Materials for the Study of the Babi Religion (E.G. Browne, 1918)
==========================================================
Browne's 1918 collection of Babi scriptures, histories, and notes — the great Cambridge orientalist's source-book for the study of Babism. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

W7''M&^^'


:ii-.^:  v-,it^*'>;;  ;.v^-^'->.^  /f


-5»'':'-;i'""'vt:


^Ai/''^.rl'-.;


MATERIALS

FOR   THE   STUDY   OF
THE    BABI    RELIGION


CAMBRIDGE   UNIVERSITY   PRESS
C.   F.  CLAY,  Manager


LONDON
Fetter  Lane,  E.C.  4


EDINBURGH

100  Princes  Street


NEW  YORK:    G.  P.  PUTNAM'S  SONS

BOMBAY,  CALCUTTA,  MADRAS  :    MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  Ltd.

TORONTO  :   J.  M.  DENT  AND  SONS,  Ltd.

TOKYO:    THE  MARUZEN-KABUSHIKI-KAISHA


'Abbas  Efendi  ^Abdu'l-Bahd,  eldest  son  of  Baha'u'llah,  entitled
Al-Ghusnu'l-A'zam  ("the  Most  Mighty  Branch").

Frontispiece.


MATERIALS

FOR    THE    STUDY   OF

THE    BABI    religion


COMPILED    BY
EDWARD    G.    BROWNE

M.A.,  M.B.,  F.B.A.,  F.R.C.P.

Sir  Thomas  Adams'  Professor  of  Arabic
and  Fellow  of  Pembroke  College  in  the  University  of  Cambridge


Cambridge :

at  the  University   Press
1918


b8094


CONTENTS

PAGE

Introduction .        .       vii

I.  An  Epitomeof  Bdbi  and  Bahd.'i  history  to  A. D.  1898,
translated  from  the  original  Arabic  of  Mirz^
Muhammad  Jawdd  of  Qazwin  ...  i

1 1.       Ibrdhim  George  Khayru'lMh  and  the  Bahd'i  Propa-
ganda in  America     113

III.  Further  Notes  on  B^bi,  Azali  and  Bahd'i  Litera-

ture, Oriental  and  Occidental,  printed,  litho-
graphed and  manuscript 173

IV.  Five  unpublished  contemporary  documents,  Per-

sian and  English,  relating  to  the  Bdb's  exami-
nation at  Tabriz  in  1848  .....       245

V.  An  Austrian    Officer's   account   of  the   cruelties

practised  on  the  B^bis  who  suffered  in  the
great  Persecution  of  1852         ....       265

VI.  Two    unpublished    contemporary    State    Papers

bearing  on  the  removal  of  the  Bdbis  from
Baghdad  to  Turkey  in  Europe,  dated  May  10,
1862  .        . 273

VII.  Persecutions  of  B4bis  in    1 888-1 891  at  Isfahan

and  Yazd 289

VIII.  Account  of  the  Death  and  Burial  of  Mirza  Yahya

Subh-i-Azal  on  April  29,  1912  .         .         .         .       309

IX.  List  of  the  Descendants  of  Mirzd  Buzurg  of  Nur,

the  Father  both  of  Bahd'u'lMh  and  of  Subh-i-

Azal 317

X.  Thirty  heretical  doctrines  ascribed  to  the  B^bis

in  the  IhqdquH-Haqq  of  Aqd  Muhammad  Taqi

of  Hamadd,n     .......       323

XI.      Selected  poems  by  Qurratu'l-'Ayn  and  Nabil        .       341

Index 359

List  of  other  Works  by  the  Author  of  this  book      381


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS


'Abb^s  Efendi  'AbduH-Bahd        ....

Invitation  to  centenary  of  Bahd'u'Uah's  birth  to  be

bratedat  Chicago  on  November  lo — 12,  1917
Mushkm  Qalam  the  B^bi  calligraphist
Portraits  of  ten  notable  Bdbis  .
The  North  America?!  of  Feb.  16,  1902
The  New  York  Times  of  Dec.  18,  1904
The  B aha! t  News  of  Aug.  i,  19 10
Fac-simile  of  document  A

„  A.6       .

•>•)  •)•)  A.  7       •

Funeral  of  Mirza  Yahyd.  Stibh-i-Azal
Subh-i-Azai  and  three  of  his  sons     .
Fac-simile  of  alleged  autograph  poem  by  Qurratu'l


Fron

tis

piece

To  face  p.

cele-

xxiv

44

56

151

152

'

177

249

256

259

277

279

312

322

'Ayn

344

ERRATA

The  descriptions  of  Sections  VIII  and  XI  should  stand  as
given  in  the  Table  of  Contents  on  the  preceding  page,  and  not
as  in  their  respective  titles  on  pp.  309  and  341.


INTRODUCTION

NEARLY  thirty  years  have  elapsed  since  I  first  established
direct  relations  with  the  Babis  in  Persia,  having  already
become  deeply  interested  in  their  history  and  doctrines
through  the  lively  and  graphic  narrative  of  the  Comte  de
Gobineau  in  his  classical  work  Les  Religions  et  les  Philo-
sophies dans  rAsie  Centrale.  Subsequently  (in  the  spring  of
1890)  I  visited  Mirza  Yahya  Subh-i-Azal  ("the  Dawn  of
Eternity  ")  and  Mi'rza  Husayn  'Ali  Bahd'u'lldh  ("  the  Splen-
dour of  God  "),  the  respective  heads  of  the  two  rival  parties
into  which  the  original  community  had  split,  at  Famagusta
in  Cyprus  and  at  'Akka  (St  Jean  d'Acre)  in  Syria ;  and
from  that  time  until  now  I  have  maintained  more  or  less
continuous  relations  with  both  parties  through  various
channels.  Fresh  and  fuller  materials  for  the  study  of  Babi
history  and  doctrine  have  continued  to  flow  into  my  hands
through  these  channels,  until,  apart  from  what  I  had  utilized
fully  or  in  part  in   previous  publications  \  a  considerable

^  The  more  important  of  these  publications,  arranged  in  chronologi-
cal order,  are  as  follows,  (i)  The  Bdbis  of  Persia:  i.  Sketch  of  their
History  and  Personal  Experiences  amongst  them  ;  ii.  Their  Literature
and  Doctrines  {J.R.A.S.,  Vol.  xxi,  1889).  (2)  A  Traveller's  Narrative
etc.,  Persian  text  and  P^nglish  translation,  2  vols.  (Camb.  Univ.  Press,
1891).  (3)  Some  Remarks  on  the  Bdbt  Text  edited  by  Baron  V.  Rosen
{J.R.A.S.,  Vol.  xxiv,  1892).  (4)  Catalogue  and  Description  of  27
Bdbl  Manuscripts  {/.R.A.S.,Vo\.  xxiv,  1892).     (5)  A  Year  amongst


vm  INTRODUCTION

amount  of  new  and  unpublished  matter  had  accumulated  in
my  hands.  Much  of  this  matter,  consisting  of  manuscript
and  printed  documents  in  various  Eastern  and  Western
languages,  could  only  be  interpreted  in  connection  with  the
correspondence  relating  to  it,  and  would  inevitably,  I  felt,
be  lost  if  I  did  not  myself  endeavour  to  record  it  in  an
intelligible  form,  capable  of  being  used  by  future  students
of  this  subject.  Hence  the  origin  of  this  book,  which,  if
somewhat  lacking  in  coherence  and  uniformity,  will,  I  believe,
be  of  value  to  anyone  who  shall  in  the  future  desire  to  study
more  profoundly  a  movement  which,  even  if  its  practical
and  political  importance  should  prove  to  be  less  than  I
had  once  thought,  will  always  be  profoundly  interesting  to
students  of  Comparative  Religion  and  the  history  of  Religious
Evolution.

The  book,  in  the  form  which  it  has  finally  assumed,
comprises  eleven  more  or  less  independent  sections,  about
each  of  which  something  must  be  said.

Section  I  (pp.  3 — 112)  is  a  translation  into  English  of  a
short  historical  and  biographical  sketch  of  the  Babi  move-
ment, of  the  life  of  Baha'u'llah,  of  the  further  schism  which
succeeded  his  death,  and  of  the  Baha'i  propaganda  in
America,  written  in  Arabic  by  Mirza  Muhammad  Jawad
of  Qazwin,  by  whom  the  original,  and,  I  believe,  unpublished
manuscript  was  transmitted  to  me.     I  was  not  personally

the  Persians  (A.  and  C.  Black,  1893).  (6)  The  Ta'rikh-i-Jadid  or  New
History  of  ...the  Bab,  translation  (Camb.  Univ.  Press,  1893).  (7)  Per-
sonal Reminiscences  of  the  Bdbi  Insurrection  at  Zanjdn  in  1850,
translated  from  the  Persian  {/.R.A.S.,  Vol.  xxix,  1897).  (8)  The
Kitdb-i-Nuqtatu'' l-Kdf,  being  the  earliest  history  of  the  Babis,  compiled
by  Hajji  Mirza  Jani  of  Kashan :  Persian  text  with  Introduction  in
English  {E.J.  W.  Gibb  Memorial  Series,  Vol.  xv,  19 10).  Also  articles
on  Bdbis  in  the  Supplement  to  the  Encyclopaedia  Britannica  and
Hastings'  Dictionary  of  Religions.


INTRODUCTION  ix

acquainted  with  the  author,  but  his  son,  Mirza  Ghulamu'llah,
paid  me  a  visit  of  several  days  at  Cambridge  in  January,
1 90 1,  on  his  way  to  the  United  States.  Both  belong  to  that
section  of  the  Baha'is,  called  by  themselves  "  Unitarians  "
{Ahlu't-Tawhid,  Muwahhiduii)  and  by  their  opponents  "Co-
venant-breakers "  {Ndqiztin),  who  reject  the  claims  of  'Abbas
Efendi  'Abdu'1-Baha  (whom  the  majority  of  the  Baha'is
recognize  as  their  head)  and  follow  his  half-brother,  Mfrza
Muhammad  'All.  From  incidental  remarks  in  the  narrative
we  learn  that  the  author,  Mirza  Muhammad  Jawad,  was  at
Baghdad  (p.  15)  about  1862  or  a  little  earlier,  shortly  before
the  removal  of  the  leading  Babis  thence  to  Adrianople ;  that
he  was  with  them  at  Adrianople  (pp.  25,  27,  28)  for  rather
more  than  a  year  before  Baha'u'llah  was  transferred  thence
to  'Akka  in  August,  1868;  that  he  was  Baha'u'llah's  fellow-
passenger  on  the  steamer  which  conveyed  him  from  Gallipoli
to  Hayfa  (p.  32);  that  he  was  at  'Akka  in  January,  1872
when  Sayyid  Muhammad  of  Isfahan  and  the  other  Azalis
were  assassinated  (pp.  54-5)  and  also  at  the  time  of,  or  soon
after,  Baha'u'llah's  death  on  May  28,  1892,  when  he  was  one
of  the  nine  Companions  chosen  by  'Abbas  Efendi  to  hear
the  reading  of  the  "Testament"  or  "Covenant,"  (p.  75).
We  also  learn  (pp.  35-6)  that  he  was  one  of  several  Babis
arrested  at  Tabriz  about  the  end  of  1866  or  beginning  of
1867,  when,  more  fortunate  than  some  of  his  companions,  he
escaped  with  a  fine.  This  is  the  only  mention  he  makes  of
being  in  Persia,  and  it  is  probable  that  from  this  date  onwards
he  was  always  with  Baha'u'llah,  first  at  Adrianople  and  then
at  'Akka,  where,  so  far  as  I  know,  he  is  still  living,  and
where  his  son  Mirza  Ghulamu'llah  was  born  and  brought
up.  Since  the  entry  of  Turkey  into  the  European  War  in
November,  19 14,  it  has,  of  course,  been  impossible  to  com-
municate with  'Akka,  or  to  obtain  news  from  thence.
B.  B.  b


X  INTRODUCTION

Mirza  Jawad's  narrative  is  valuable  on  account  of  the.
numerous  dates  which  it  gives,  and  because  it  comes  down
to  so  late  a  date  as  March,  1908  (p.  90),  while  Nabil's
chronological  poem  (see  p.  357)  stops  short  at  the  end  of
1869.  The  value  of  his  account  of  the  propaganda  carried
on  in  the  United  States  of  America  by  Dr  I.  G.  Khayru'llah
has  been  somewhat  discounted  by  this  gentleman's  recent
publication  of  his  autobiography  in  his  book  O  Christians!
why  do  ye  believe  not  in  Christ  ^  (p.  18 1),  which  reached  me
only  after  this  portion  of  my  book  was  already  in  type.

Section  II  (pp.  115---171)  deals  more  fully  with  the
Baha'i  propaganda  carried  on  in  America  since  1893  by
Dr  I.  G.  Khayru'llah  and  his  converts  with  remarkable
success.  Of  the  methods  employed  an  illuminating  account
(pp.  116 — 142)  is  given  by  an  American  lady  of , enquiring
mind  who  attended  the  classes  of  instruction  in  a  sympa-
thetic but  critical  spirit.  Her  notes  show  very  clearly  the
adaptation  of  the  Baha'i  doctrine  to  its  new  environment  in
a  manner  which  can  hardly  fail  to  remind  the  Orientalist  of
the  old  Isma'ili  propaganda,  still  further  recalled  by  the
form  of  allegiance  (p.  121)  which  the  neophyte  is  obliged
to  sign  before  he  is  fully  initiated  into  the  details  of  the  new
doctrine.  Extracts  from  the  American  Press  in  the  years
1902 — 4  are  cited  to  show  how  much  attention,  and  even
in  some  quarters  alarm,  was  aroused  by  the  success  of
the  new  doctrines.  Khayru'llah's  narrative  (pp.  154 — 5)
of  the  threats  addressed  to  him  on  account  of  his  apostasy
from  'Abbas  Efendi  'Abdu'1-Baha  by  Mirza  Hasan-i-Khura-
sani,  and  the  history  of  the  sad  fate  of  Mirza  Yahya  at
Jedda  (pp.  156—167)  read  like  extracts  from  the  history
of  the  Assassins  of  Alamiit  and  "  the  Old  Man  of  the
Mountain."

Section  III  {^t^.   175 — 243)  contains  a  bibliography  of


INTRODUCTION  XI

everything  written  by  or  about  the  Babis  and  Baha'is  in
eastern  or  western  languages  which  has  come  under  my
notice  since  the  publication  of  the  bibliography  in  Vol.  ii  of
my  Traveller's  Narrative  in  1891,  and  of  my  Catalogue  and
Description  of  2f  BdM Manuscripts  in  they^i^.^.-S.  for  1892.
This  supplementary  bibliography  contains  descriptions  of
49  printed  works  in  European  languages  (English,  French,
German  and  Russian),  18  printed  and  lithographed  works
in  Arabic  and  Persian,  and  between  30  and  40  Babi,  Azali
and  Baha'i  books  which  exist  only  in  manuscript.  Nearly
all  of  these  are  in  my  own  library,  and  in  many  cases  were
presented  to  me  by  their  authors  or  by  kind  friends  who
knew  of  the  interest  I  felt  in  the  subject,  but  in  the  case  of
the  manuscripts  I  have  included  brief  descriptions  of  a
number  of  books  (mostly  obtained  from  Cyprus  through  the
late  Mr  Claude  Delaval  Cobham,  for  whom  they  were
copied  by  Subh-i-Azal's  son  Rizwan  'Ali,  alias  "Constantine
the  Persian  ")  belonging  to  the  British  Museum,  which  were
examined  and  described  for  me  by  my  friend  and  former
colleague  Dr  Ahmad  Khan.  For  several  rare  manuscript
works  I  am  indebted  to  an  old  Babi  scribe  of  Isfahan,
resident  at  Tihran,  with  whom  I  was  put  in  communication
by  Dr  Sa'id  Khan  of  Hamadan,  who,  though  coming  of  a
family  of  7?iullds,  is  a  fervent  Christian,  while  preserving  in
true  Persian  fashion  a  keen  interest  in  other  religious  beliefs.
This  old  scribe,  a  follower  of  Subh-i-Azal,  seems  to  have
been  in  close  touch  with  many  Babis  in  all  parts  of  Persia,
and  on  several  occasions  when  persecutions  threatened  or
broke  out  to  have  been  entrusted  by  them  with  the  custody
of  books  which  they  feared  to  keep  in  their  own  houses,  and
which  in  some  cases  they  failed  to  reclaim,  so  that  he  had
access  to  a  large  number  of  rare  Babi  works,  any  of  which  he
was  willing  to  copy  for  me  at  a  very  moderate  charge.

b2


Xll  INTRODUCTION

Section  IF  (pp.  247 — 264)  contains  the  text  and  trans-
lation, with  photogrsiphic /ac-simi7es,  of  three  original  Persian
documents  connected  with  the  examination  and  condemna-
tion of  the  Bab  for  heresy,  one  of  which  appears  to  show  that
he  formally  abjured  all  his  claims,  and  begged  for  mercy  and
forgiveness.  These  are  followed  by  two  English  documents
penned  by  the  late  Dr  Cormick  of  Tabriz,  one  of  which  gives
the  impression  produced  on  him  by  the  Bab,  whom  he  was
called  in  to  see  professionally.  I  do  not  know  of  any  other
European  who  saw  and  conversed  with  the  Bab,  or,  if  such
there  were,  who  has  recorded  his  impressions.

Section  F(pp.  267 — 271)  contains  a  moving  account  by
an  Austrian  officer.  Captain  von  Goumoens,  who  was  in  the
service  of  Nasiru'd-Din  Shah  in  the  summer  of  1852,  of  the
horrible  cruelties  inflicted  on  the  Babis  in  the  great  perse-
cution of  that  period  which  resulted  from  the  attempt  by
three  Babis  on  the  Shah's  life ;  cruelties  so  revolting  that  he
felt  himself  unable  to  continue  any  longer  in  the  service  of
a  ruler  who  sanctioned  them.

Section  F/ (pp.  275 — 287)  contains  the  fac-simi/es,  texts
and  translations  of  two  Persian  State  papers  bearing  on  the
negotiations  between  the  Persian  and  Turkish  Governments
as  to  the  removal  of  the  Babi  leaders  from  Baghdad  to  a
part  of  the  Ottoman  Empire  more  remote  from  the  Persian
frontier.  These  documents  were  kindly  communicated  to
me  by  M.  A.-L.-M.  Nicolas,  a  French  diplomatist  who  has
devoted  much  attention  to  the  history  and  doctrine  of  the
Babis,  and  whose  father  is  well  known  to  Persian  students
as  the  first  to  introduce  to  Europe  the  now  celebrated  qua-
trains of  'Umar-i-Khayyam.

Section  VII  (pp.  291 — 308)  contains  accounts  received  at
the  time  from  various  correspondents  as  to  the  persecutions
of  Babis  at  Isfahan  and  the  neighbouring  villages  of  Si-dih


INTRODUCTION  xill

and  Najafabad  in  1888 — 9,  and  at  Yazd  in  May,  1891.  For
these  accounts  I  am  indebted  to  the  late  Dr  Robert  Bruce,
Mr  Sidney  Churchill,  Mr  (now  Sir)  Walter  Townley,  'Abbas
Efendi  'Abdu'1-Baha,  his  brother  Mirza  Badi'u'llah,  and  two
other  Baha'is,  one  actually  resident  at  Yazd  at  the  time  of
the  persecution.  To  another  horrible  persecution  of  Babis
in  the  same  town  in  the  summer  of  1903  some  references
will  be  found  in  the  Rev.  Napier  Malcolm's  illuminating
work  Five  Years  in  a  Persian  Town  (pp.  155 — 6,  186  etc.).

Section  VIII  i^"^.  311 — 315)  contains  the  translation  of
an  account  of  the  death  and  burial  of  Mirza  Yahya  Subh-i-
Azal  on  Monday,  April  29,  19 12,  written  in  Persian  by  his
son  Rizwan  'All  alias  "  Constantine  the  Persian,"  and  also
some  further  information  on  matters  connected  with  the
succession  kindly  furnished  to  me  by  Mr  H.  C.  Lukach,  to
whom  I  am  further  indebted  for  permission  to  reproduce
here  two  photographs  of  the  funeral  which  he  published  in
his  book  The  Fringe  of  the  East ;  for  which  permission  I
desire  to  express  my  sincere  gratitude  both  to  him  and  his
publishers,  Messrs  Macmillan.

Section  /X  {pp.  319 — 322)  contains  a  list  of  the  descen-
dants of  Mirza  Buzurg  of  Nur  in  Mazandaran,  the  father  of
both  Baha'u'llah  andSubh-i-Azal,  of  which  the  original  Persian,
drawn  up  by  a  younger  member  of  the  family,  was  sent  to
me  by  the  Babi  scribe  already  mentioned  (p.  xi  supra).  This
is  followed  by  lists  of  the  children  of  Baha'u'llah  and  Subh-i-
Azal  compiled  from  other  trustworthy  sources.

Section  X  (pp.  325 — 339)  contains  a  condensed  summary
in  English  of  a  portion  of  the  polemical  work  IhqdqiiU-Haqq
dealing  with  the  principal  doctrines  of  the  Babis  and  Baha'is
deemed  heretical  by  the  Shi'a  Muhammadans.  I  have  some-
times been  reproached  with  having  written  so  much  more
about  the  history  of  the  Babis  than  about  their  doctrines.


xiv  INTRODUCTION

though  I  hope  that  the  Introduction  to  my  edition  of  Hajji
Mirza  Jani's  NuqtatuU-Kdf^  has  in  some  degree  removed
this  reproach.  But  the  fact  is  that,  though  the  synthesis
may  be  original,  almost  every  single  doctrine  held  by  the
Babis  and  Baha'is  (and  their  doctrine,  even  on  such  impor-
tant matters  as  the  Future  Life,  is  by  no  means  fixed  and
uniform)  was  previously  held  and  elaborated  by  one  or
another  of  the  earlier  cognate  sects  grouped  together  under
the  general  title  of  Ghuldi^  whereof  the  Isma'ilis  are  the
most  notable  representative.  The  Ihqdqu^l-Haqq^  which
shows  a  much  better  knowledge  of  the  opinions  which  it
aspires  to  refute  than  most  polemical  works  directed  against
the  Babis,  summarizes  in  a  convenient  form  the  most  salient
points  of  doctrine  in  which  the  Babis  differ  from  the  Shi 'a
Muhammadans.

Section  j£!/(pp.  343 — 358),  which  concludes  the  volume,
contains  the  texts,  accompanied  in  some  cases  by  trans-
lations, of  one  unpublished  and  two  already  published  poems
by  Qurratu'l-'Ayn  and  of  two  poems  by  Nabil  of  Zarand.
I  should  like  to  have  enlarged  this  section  by  the  addition
of  other  Babi  poems  in  my  possession,  especially  of  the
Qasida-i-Alijiyya  of  Mirza  Aslam  of  Niir  (see  pp.  228 — 9),
but  the  book  had  already  considerably  exceeded  the  limits
which  I  had  assigned  to  it,  and  I  regretfully  postponed  their
publication  to  some  future  occasion.

As  regards  the  illustrations,  the  originals  from  which  they
are  taken  have  in  several  cases  been  in  my  possession  for
many  years,  but  I  desire  here  to  express  my  thanks  to  Dr  Ignaz
Goldziher  for  the  two  American  newspapers  partly  reproduced
on  the  plates  facing  pp.  151  and  152 ;  to  M.  Hippolyte  Dreyfus
for  the  three  documents  (^.,  B.^  and  B^.)  bearing  on  the

^  Vol.  XV  of  the  E.J.  W.  Gibb  Memorial  Series.


INTRODUCTION  XV

examination  of  the  Bab;  to  M.  A.-L.-M.  Nicolas  for  the
two  Persian  State  papers  dealing  with  the  expulsion  of  the
Babis  from  Baghdad ;  to  Mr  H.  C  Lukach  and  his  pub-
lishers Messrs  Macmillan  for  their  kind  permission  to
reproduce  the  two  illustrations  mentioned  above  (p.  xiii),
and  to  my  old  friend  and  colleague  Mr  Ellis  H.  iVlinns,  who
has  given  me  valuable  help  in  connection  with  the  Russian
books  mentioned  in  the  bibliography.

In  conclusion  I  desire  to  add  a  few  words  as  to  what  I
conceive  to  be  the  special  interest  and  importance  of  the
study  of  the  Babi  and  Baha'i  movements.  This  interest  is
in  the  main  threefold,  to  wit,  political,  ethical  and  historical,
and  I  shall  arrange  what  I  have  to  say  under  these  three
headings.

I .    Political  interest.

The  original  Babis  who  fought  so  desperately  against  the
Persian  Government  at  Shaykh  Tabarsi,  Zanjan,  Nayriz  and
elsewhere  in  1848 — 50  aimed  at  a  Babi  theocracy  and  a  reign
of  the  saints  on  earth ;  they  were  irreconcilably  hostile  to
the  existing  government  and  Royal  Family,  and  were  only
interested  for  the  most  part  in  the  triumph  of  their  faith,  not
in  any  projects  of  social  or  political  reform.

Of  their  attitude  during  the  Baghdad  and  Adrianople
periods  (1852 — 63  and  1863 — 68)  we  know  little,  and  the
anxiety  of  the  Persian  Foreign  Office  as  to  their  activities  in
the  former  place  is  sufficiently  explained  by  fear  of  the  pro-
paganda which  they  were  so  easily  able  to  carry  on  amongst
the  innumerable  Persians  who  passed  through  it  on  their  way
to  and  from  the  Holy  Shrines  of  Najaf  and  Karbala.

After  the  schism  and  the  banishment  of  Subh-i-Azal  to
Famagusta  in  Cyprus,  and  of  Baha'u'Uah  to  'Akka  in  Syria,


xvi  INTRODUCTION

we  have  to  distinguish  between  the  activities  of  the  two  rival
parties.  The  Azah's,  from  the  first  a  minority,  were  much
more  cut  off  from  external  activity  than  the  Baha'is.  They
represented  what  may  be  called  the  conservative  party,  and
experience  shows  that  with  such  rehgious  bodies  as  the  Babi's
fresh  manifestations  of  activity  and  developments  of  doctrine
are  essential  to  maintain  and  increase  their  vitality.  The  same
phenomenon  was  witnessed  again  in  the  further  schism  which
took  place  after  the  death  of  Baha'u'llah  in  1892  ;  the  con-
servative tendencies  represented  by  Muhammad  'Ali  could
not  hold  their  own  against  the  innovations  of  his  more  able
and  energetic  half-brother  'Abbas  Effendi  'Abdu'1-Baha,  who
since  the  beginning  of  this  century  commands  the  allegiance
of  the  vast  majority  of  the  Baha'is  both  in  the  East  and  in
the  West.

That  the  Baha'is  constituted  a  great  potential  political
force  in  Persia  when  I  was  there  in  1887 — 8  was  to  me  self-
evident.  Their  actual  numbers  were  considerable  (Lord
Curzon  estimated  them  at  the  time  he  wrote  ^  at  nearer  a
million  than  half  a  million  souls),  their  intelligence  and
social  position  were  above  the  average,  they  were  particu-
larly well  represented  in  the  postal  and  telegraph  services,
they  were  well  disciplined  and  accustomed  to  yield  a  ready
devotion  and  obedience  to  their  spiritual  leaders,  and  their
attitude  towards  the  secular  and  ecclesiastical  rulers  of  Persia
was  hostile  or  at  least  indifferent.  Any  Power  which,  by
conciliating  their  Supreme  Pontiff  at  'Akka,  could  have
made  use  of  this  organization  in  Persia  might  have  estab-
lished an  enormous  influence  in  that  country,  and  though
the  valuable  researches  of  the  late  Baron  Victor  Rosen
and  Captain  Tumanskiy  were  no  doubt  chiefly  inspired  by
scientific  curiosity,  there  may  have  been,  at  any  rate  in  the
1  Persia  (London,  1892),  Vol.  i,  p.  499.


INTRODUCTION  XVU

case  of  the  latter  gentleman,  some  arriere-pensee  of  a  political
character.  At  any  rate  the  Russian  Government  showed  a
good  deal  of  civility  to  the  Baha'is^  of  'Ishqabad  (Askabad),
where  they  allowed  or  encouraged  them  to  build  a  Mashri-
qu'l-Adhkdr^  or  place  of  worship,  which  was,  I  believe,  the
first  of  its  kind  ever  erected  ;  and  when  a  leading  Baha'i
was  murdered  there  by  fanatics  from  Mashhad,  the  Russian
authorities  condemned  the  assassins  to  death,  though  sub-
sequently, at  the  intercession  of  the  Baha'is,  their  sentence
was  commuted  to  hard  labour  in  the  Siberian  mines.  That
Baha'u'llah  was  not  insensible  to  these  amenities  is  clearly
apparent  from  two  letters  filled  with  praises  of  the  Russian
Government  which  he  addressed  to  his  followers  shortly
afterwards,  and  which  were  published  by  Baron  Rosen,  to-
gether with  an  account  of  the  circumstances  above  referred
to,  in  Vol.  vi  of  the  Collections  Scientifiques'^.  If  the  state-
ment (on  p.  II  infra)  that  Colonel  (afterwards  Sir)  Arnold
Burrows  Kemball,  when  British  Consul-General  at  Baghdad
about  1859,  offered  British  protection  to  Baha'u'llah  be  true,
this  would  account  for  the  laudatory  tone  adopted  by  him
in  the  epistle  which  he  addressed  to  Queen  Victoria.  None
of  the  other  rulers  addressed  in  the  "  Epistles  to  the  Kings  "
come  off  so  well,  and  for  Napoleon  III  in  particular  disaster
is  clearly  foretold.  Germany  fares  no  better  than  France,
being  thus  apostrophized  in  the  Kitdb-i-Aqdas  :

"  O  banks  of  the  river  Rhine^  We  have  seen  you  drenched
in  gore  for  that  the  swords  of  the  foes  are  draw7i  against  you;

1  Already  in  1852  the  Russian  Minister  at  Tihran  had  intervened
in  Baha'u'llah's  favour  (see  pp.  6  —  7  infra),  for  which  intervention
Baha'u'llah  expresses  his  gratitude  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Tsar  of  Russia
[f.R.A.S.  for  1889,  p.  969).

2  See  also  my  Remarks  on  these  texts  in  the  /.R.A.S.  for  1892,
PP-  318—321.


XVlll  INTRODUCTION

and  you  shall  have  another  turn!    And  we  hear  the  wail  of
Berlin^  although  it  be  to-day  in  conspicuous  glory  l^""^

The  occasion  of  this  outburst,  according  to  Roemer^,  was
the  omission  of  the  then  Crown-Prince  of  Prussia  P>iedrich
Wilheh-n  to  pay  his  respects  to  Baha'u'llah  when  he  visited
Palestine  in  the  autumn  of  1869.  In  the  main,  however,
Baha'u'llah  wisely  avoided  any  political  entanglements,  and
indeed  sought  rather  to  conciliate  the  Shah  and  the  Persian
government,  and  to  represent  such  persecutions  of  his  fol-
lowers as  took  place  in  Persia  as  the  work  of  fanatical
theologians  whom  the  government  were  unable  to  restrain.
The  Azalis,  on  the  other  hand,  preserved  the  old  Babi
tradition  of  unconquerable  hostility  to  the  Persian  throne
and  government.

In  the  Persian  Constitutional  or  National  Movement
dating  from  the  end  of  1905  the  Azalis  and  Baha'is  were,  as
usual,  in  opposite  camps.  Oflficially  'Abbas  Efendi  'Abdu'l-
Baha  commanded  his  followers  to  abstain  entirely  from
politics,  while  in  private  he  compared  the  demand  of  the
Persians  for  parliamentary  government  to  that  of  unweaned
babes  for  strong  meat.  Some  of  the  leading  Baha'is  in
Tihran,  however,  were  accused,  whether  justly  or  not,  of
actually  favouring  the  reaction  ^  In  any  case  their  theo-
cratic and  international  tendencies  can  hardly  have  inspired
them  with  any  very  active  sympathy  with  the  Persian  Revo-
lution. The  Azalis,  on  the  other  hand,  though  they  cannot
be  said  to  have  any  collective  policy,  as  individuals  took  a
very  prominent  part  in  the  National  Movement  even  before
the   Revolution,  and    such  men  as   Hajji   Shaykh  Ahmad

1  ^^qJ.R.A.S.  for  1889,  p.  977.

2  Die  Bdbt-Beha'i  (^Vo\.?,^2,m,  191 1),  p.  108.

^  See  Roemer,  op.  cit.  pp.  153 — 8,  and  my  Persian  Revolution,
pp.  424—9.


INTRODUCTION  XIX

"  Riihi "  of  Kirman,  son-in  law  to  Subh-i-Azal,  and  his  friend
and  fellow-townsman  Mirza  Aqa  Khan,  both  of  whom
suffered  death  at  Tabriz  in'  1896,  were  the  fore-runners  of
Mirza  Jahangir  Khan  and  the  Maliku'l-MutakaUimin,  who
were  victims  of  the  reactionary  coup  d'etat  of  June,  1908.
Indeed,  as  one  of  the  most  prominent  and  cultivated  Azalis
admitted  to  me  some  six  or  seven  years  ago,  the  ideal  of  a
democratic  Persia  developing  on  purely  national  lines  seems
to  have  inspired  in  the  minds  of  no  few  leading  Azalis  the
same  fiery  enthusiasm  as  did  the  idea  of  a  reign  of  the  saints
on  earth  in  the  case  of  the  early  Babi's.    "',

The  political  ideals  of  the  Baha'is  have  undergone  con-
siderable evolution  since  their  propaganda  achieved  such
success  in  America,  where  they  have  come  into  more  or
less  close  connection  with  various  international,  pacifist
and  feminist  movements.  These  tendencies  were,  however,
implicit  in  Baha'u'llah's  teachings  at  a  much  earlier  date,  as
shown  by  the  recommendation  of  a  universal  language  and
script  in  the  Kitdb-i-Aqdas,  the  exaltation  of  humanitarianism
over  patriotism,  the  insistence  on  the  brotherhood  of  all
believers,  irrespective  of  race  or  colour,  and  the  ever-present
idea  of  "  the  Most  Great  Peace  "  {Sulh-i-Akbar).  In  connec-
tion with  the  last  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  Dr  I.  G.
Khayru'llah,  "  the  second  Columbus  "  and  "  Baha's  Peter  "
as  he  was  entitled  after  his  successes  in  America,  definitely
stated  in  his  book  Behd^uUldh^  originally  published  at  Chicago
in  1899  (Vol.  ii,  pp.  480 — i),  that  "the  Most  Great  Peace"
would  come  in  the  year  1335  of  the  Hijra,  which  began  on
October  28,  191 6,  and  ended  on  October  17,  191 7.  This
forecast,  based  on  Daniel  xii,  12,  "  Blessed  is  he  that  waiteth
and  Cometh  to  the  end  of  the  thousand  three  hundred  and  five
and  thirty  days"  has,  unfortunately,  not  been  realized,  but
the  paragraph  in  which  Khayru'llah  speaks  of  the  frightful  ,


XX  INTRODUCTION

war  which  must  precede  "  the  Most  Great  Peace "  is  so
remarkable,  when  one  remembers  that  it  was  written  fifteen
years  before  the  outbreak  of  the  Great  War,  that  I  cannot
refrain  from  quoting  it.

"  In  testimony  of  the  fulfilment  of  His  Word,  the  Spirit
of  God  is  impelling  mankind  toward  that  outcome  with
mighty  speed.  As  the  prophet  indicated,  the  final  condition
in  which  peace  shall  be  established  must  be  brought  about
by  unparalleled  violence  of  war  and  bloodshed,  which  any
observer  of  European  affairs  at  the  present  day  can  see
rapidly  approaching.  History  is  being  written  at  tremen-
dous speed,  human  independence  is  precipitating  the  final
scenes  in  the  drama  of  blood  which  is  shortly  destined  to
drench  Europe  and  Asia,  after  which  the  world  will  witness
the  dawn  of  millennial  peace,  the  natural,  logical  and  pro-
phetical outcome  of  present  human  conditions."

And  again  two  pages  further  on  (p.  483)  he  says :

"Although  the  thousand  years  began  with  the  departure
of  the  Manifestation^  in  1892,  the  commencement  of  the
'Great  Peace'  will  be  in  1917."

He  also  quotes  Guinness  as  having  written  (in  1886)^:
"  The  secret  things  belong  to  God.  It  is  not  for  us  to  say.
But  there  can  be  no  question  that  those  who  live  to  see  this
year  191 7  will  have  reached  one  of  the  most  important,  per-
haps the  most  momentous,  of  these  terminal  years  of  crisis."

2.   Ethical  intei'est.

While  ethical  teaching  occupies  a  very  subordinate  place
in  the  writings  of  the  Bab  and  his  disciples,  it  constitutes  the
chief  part  of  the  Baha'i  teachings.     Sir  Cecil  Spring-Rice,

^  i.e.  the  death  of  Baha'u'llah.

2  Light  for  tke  Last  Days  (London,  Hodder  and  Stoughton,  1886),
pp.  345 — 6.  The  reference  (p.  2-24)  given  by  Khayru'llah  is  evidently
to  a  different  edition.


INTRODUCTION  xxi

formerly  British  Minister  at  Tihran,  who  had  the  most  extra-
ordinary insight  into  the  Persian  mind,  made  one  of  the
most  illuminating  remarks  I  ever  heard  in  this  connection.
He  pointed  out  most  truly  that  the  problem  which  Baha'u'Uah
had  to  solve  was  a  far  greater  one  than  any  mere  question
of  claims  of  succession,  and  was  essentially  the  same  as  that
which  confronted  St  Paul,  viz.  whether  the  new  religion
which  he  represented  was  to  become  a  world  religion  ad-
dressed to  all  mankind,  or  whether  it  was  to  remain  a  more
or  less  obscure  sect  of  the  religion  from  which  it  sprang.
Mutatis  mutandis  the  strife  between  Baha'u'Uah  and  Subh-i-
Azal  was  essentially  identical  with  the  strife  between  St  Paul
and  St  Peter,  though  in  the  former  case  the  resulting  sepa-
ration was  even  greater,  and  the  Baha'is  regard  the  Bab  as
a  mere  fore-runner  and  harbinger  of  the  greater  Manifestation,
and  his  writings  and  teachings  as  practically  abrogated,  for
which  reason  they  no  longer  willingly  suffer  themselves  to
be  called  Babls,  a  name  which  was  still  almost  universally
applied  to  them  in  Persia  by  those  who  were  not  members
of  their  body  at  any  rate  when  I  was  there  in  1887 — 8.

Of  the  ethical  teaching  of  Baha'u'Uah  numerous  specimens
are  given  in  this  volume  (pp.  64 — 73  infra)  and  many  more
have  been  published  in  English  by  the  American  "  Baha'i
Publishing  Society^"  and  elsewhere.  These  teachings  are
in  themselves  admirable,  though  inferior,  in  my  opinion,
both  in  beauty  and  simplicity  to  the  teachings  of  Christ.
Moreover,  as  it  seems  to  me,  ethics  is  only  the  application
to  everyday  life  of  religion  and  metaphysics,  and  to  be
effective  must  be  supported  by  some  spiritual  sanction ;  and
in  the  case  of  Baha'ism,  with  its  rather  vague  doctrines  as  to

^  Address :  84,  Adams  Street,  Chicago ;  or,  Charles  E.  Sprague,
Publishing  Agent  for  the  Baha'is'  Board  of  Counsel,  191,  Williams
Street,  New  York.


XXll  INTRODUCTION

the  nature  and  destiny  of  the  soul  of  man,  it  is  a  little
difficult  to  see  whence  the  driving-power  to  enforce  the
ethical  maxims  can  be  derived.  I  once  heard  Mr  G.
Bernard  Shaw  deliver  an  address  to  a  branch  of  the  Fabian
Society  on  ''The  Religion  of  the  Future."  In  this  lecture
he  said  that  he  was  unwilling  that  the  West  should  any
longer  be  content  to  clothe  itself  in  what  he  called  "  the
rags  of  Oriental  systems  of  religion  " ;  that  he  wanted  a
good,  healthy  Western  religion,  recognizing  the  highest  type
of  humanity  as  the  Superman,  or,  if  the  term  was  preferred,
as  God  ;  and  that,  according  to  this  conception,  man  was
ever  engaged  in  "  creating  God."  As  I  listened  I  was  greatly
struck  by  the  similarity  of  his  language  to  that  employed  by
the  Baha'is^  and  was  diverted  by  the  reflection  that,  strive  as
he  would,  this  brilliant  modern  thinker  of  the  West  could
not  evolve  a  religion  which  the  East  had  not  already  formu-
lated. Yet  it  would  be  an  error  to  regard  Baha'ism  merely
as  an  ethical  system,  as  is  already  shown  by  the  opening
verse  of  the  Kitdb-i-Aqdas  : — "  The  first  thing  7vhich  God
hath  prescribed  unto  His  seT^^ants  is  the  recognition  of  the
Daivning-place  of  His  Revelation  and  the  Day-spring  of  His
Dispefisation.  Whosoever  attaineth  unto  Him  hath  attaitied
unto  all  good ^  and  whosoever  is  hindered  therefrom  is  in  truth
of  the  people  of  error ^  even  though  he  bring  forth  all  good
works y

3.    Historical  interest.

But  the  chief  interest  of  the  study  of  the  Babi  and  Baha'i
movements  is,  as  it  seems  to  me,  neither  political  nor  ethical,
but  historical,  because  of  the  light  it  throws  on  the  genesis
and  evolution  of  other  religions.     Renan  emphasized  this  in

1  Cf.  p.  346  infra,  n.  i  ad  calc;  and  p.  21  r  of  my  Year  amongst
the  Persians.


INTRODUCTION  XXlll

his  work  Les  Apotres^  and  it  was  he,  I  think,  who  said  that
to  understand  the  genesis  and  growth  of  a  new  religion  one
must  go  to  the  East  where  religions  still  grow.  And  this
holds  good  particularly  of  Persia,  which  has  ever  been  the
fertile  breeding-ground  of  new  creeds  and  philosophies  from
the  time  of  Zoroaster,  Manes  and  Mazdak  to  the  present
day.  It  would  be  interesting  to  compute  how  many  of  the
"  seventy-two  sects  "  into  which  Islam  is  supposed  to  be
divided  owe  their  existence  wholly  or  in  part  to  the  theo-
logical activity  of  the  Persian  mind.

The  phenomena  actually  presented  by  Babiism  are  often
such  as  one  would  not  prima  /aa'e  expect.  In  spite  of  the
official  denial  of  the  necessity,  importance  or  evidential
value  of  miracles  in  the  ordinary  sense,  numerous  miracles
are  recorded  in  Babi  histories  like  the  NuqtatuU-Kdf  and
the  Ta'rikh-i-Jadid^  and  many  more  are  related  by  adherents
of  the  faith.  The  most  extraordinary  diversity  of  opinion
exists  as  to  doctrines  which  one  would  be  inclined  to  regard
as  fundamental,  such  as  those  connected  with  the  future  life.
A  similar  diversity  of  opinion  prevails  as  to  the  authorship
of  various  Babi  books  and  poems,  though  the  beginnings  of
Babi  Hterature  only  go  back  to  1844  or  1845.  The  earliest,
fullest  and  most  interesting  history  of  the  Bab  and  his
immediate  disciples  (that  of  Hajji  Mirza  Jani  of  Kashan^)
was  almost  completely  suppressed  because  it  reflected  the
opinion  which  prevailed  immediately  after  the  Bab's  martyr-
dom that  his  successor  was  Mirza  Yahya  Subh-i-Azal,  and
thus  came  into  conflict  with  the  Baha'i  contention  which
arose  ten  or  fifteen  years  later,  and  a  recension  of  it  was
prepared  (known  as  "  the  New  History,"  Ta^ rikh-i-Jadid)  in

\The  NziqtatuH-Kdf,  edited  by  me  in  the  E.J.  W.  Gibb  Memorial
Series  (Vol.  xv)  from  the  Paris  MS.,  the  only  complete  one  extant  in
Europe.


XXIV  INTRODUCTION

which  all  references  to  Subh-i-Azal  were  eliminated  or  altered,
and  other  features  regarded  as  undesirable  were  suppressed
or  modified.  Later  a  third  official  history,  "  The  Traveller's
Narrative,"  Maqdla-i-Shakhsi  Sayydk^,  in  which  the  Bab
was  represented  as  a  mere  forerunner  of  Baha'u'llah,  was
issued  from  'Akka,  and  subsequently  lithographed  to  secure
its  wider  difTusion,  while  the  Ta^rikh-i-Jadid,  of  which  not
more  than  three  or  four  copies  exist  in  Europe,  was  suffered
to  remain  in  manuscript.  Certain  critical  Christian  theo-
logians have  seen  in  Hajji  Mirza  Jani's  history  in  its  relation
to  the  later  narratives  a  close  parallel  to  the  Gospel  of  St
Mark  in  its  relation  to  the  synoptic  gospels.

Of  the  future  of  Baha'ism  it  is  difficult  to  hazard  a  con-
jecture, especially  at  the  present  time,  when  we  are  more  cut
off  from  any  trustworthy  knowledge  of  what  is  happening  in
the  world  than  at  any  previous  period  for  many  centuries.
Less  than  a  month  ago  the  centenary  of  Baha'u'llah's  birth
was  celebrated  in  America,  whither  his  teachings  have  spread
only  within  the  last  twenty  years,  but  what  influence  they
have  attained  or  may  in  the  future  attain  there  or  elsewhere
it  is  impossible  to  conjecture.

EDWARD  G.  BROWNE.

December  lo,  191 7.

1  Edited  by  me  with  English  translation  and  notes  in  1891.


corcltafp^  iuvilcs  you  io  par Jicipafe
in  l^e  cctcBraiion  of  i^c^

o£  l^e  Strf ^  of

10nf]n'D  Hull

front  'DlovitxnScr^  I^e  Jeuf ^  fo

f^e  Iwe^r^ifi  Ittcdisivc

9ttnckctt  cJ-funclrccL  ^evenlccn

Fac-simile  of  Invitation  to  the  Centenary  of  Baha'u'llah's  birth
on  Nov.  lo — 12,  1917.

To  face  p.  xxiv.


1817         laliaVUali         1917


TN  tKis  a^e,  BAHA'O'LLAH  has  breathed
•^  the  Holy  Spirit  into  the  dead  body  of
the  world.  Consequently,  every  weak  soul  is
strengthened  by  those  divine  outbreathing,s-
Every  poor  man  will  become  rich,  every
darkened  soul  will  become  illumined,  every
ig,norant  one  will  become  wise,  because  the
confirmations  of  the  Holy  Spirit  are  descend-
ing, like  unto  torrents,  A  new  era  of  divine
consciousness  is  upon  us.  The  world  of
humanity  is  ^oin^  through  a  process  of
transformation.  A  new  race  is  being  devel-
oped. The  thoughts  of  human  brotherhood
are  permeating  the  depths  of  hearts  and  a
new  spirit  of  universal  consciousness  is
being,  profoundly  felt  by  all  men.

From  the  Utterances  of
ABDUL-BAHA


1817         laliaVUali         1917


PROGRAM

CENTENNIAL  FESTIVAL

Saturday  evening,  at  six  o'clock
•
CINEMATOGRAPH  EXHIBITION

Abdul-Baha  in  America

(Castle  Theater,  State  and  Madison  Streets)

Sunday  morning,  at  nine  o'clock

BAHA'O'LLAH'S  CONTRIBUTION  TO  WORLD
CIVILIZATION

Sunday  afternoon,  at  half  past  three  o'clock

SERVICE  ON  THE  MASHRAK-EL-AZKAR
GROUNDS  AT  WILMETTE

Monday  morning,  at  half  past  ten  o'clock
(weather  permitting)

CONVENTION  OF  TEACHING

Monday  afternoon,  at  three  o'clock

THE  MASHRAK-EL-AZKAR  IN  AMERICA
Monday  evening,  at  eig,ht  o'clock


I


AN  EPITOME  OF  BABI  AND  BAHA'I
HISTORY  TO  A.D.  1898,  TRANSLATED
FROM  THE  ORIGINAL  ARABIC  OF
MIRZA  MUHAMMAD  JAWAD  OF
OAZWfN


B.  B.


The  Beginning  is  in  the  Name  of  the  Eternal  Lord,
whom  I  praise,  and  whose  Word  I  glorify y  and
whose  Grace  I  thank,  since  He  hath  taught  me  by
His  Wisdom  that  wherein  is  my  deliverance,  my
salvation,  and  my  life  in  His  Everlasting  Kingdom,
I  ask  Him  to  strengthen  me  in  the  service  of  His
Pure  Law,  to  endow  me  with  stedfastness,  and  to

fortify  me,  so  that  /  7nay  ever  devote  myself,  according
to  His  commands,  to  that  which  is  of  service  to  my

fellow-creatures,   and  of  advantage  to  me  and  my

brethren  both  Here  and  Hereafter,      Verily  He  is

the  Almighty,  the  Lnspirer,  the  Helper  I

On  the  2nd  of  Muharram  a.h.  1233  (November  12,
1 8 1 7 )  was  born  our  Great  Master  His  Holiness  ^\^^  f
Baha'u'llah  (to  whom  be  Glory !).  His  Baha'u'Uah,
original  name  was  Mirza  Husayn  'Ali,  son  of  ov.  12, 181 7.
the  well-known  Sayyid  Mirza  'Abbas,  one  of  the  Ministers
of  the  Royal  Court  of  Persia,  entitled  "  Mirza  Buzurg,"  a
native  of  the  district  of  Niir  in  the  province  of  Mazandaran,
one  of  the  provinces  of  *  Persia.  He  was  born  in  Tihran,
the  metropolis  of  the  Persians.

When   he    reached    twenty-seven    years   of    age   there
appeared  His  Holiness  the  Harbinger,  whose
noble  name  was  Mirza  'Ali  Muhammad,  and     tion"ofthe'
who  is  entitled  the  Bab  and  the  First  Point     Bab,  May  24,
{Nu^ta-i-Uld),   who  declsived  himself  to   be     ^  ^'^'

'■■:-■'.  „*.  P:^ge  2.  .

■"1—2


4      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

the  Promised  QaUm  (He  who  shall  arise)  and  the  Mahdf,
whose  advent  is  expected  in  Islam.  This  event  happened
on  the  5th  of  Jumada  i,  a.h.  1260  (May  24,  1844).

From  the  very  beginning  of  his  Manifestation,  the  Bab
began  to  give  good  tidings  of  the  imminence

*  <  T_T  r^  *^  \J  <J  o

God^shall"^  of  some  Great  Event  and  the  advent  of  some
manifest"  Promised    Benefactor,    of    whom    he    made

the^Bab   ^  mention  in  his  writings  with  great  emphasis,

even  as  John  the  Baptist  foretold  the  appear-
ance of  the  Lord  Christ,  whom  he  mentions  with  the
utmost  veneration  and  respect  in  the  Gospel  of  Matthew,
ch.  iii,  verse  11:  "I  baptize  you  with  the  Water  of  Repent-
ance, but  He  who  cometh  after  me  is  stronger  than  I,
whose  shoes  I  am  unworthy  to  bear.  He  shall  baptize  you
with  the  Holy  Spirit  and  Fire."  And  he  (the  Bab)  gives
good  tidings  to  his  followers  of  the  Universal  Manifestation,
whom  he  describes  as  "  He  whom  God  shall  manifest,"  or
"  He  who  shall  appear,"  which  expression  is  contained  in
most  of  his  writings.  He  lays  great  stress  on  His  celebra-
tion, description  and  Manifestation,  while  he  himself,  not-
withstanding his  claim  to  the  highest  of  stations,  reckons
himself  only  a  servant  in  relation  to  Him  so  mentioned  and
described.  Moreover  this  announcement  was  continued
from  the  beginning  of  his  Manifestation  (in  a.d.  1844)  until

he  was  crucified  in  the  city  of  Tabriz,  the
to  death  at  chief  town   of  the  province  of  Azarbayjan,

Tabriz  on  together   with    one   of    his   disciples,    Mirza

juy  >  5  •  Muhammad  'All,  a  native  of  Zanwaz  near
Tabriz,  on  the  28th  of  Shaban,  1266  (July  8,  1850).  But
since  the  author  of  the  abridged  history  entitled  A
Traveller's  Narrative^  has  recorded  the  details  of  the  birth

1  The  Persian  text  of  this  work,  which  has  been  ascribed  to  'Abbas
Efendi,  together  with  an  English  translation   and  copious  historical


I.      MIRZA  JAWAd'S   historical   EPITOME  5

of  His  Holiness  the  Harbinger  {i.e.  the  Bab),  his  Manifesta-
tion, and  the  chief  events  of  his  life,  and  Mr  Browne,  the
Oriental  scholar,  has  translated  this  book  into  English,  and
printed  and  published  it,  there  is  no  need  for  me  to  repeat
what  is  recorded  in  it

When  our  great  Master  Baha'u'Uah  reached  the  age  of
thirty-two,  he  set   out  for  the   place   called        r  ^^    u
*Badasht  in   the  direction    of  Mazandaran,
where   he    met    His    Holiness    Hajji   Muhammad   'Ali  al-
Mazandarani    [or  -Barfurushi],   who   was    entitled  Jandb-i-
Qiiddds,  and  Qurratu'l-'Ayn^,  and  others  of  the  Friends.

When  he  was  thirty-three  years  of  age  he  went  to  the

place  called  Shaykh  Tabarsi  in  Mazandaran,

where  he  suffered  at  the  hands  of  the  Shi 'a        S^t^'"^.

labarsl.

divines    and    their    followers,    and   was    im-
prisoned in  the  town  of  Amul,  one  of  the  dependencies  of
Mazandaran,  and  was  much  afflicted,  and  despoiled  of  his
property.  .  '     ^

When   he  reached  the  age  of  thirty- five,  being  at  the
time  in   one  of  the  summer  resorts  of  Shimiran,  on  the
outskirts  of  the  city  of  Tihran,  there  happened  the  attempt
on  the  life  of  the  Shah  (Nasiru'd-Din),  which  was  as  follows.
One  of  the   sect   [of  the   Babis]   named    Sadiq,   after  the
execution    of    His    Holiness   the    Harbinger
{i.e.  the  Bab),  conceived  the  idea  of  exacting     theliftfof^"
revenge  without  taking  counsel  with  any  man     Nasiru'd-Dfn
of  sense;  and,  meeting  Nasiru'd-Din  Shah  on     ig-V     ^^^^'
the  28th  of  Shawwal,   1268  (May   17,   1852)
while   he    was  out   riding,    discharged   at    him    a   fire-arm

notes  by  myself,  was  published  at  the  Cambridge  University  Press  in
iSgr  under  the  title  of  A  Traveller'' s  Narrative,  written  to  illustrate
the  History  of  the  Bab.  *  page  3.

^  Also  cdiWtdiJandb-i-Tdhira,  the  Babf  poetess  and  martyr.


6      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

charged  with  shot,  which,  however,  did  not  kill  him.  This
deed,  which  arose  from  lack  of  thought  and  consideration
of  consequences,  brought  grievous  sufferings  on  this  sect
(the  Babis),  of  whom  the  Government  arrested  many,  and
condemned  them  to  death.  The  various  classes  of  citizens
slew  them  with  all  manner  of  torments \  and  in  consequence
thereof,    moreover,   much   suffering    befel   our   great    Lord

Baha'u'llah  while  he  was  sojourning  in  the

r^  \^d  and        above-mentioned    summer   resort.      He   was

imprisoned  Surrounded  by  order  of  the  Government  by

th"^  ^  body  of  troopers,  who  led  him,  walking  and

bare-footed,  in  the  extreme  heat  of  summer,
to  Tihran,  where  he  was  confined  in  the  prison  for  four
months  in  fetters  and  chains.  During  this  period  he  used
to  pass  some  of  his  nights  without  food,  sleeping  on  *the
ground ;  and  I  know  not  how  I  can  describe  this  prison,
for  it  was  notorious  for  badness  and  foulness  of  air  and
water,  nor  did  the  rays  of  the  sun,  the  light  of  day,  or  pure
air  ever  enter  it.  There  he  remained  until  the  Russian
Minister  in  the  Capital  exerted  himself  to  protect  him,  when
it  was  proved  on  enquiry  and  investigation  that  His  Holiness
our  Great  Master  had  no  knowledge  of  the  above-mentioned
event,  and  his  non-complicity  therein  became  clear.  So,
his  innocence  being  established,  he  was  released  through
the  efforts  of  the  afore-mentioned  Minister ;  but,  having
regard  to  existing  circumstances  and  the  severities  which
prevailed,  it  was  considered  expedient  that  he  should  reside

in  the  "Abode  of  Peace"  (Ddru's-Sa/dm)  of

exiled^\o^  Baghdad.     So  His  Holiness   Baha'u'llah  set

Baghdad,  out,  being  accompanied  by  his  family,  and  a

*  ''*'      ^  ■     specially  selected  officer  on  the  part  of  the

1  A  list  of  28  of  these  victims  will  be  found  in  my   Traveller''s
Narrative,  Vol.  ii,  pp.  323—334.  *  page  4.


I.    MiRzA  jawAd's  historical  epitome       7

Shah,  and  another  on  the  part  of  the  Russian  Legation,  for
Baghdad,  the  administrative  centre  of  'Iraq-i-'Arab  (Meso-
potamia). This  happened  when  he  was  thirty-six^  years  of
age,  on  the  ist  of  Muharram,  1269  (October  14,  1852^);
and  after  a  while  he  was  joined  by  Mirza  Yahya  called  AzaL
Now  in  those  days,  by  reason  of  grievous  sufferings  and
unremitting  persecution,  this  community  (the  Babis)  was
dissolved  in  the  lands  of  Persia,  and  their  assembly  was
scattered,  and  most  of  them  were  slain  with  all  manner  of
torments  and  the  harshest  punishments ;  their  possessions
were  plundered,  their  wives  and  children  were  led  into
captivity,  and  if  one  of  them  survived,  he  hid  himself  in
some  corner,  or  chose  for  himself  exile  from  iiis  country.
But  at  this  juncture  His  Holiness  our  Great  Master  set
himself  in  Baghdad  to  the  elevation  of  the  Word  and  the
diffusion  of  its  lights  with  a  zeal  which  could  not  be
exceeded.  His  efforts  led  to  a  general  diffusion  of  the
Word,  and  this  religion  became  famous  throughout  all
regions  more  than  it  had  been  at  first.  Thereby  was  the
fire  of  envy  kindled  in  the  heart  of  Mirza  Yahya  and  his
companions,  so  that  after  about  a  year,  in  order  *to
extinguish  this  fire,  His  Holiness  Baha'u'llah  determined
to  leave  Baghdad,  and  so  set  out  suddenly,

without  the  knowledge  of  anv   one,  with   a     Baha'u'llah

°      _  -  '         _  retires  into  the

servant  named  Abu'l-Qasim,  for  Sulaymaniyya     mountains  of

in   Kurdistan.     This  happened  in  a.h.  1271     r^^Wmaniyya

,  .  .   n^  1854.

(a.d.  1854),  Baha'u'llah  being  then  thirty-
eight  years  of  age.  The  servant  was  killed  after  a  few  days
at  the  hands  of  thieves,  while  he  was  travelling  from  one
place  to  another  on  special  business,  so  that  His  Holiness
our  Master  Baha'u'llah  remained  alone  in  these  deserts  and
mountains.  Many  nights  passed  over  him  when  he  was
^  MS.  has  "thirty-seven"  and  "1853"  erroneously.  *  page  5.


8      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

without  food,  and  none  of  his  companions  knew  where  he
was  until  a  definite  time  which  will  be  mentioned,  and  he
has  made  mention  of  this  in  a  Tablet  in  Persian  which  he
addressed  to  the  sister  of  his  wife  named  Maryam  and
entitled  "the  Red  Leaf"  {al-WaraqatuU-Hamrd)^  some
portions  of  which  I  shall  cite  in  this  place  to  seek  a  blessing
and  for  the  better  information  [of  my  readers].  He  says
(may  my  life  be  his  sacrifice  !)  :—

"O  Maryam !    The  wrongs  which  I  suffer  have  obliterated

the  wrongs  suffered  by  my  First  Name  from
Malyim!''       ^^^   Tablet    of  the    Universe.     O   Maryam !

From  the  Land  of  Ta  (Tihran),  after  afflictions
which  cannot  be  enumerated,  we  reached  Traq-i-'Arab  by
command  of  the  Tyrant  of  Persia,  where,  after  the  fetters
of  foes,  we  were  afflicted  with  the  perfidy  of  friends.  There-
after God  knoweth  what  befell  me,  until  I  chose  solitary
exile,  cut  off  from  my  household  and  what  it  contained,  and
from  the  Spirit  and  what  is  connected  therewith.  I  journeyed
through  the  deserts  of  Resignation,  travelling  in  such  guise
that  all  men  wept  over  my  strangerhood,  and  all  things  shed
tears  of  blood  over  my  sorrows.  I  kept  company  with  the
birds  of  the  plain  and  dwelt  with  the  beasts  of  the  field,
passing  beyond  this  transitory  world  like  spiritual  lightning,
while  for  two  years  or  rather  less  I  avoided  all  beside  God
and  shut  my  eyes  to  all  but  Him Until  God's  Predestina-
tion reminded  some  of  His  spiritual  servants  of  this  youth
of  Canaan,  and  they  began  *to  make  enquiry  and  to  establish
correspondence  with  all  places  and  persons,  until  they  dis-
covered a  sign  of  that  signless  one  in  a  mountain  cave.
Verily  he  guideth  all  things  into  a  straight  path."

In  short,  after  His  Holiness  our  Master  Baha^u'llah  had
left    Baghdad,    the    conditions    underwent   a    change,    the

*  page  6.


I.      MIRZA   JAWAD'S    historical   EPITOME  Q

ardour  of  this  community  was  cooled,  and  sloth  overcame
them.  This  period  of  absence  endured  two  years  or  rather
less,  and  it  wanted  but  little  that  the  harmony  of  the
companions  should  be  broken  up,  the  name  of  the  First
Point  {i.e,  the  Bab)  obliterated,  and  the  Light  of  Religion
extinguished.  Then  arose  the  brother  of  our  glorious
Master,  Aqa  Mirza  Musa,  who  was  entitled  Kalim  ("the
Interlocutor")^  and  the  father  of  his  wife  Shaykh  Sultan,  a
native  of  'Iraq,  and  His  Honour  the  Servant  of  the  Presence
Mirza  Aqa  Jan  (of  Kashan)^,  and  some  others,  to  make
investigations  and  enquiries.  They  began,  therefore,  to  ask
for  news  and  information  from  every  traveller  and  sojourner
until  they  found  their  way  to  His  Holiness  our  Master
Baha'u'llah,  and  ascertained  that  he  was  in  the  mountains
of  Sulaymaniyya  in  Kurdistan.  Thereupon  they  sent  the
above-mentioned  bhaykh  Sultan,  with  a  number  of  letters
from  the  faithful  in  different  lands,  to  wait  upon  him ;  and
His  Holiness  our  Master  returned  to  Baghdad  in  con-
sequence of  the  urgent  representations  of  the  Return  of
above-mentioned  (Shaykh  Sultan),  and  his  Baha'u'llah
entreaties  and  prayers.  His  arrival  on  this  ^^  ^^  ^  '
occasion  effected  a  great  improvement  in  the  community,
and  an  important  extension  of  the  Word,  inasmuch  as  he
devoted  himself  with  all  his  energy  to  their  purification  and
the  improvement  of  their  characters  and  conduct  both  by
tongue  and  by  pen.  His  influence  was  far-reaching,  his
doings  were  noised  abroad  in  all  regions,  and  there  hastened
lo  him  those  members  of  the  community  who  were  scattered
abroad  throughout  the  lands.

^  This  is  also  the  title  given  to  the  Prophet  Moses  (Musa)  by  the
Muslims,  because  he  talked  with  God.

2  Commonly  entitled  by  the  'Rahi.'is  Jaiidb-i-Khddifnu'lIdh  ("His
Honour  the  Servant  of  God  ").


lO      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

Amongst  the  strange  events  which  happened  during  the
days  of  our  great  Master's  sojourn  at  Baghdad
Sayyid  ^^^  ^^^^  sacrifice  of  himself  of  one  of  the

Isma'fl  of  Companions  named   Aqa   Sayyid   Isma'il  of

A.H.  1274  Zawara,  a  dependency  of  Isfahan.    The  detail

(a.d.  1857-  of  this  is  that  the  above-mentioned  man  came-
from  his  country  to  Baghdad,  and  after  *  having
had  the  honour  of  being  presented  to  His  HoHness  our
great  Master,  and  the  lapse  of  some  days,  his  state  under-
went a  change,  and  there  appeared  in  him  an  ecstasy,
rapture  and  ardour  beyond  the  bounds  of  computation.
One  night  he  had  the  honour  of  meeting  His  Holiness  our
great  Master  outside  the  house,  and  he  bade  him  sit  down
beside  him.  Meanwhile  our  Master  asked  for  a  page  of
writing  and  a  lamp,  and  began  to  peruse  it,  while  the
attendant  stood  holding  the  candlestick  in  his  hand  before
his  Holy  Countenance.  After  a  little  while  there  appeared
a  complete  change  and  a  violent  perturbation  in  the  Sayyid
above  mentioned.  The  Master  turned  to  him,  commanded
him  to  be  tranquil,  and  entered  his  private  apartment ;  and
the  Sayyid  set  out  for  his  lodging  in  the  house  of  Aqa
Muhammad  Riza  of  Isfahan,  known  as  aP.Ariz.  Each  day
he  increased  in  love,  longing  and  rapture,  until  His  Holiness
our  great  Master  honoured  with  his  presence  the  house
above  mentioned,  at  the  invitation  of  Aqa  Muhammad
Riza  al-^Ariz.  Now  there  were  set  before  our  Lord  fruits
and  divers  sorts  of  sweetmeats,  which  our  Master  divided
amongst  those  present ;  and  he  called  the  afore-mentioned
Sayyid  Isma'il  to  give  him  a  share  thereof.  But  when  he
came,  he  said  to  him,  "  Verily  I  ask  you  for  a  spiritual
food."  After  some  days  he  resolved  to  sacrifice  himself,
but  informed  no  one  of  his  purpose.     So  one  day  in  the

*  page  7.


I.    MiRzA  jawad's  historical  epitome      ii

morning  he  went  to  the  house  of  His  HoHness  our  Master,

and  began  to  sweep  outside  the  house,  measuring  the  space,

which  was  more  than  forty  paces,  with  his  turban.     Then

he  placed  his  face  on  the  ground,  and  measured  the  two

places  above  mentioned,  and  departed  at  noon  to  a  place

outside  Baghdad  in  the  direction  where  lies  the  road  to

Kazimayn.     And  first  he  came  to  the  Shattu'l-'Arab,  where

he  performed  the  ablution  with  water  and  then  lay  down  on

his  back  with  his  face  turned  towards  Baghdad,  and  cut  his

throat  with  a  razor  for  shaving,  and  laid  the  razor  on  his

breast,  and  yielded  up  his  pure  spirit.     Now  when  the  local

government  was  informed  of  this,  it  sent  officials  to  convey

the  martyr  in  a  coffin  *to  the  governor's  palace;  and  the

governing  classes  gathered  round  him,  looking  at  him  and

weeping.      And    the   military   guards    informed    the   local

government  about  this  event,  and  of  how  he  came  alone,  and

performed  his  ablution,  and  set  out  for  the  place  of  his  death.

This  event  happened  in  the  year  a.h.  1274  (a.d.  1857-8).

And  amongst  the  events  of  those  days  was  that  the

Consul-General  of  the    British  Government,

Colonel  Arnold  Burrowes  KembalP,  entered     Baha'u'llah

\  ^        invited  to

mto    a    friendly    correspondence    with     His     become  a

Holiness  our  great  Master,  his  object  being  ^"^.^sh
to  adopt  our  Master  as  a  British  subject  and
to  place  him  under  the  protection  of  the  British  Govern-
ment. His  Holiness,  however,  would  not  accept  this
proposal,  though  the  British  Consul-General  said  to  him,
"  If  you  do  not  like  to  live  in  England,  you  can  journey  to
India,    which   is   indeed   an    Oriental   and    Muhammadan

*  page  8.

^  According  to  the  D/cL  0/  Nat.  Biogr.  Sir  A.  B.  Kemball  became
Consul-General  at  Baghdad  in  1859,  hut  according  to  the  Ahn.  de  Gotha
in  1857.


12      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

country,  where  you  can  dwell  in  any  spot  which  is  agreeable
to  your  taste  in  the  utmost  honour  and  ease."  To  be  brief,
however,  our  Master  would  not  accept  this  proposal,  pre-
ferring to  abide  in  the  Ottoman  dominions ;  a  decision
whereof  the  wisdom  will  not  be  hidden  from  men  of  sagacity,
if  they  consider  the  events  which  happened  subsequently

At  this  juncture  one  of  the  relatives  of  the  Bab  on  the
The  loan  mother's    side    named    Hajji    Mirza    Sayyid

composed  and  Muhammad,  a  native  of  Shiraz,  came  to
^"    '^  ^  •  Karbala    and     Najaf.       When    he    reached

Kazimayn,  which  is  distant  one  hour  from  Baghdad,  His
Holiness  our  Master  Baha'u'llah  sent  to  him  one  of  the
most  eminent  of  his  Companions,  named  Hajji  Sayyid
Jawad  of  Karbala,  to  invite  him  to  Baghdad.  He  accepted
the  invitation,  and,  when  he  attained  the  honour  of  an
interview,  asked  some  questions  about  the  appearance  of
the  Promised  Qd'im,  whose  advent  Islam  awaits.  Our
Master  thereupon  issued  in  reply  to  him  a  perspicuous
book  entitled  KitdbiiU-Iqdn  (the  "Book  of  Assurance")';
and  when  he  had  read  it  and  acquainted  himself  with  its
contents,  he  acknowledged  the  truth  of  this  matter  and
returned  to  his  country.

*This  notoriety  which  accrued  to  this  community  became

a  cause  of  the  hatred  of  certain  doctors  of  the

SWite  divines     Shi'a  sect  who  dwelt  at  Karbala  and  Najaf.

towards  Amongst  these  was  Shaykh   'Abdu'l-Husayn

Balia'u'llah.  -     „,-,     /  ,111  •         1     1

01     lihran,    who    had    been    appomted    by

Nasirii'd-Din  Shah  to  repair  the  Holy  shrines.     He  agreed

with  the  other  doctors  who  were  resident  there  to  assemble

at    Kazimayn    and    order    the    common    people    to   revolt

against  this  community.     Therefore  he  started  an  agitation

^  This  book  has  been  translated  into  French  by  M.  H.  Dreyfus  under
the  title  oi  Le  Livre  de  la  Certitude  (Paris,  1904).  *  page  9.


I.      MIRZA  JAWAd'S   historical   EPITOME        1 3

there,  and  invited  all  the  doctors  to  the  place  prepared  for
the  banquet.  Amongst  those  invited  was  the  great  Shaykh
Murtaza  al-Ansari,  who  was  one  of  the  most  famous
mujtahids,  a  pious,  learned,  accomplished,  devout  and  just
man.  So  when  the  company  was  collected,  the  above-
mentioned  Shaykh  'Abdu'l-Husayn  disclosed  his  purpose,
and  asked  for  a  fativd  from  Shaykh  Murtaza  al-Ansari  on
this  subject.  But  when  Shaykh  Murtaza  heard  his  words,
he  did  not  give  a  fatwd  according  to  what  was  sought,  but
said,  "  I  have  not  yet  acquainted  niyself  with  the  ideas  of
the  Babis ;  how  then  can  I  give  a  fatwd  against  them  ? "
Then  he  rose  up  and  returned  to  Najaf,  whence  he  sent  a
message  to  His  Holiness  our  Master  Baha'u'llah,  declaring
his  affection  for  him,  and  excusing  himself  because  he  had
not  been  aware  of  the  intentions  of  the  doctors,  else  would
he  not  have  been  present  with  them,  and  adding:  "Verily
I  pray  for  you  and  ask  God  to  preserve  and  help  you."  So
when  Shaykh  'Abdu'l-Husayn  and  the  other  doctors  found
themselves  thus  disappointed,  they  had  recourse  to  another
plan.  And  there  was  amongst  them  an  eloquent  and  fluent
man  named  Mulla  Hasan  'Amd,  who  was  celebrated  for  his
gift  of  speech  and  eloquence.  So  they  agreed  to  send  him
to  His  Holiness  Baha'u'llah  to  prove  him,  supposing  that
he  would  prevail  over  him  by  his  fluency  and  eloquence.
Him,  therefore,  they  sent ;  and  he  chanced  to  arrive  on  a
day  when  His  Holiness  Baha'u'llah  was  invited  to  the  house
of  Mirza  Hasan  Khan,  one  of  the  notables  of  Persia.
Thither  did  the  above-mentioned  Mulla  Hasan  direct  his
steps,  and  demanded  permission  to  enter,  which  was  granted
him.  But  after  he  had  met  our  Master,  and  had  seen  his
dignity,  *  majesty  and  awfulness,  he  did  not  dare  to  disclose
the  intentions  of  the  doctors,  but  said  that  he  had  been

*  page  JO.-  \ '-'^-yy-'y-::


14      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

sent  on  their  behalf  to  investigate  the  claim  and  proof.
Then  our  glorious  Master  said  to  him,  "  During  the  period
of  our  sojourn  in  'Iraq  we  have  been  hoping  to  meet  the
doctors  in  some  assembly  that  they  might  question  us
concerning  the  claim  and  proof,  and  that  we  might  answer,
in  accordance  with  the  texts  of  the  Scriptures  and  the
arguments  of  reason,  concerning  the  Holy  Babi  Law,  so
that  the  Truth  might  be  distinguished  from  its  opposite."
Then  His  Holiness  began  to  prove  logically  and  historically
that  His  Holiness  the  Harbinger  [i.e.  the  Bab]  was  the
Qd'i'm,  and  on  this  subject  he  set  forth  a  detailed  expla-
nation to  those  who  were  present.  When  he  had  concluded
his  discourse,  the  above-mentioned  Mulla  Hasan  made
representation  to  him  as  follows :  "  Verily  the  learning,
wisdom,  eloquence  and  fluency  [of  the  Bab's  words]  are
admitted,  and  there  is  no  doubt  about  them,  nor  can  they
be  exceeded ;  but  let  not  the  position  of  the  doctors  be
misunderstood,  for  they  are  not  satisfied  with  scientific
proofs,  but  require  some  heavenly  sign  and  demand  a
miracle."  His  Holiness  our  Master  Baha'u'Uah  replied :
"  Well  dost  thou  speak  !  Go  to  the  doctors  and  bid  them
agree  on  one  thing  and  one  miracle  on  recognized  con-
ditions, that  God,  glorious  is  His  state,  may  display  it,  and
may  complete  this  Proof  to  His  creatures."  Then  the
above-mentioned  Mulla  Hasan  arose,  expressing  his  joy  and
gratitude,  and  returned  to  the  doctors  full  of  gladness,  and
explained  to  them  the  state  of  the  case.  Some  while  elapsed
after  this,  and  no  reply  was  received  from  them.  Then
Mulla  Hasan  sent  a  message  to  His  Holiness,  explaining
that  the  doctors  had  fled  from  the  field,  and  would  not
accept  this  arrangement.  So  he  departed  into  the  land  of
Persia  and  made  mention  of  this  matter  to  all  men  in  every
province,  admitting  the  collapse  of  the  doctors.


I.      MIRZA  JAWAD'S   historical   EPITOME        1 5

After  this  event  the  above-mentioned  Shaykh  'Abdu'l-
Husayn  had  recourse  to  another  trick  and  stratagem,  and
misled  by  means  of  worldly  wealth    Mirza    Buzurg   Khan
of  Qazwin,  who   was   the  Consul-General  of  the  Persian
Government  in  Baghdad,  *and  conspired  with  him  to  thwart
His    Holiness   our    Master   Baha'u'llah.     So     intj-i^^es  of
they  began  to  correspond  with  Nasiru'd-Din     the  Persian
Shah  and  his   ministers  and  the   nobles    of    Baghdad,
Persia,   and  frightened  them   about   the   in-     Mfrza  Buzurg
creasing  numbers  of  the  Babfs  in  Baghdad,  and
their  power  and  influence.     They  also  stirred  up  the  dregs
of  the  Persian  population  in  Baghdad  to  kill  His  Holiness
our  Master  Baha'u'llah,  who,  however,  never  attempted  to
conceal   himself,  but   still  continued  to   consort  with   the
people  of  Baghdad,  and  to  go  out,  generally  alone,  from'his
house,  and  to  visit  a  place  in  Baghdad  specially  designed
for  men  of  learning,  scholars  and  magnates  to  meet.     Only
after  his  arrival  there  would  his  attendants  overtake  him.
The  anxiety  of  his  enemies  to  kill  him  or  hurt  him,  and  his
disregard  of  them,  was  a  source  of  great  wonder  to  the
public.      In    those   days   the   writer   was    in
attendance,  enjoying  the  honour  of  entering         ^    1^01 'T
the   presence   of   His    Holiness   our   Master
Baha'u'llah ;  but  after  four  months  permission  was  accorded
to  him  to  return  to  his  own  country.

In  short,  the  persistency  of  the  above-mentioned  Shaykh
'Abdu'l-Husayn  and  the  Consul-General  and  the  mischief-
making  divines  impelled  Mirza  Husayn  Khan,  the  Persian
Ambassador  at  Constantinople,  to  request  the  Ottoman
Sultan  'Abdu'l-'Aziz  to  assign  to  His  Holiness  otir  Master*
Baha'u'llah  some  residence  remote  from  Baghdad,  which  is
adjacent  to  Persian  territory  and  is  the  resort  of  numbers  of

*  page  II.


l6      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

Shi'ite  pilgrims.  Accordingly  the  Ottoman  Government
decided  to  bring  His  Holiness  from  Baghdad  to  Constanti-
nople. The  late  Namiq  Pasha,  who  was  subsequently  doyen
of  the  ministers  {Shaykhu'l-  Wiizara),  was  at  that  time
Governor  [of  Baghdad].  He  informed  His  Holiness  our
Master  Baha'u'llah  of  this  matter,  and  of  the  determination
of  this  journey.  He  \i.e.  Baha'u'llah]  was  at  this  time  forty-
seven  years  of  age,  and  had  sojourned  in  Baghdad  eleven
years  and  more.  On  the  3rd  of  Dhu'l-Qa'da,
leaves  1279,  on  the  thirty-first  day  after  the  Persian

Baghdad,  New  Year's  Day,  *on  April  20,  1863,  in  the

1863,  foi- the       afternoon,   he    set    out   from    Old    Baghdad,
Garden  of  wherein  was  the  Most  Great  House  set  apart

for  His  Holiness  our  Master,  for  the  Garden
of  Najib  Pasha,  called  Rizwan,  and  situated  in  the  new
quarter  of  Baghdad.  He  crossed  the  Shatt[u'l-'Arab]  in  a
boat,  entered  the  above-mentioned  garden,  and  abode  there
for  twelve  days,  which  are  called  Ayydmu'r-Rizwdn.  'Fhither
the  townsfolk,  including  the  Sunni  doctors,  the  local  notables
and  the  Government  officials  came  daily  in  crowds  to  visit
him,  to  present  their  dues  of  affection  and  farewell,  returning
afterwards  to  their  houses  in  exceeding  grief  and  sorrow.
In  those  days  His  Holiness  our  Lord  Baha'u'llah  declared
his  Mission  in  his  writings ;  and  this  is  reckoned  a  second
declaration,  as  is  fully  set  forth  in  more  lengthy  treatises  on
this  matter.

To  be  brief,  His  Holiness  our  Master  Baha'u'llah  set
B  h"u'irh  forth  on  his  journey  at  noon  on  the  twelfth

sets  out  from       day  from   the  above-mentioned  garden,  this

Sttfti-'''        b^^"g  ^^^   ^3th  of  Dhu'l-Qa'da,  1279,  corre-

nople,  May  J,     sponding   with    the   ist  of  May,   1863.     He

^'  was   accompanied    by    his    three    sons    {al-

*  page  12,


I.      MIRZA  JAWAD'S   historical   EPITOME        1/

Aghsdnu'th-Thaldthd),  'Abbas  Efendi,  Muhammad  'All
Efendi,  and  Mahdi  Efendi,  his  wives  and  family,  his  brother
Aqa  Mirza  Mdsa,  the  Servant  of  the  Presence^  Mirza
Muhammad-quli,  and  a  number  of  the  disciples  in  his
service.  That  was  a  memorable  day :  waiUng  and  lamen-
tation arose  from  all  sides ;  the  people  grieved  over  his
departure  as  he  rode  forth  on  his  horse,  exhorting  and
admonishing  them,  enjoining  on  them  patience  and  dignity,
and  consoling  them  with  words  and  expressions  which
attracted  their  hearts  and  minds.  His  Holiness  our  Master
alighted  at  a  place  called  Furayjat,  distant  two  hours  from
Baghdad,  where  he  abode  a  week.  Each  day  his  followers
appeared  before  him  to  visit  him  and  then  returned  [to
Baghdad],  while  he  enjoined  on  them  patience,  *  composure,
virtue  and  courtesy.  After  the  lapse  of  a  week  he  continued
his  journey  by  way  of  Kerkilk,  Mawsil  and  Diyar  Bakr
towards  Constantinople,  until  he  reached  the  town  of
Samsiin,  situated  on  the  coast  of  the  Black  Sea ;  and  the
duration  of  this  journey  was  four  months.  There  he  issued
a  Tablet  entitled  the  "  Tablet  of  the  Howdah  "  {Lawhu^l-
HawdaJ),  in  which  was  contained  information  as  to  certain
future  events.  Then  he  embarked  on  the  steamer  and
reached  Constantinople,  where  a  number  of  carriages  were
provided  by  the  Ottoman  Government  for  him  and  his
following.  In  these  he  and  his  companions  drove  to
the  Government  Guest-house;  but  since  this  did  not
provide  sufficient  accommodation,  another  more  spacious
house,  called  "the  House  of  Veysi  Pasha,"  was  assigned
to  His  Holiness  our  Master  and  his  following  at  the
charges   of   the    State,   while    Shemsi    Bey  was  appointed

^  i.e.  Mirza  Aqa  Jan  of  Kaslian,  commonly  c'sW&d,  Jandb-i- Khddimu
'lldh.

*  page  13.
B.  B.  2


1 8     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABf  RELIGION

on  behalf  of  the  Government  to  arrange  for  their  enter-
tainment.

His  Holiness  our  Master  abode  in  Constantinople  for
four   months,  during  which  period   he  asso-

Bahd'u'llah         ciated  with  no  one  of  the  Ministers  of  the

resides  tor

four  months         State  or  its  leaders  or  officials.     One  of  these

at  Constanti-       called  Kemal  Pasha  one  day  observed  to  His
nople.  .  .  ^

Holiness  our  Master  in  the  course  of  conver-
sation that  the  current  custom  was  that  every  important
person  coming  to  the  Government,  that  is  to  say  being
received  as  its  guest,  should  visit  the  Prime  Minister  and
the  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs  on  the  second  or  third  day
after  his  arrival,  to  set  forth  his  aims  and  objects,  and
should,  if  necessary,  request  an  interview  with  his  Majesty
the  Sultan.  To  this  our  Master  replied,  "I  am  not  unaware
of  the  current  customs ;  but  inasmuch  as  we  have  no  need
and  no  request  to  prefer,  and  our  trust  is  in  none  save  God
alone ;  and  since  the  Government  desired  our  presence
here,  and  we,  in  obedience  to  it,  journeyed  hither,  so  that
it  might  be  apparent  to  it  that  we  have  no  aim  except  the
well-being  of  the  State  and  the  Nation,  therefore  we  are
unwilling  to  cause  it  further  trouble."  *So  Kemal  Pasha
was  silent,  nor  did  anyone  thereafter  speak  words  of  like
import.

Mirza  Husayn  Khan,  who  was  mentioned  a  little  while

ago,  kept  watching  for  some  opportunity  to
Mfrzl^HusIyn  trouble  the  minds  of  the  [Ottoman]  statesmen
Khan  the  in  regard   to  this  community ;   and,  finding

Ambassador.       ^^^    moment   propitious,    he    hinted    to    the

Ministers  that  these  excuses  really  arose  from
pride  and  arrogance,  not  from  mere  ijidependence  of  spirit
and  trust  in  God ;  and  since  there  existed  between  him  and

*  page  14.


I.      MIRZA  JAWAD'S   historical   EPITOME        IQ

Fu'ad  Pasha,  the  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs,  and  'Ali
Pasha,  the  Prime  Minister,  a  great  friendship,  he  devoted
all  his  energies  and  state-craft  with  them  and  others  to
changing  their  ideas  and  disturbing  their  thoughts,  until  an
Edict  was  promulgated  by  the  Ottoman  Government  to  the
effect  that  the  dwelling-place  of  His  Holiness  our  Master
Baha'u'Uah  and  his  following  should  be  the  city  of  Adria-
nople,  known  [amongst  the  Baha'is]  as  the  "  Land  of  the
Mystery"  {Ardu's-SirrY,  which  was  formerly  the  capital  of
the  [Ottoman]  Empire.

Our  Master  Baha'u'Uah  and  those  who  accompanied  him
set  out  from  Constantinople  riding  in  carriages
for  Adrianople,   which   they  reached   at   the     arrives  at
beginning  of  the  month  of  Rajab,  a.h.  1280,     Adrianople,
corresponding  with  the   12th    of  December,  '     '       ^'

1863,  and  were  lodged  at  first  in  a  khan,  whence  His
Holiness  our  Master  was  transferred  to  the  house  known  as
the  Murddiyya,  and,  after  a  few  days,  to  another  house
called  the  "  House  of  God's  Command  "  {Baytu  AmrVlldh).
The  great  men  of  the  district  and  its  officials  and  divines
visited  him  there,  paying  respect  to  his  rank.  But  those
who  accompanied  him  dwelt  in  other  quarters.

Now  as  for  the  circumstances  of  Mirza  Yahya  \^^ubh-i-
Azal\  who  has  been  mentioned  before,  the

facts  are  that  His  Holiness  our  Master,  during     Mirza  Yahy^

'  °      Subh-i-Azal.

the  days  of  his   sojourn   in    Persia,  enjoyed
great  celebrity  and  supreme  importance  in  this  matter  with
the  Ministers  of  State  and  notables  of  the  people,  the  eyes
of  all  being  directed  towards  him.     Then  there  came  before
him  one  of  the  leaders  *of  this  community,  named  Mulla

^  The  words  Sirr  (Mystery)    and   Edirni  (Adrianople)   have  the
same  numerical  equivalent,  viz.  260.
*  page  15.

2 — 2


20     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  bAbI  RELIGION

'Abdu'l-Karim  of  Qazwin  and  entitled  Mirza  Ahmad',
accompanied  by  his  [Baha'u'llah's]  brother  Aqa  Mirza
Mdsa,  and  represented  to  him  that  the  hatred  and  male-
volence of  the  doctors  and  lawyers  of  Persia  exceeded  all
that  could  be  imagined,  while  the  hatred  of  the  Prime
Minister  Mirza  Taqi  Khan  also  was  fierce  and  his  influence
great,  and  the  Government  likewise  despotic  in  its  com-
mands. In  these  circumstances  His  Holiness  our  Master
Baha'u'llah  was  in  great  peril,  and  consequently  it  was
necessary  that  the  regards  of  these  persons  should  be
directed  towards  some  other  person.  And  since,  for  various
considerations,  they  did  not  deem  it  expedient  to  appoint  a
stranger,  Mirza  Yahya  \Subh-i-Azal\  was  chosen  to  this  end,
and  His  Holiness  our  Master  Baha'u'llah  wrote  letters  to
His  Holiness  the  Harbinger  "the  First  Point"  \i.e.  the  Bab]
about  Mirza  Yahya,  his  brother  above-mentioned,  to  which
answers  were  duly  issued ;  and  His  Holiness  our  Master
began  to  instruct  him,  and  his  name  became  celebrated  [as
a  leader  of  the  sect].

To  be  brief,  the  diligence  of  His  Holiness  our  Master  in
publishing  the  Word  in  'Iraq,  and  the  fame

Subh-i-Azal        ^^  j^jg  renown  throughout  the  lands,  became

proceeds  °  '

alone  from  a   cause    of    envy   to    the    above-mentioned

Kslf"^  ^"^         [^?/^-^-/-^^«/],  who  was  secretly  moved  thereby

to   opposition  and  frowardness.     Now  when

he  was  in  Persian  territory,  and  His  Holiness  our  Master

Baha'u'llah   was  at   Baghdad,   he  was  hidden  from   men's

sight,  and  none  of  the  Companions  used  to  see  him ;  while

in  Baghdad  he  dwelt  in  a  house  apart  with  his  wife  and

children,  and  used  often  to  visit  His  Holiness  our  Master,

until,  when  the  journey  to  Constantinople  was  decided  on,

His  Holiness  our  Master  ordered  him  to  take  with  him  the

1  See  my  Traveller' s  Narrative,  ii,  pp.  41 — 2  and  n.  2  ad  c ale.


I.      MfRZA  JAWAD'S    historical   epitome        21

writings  of  His  Holiness  the  Harbinger  [i.e.  the  Bab],  and

to  go  to  Persia  to  have  them  copied  and  published.     But

after  the  departure  of  His  Holiness  our  Master,  he  left  the

above-mentioned  writings  in  the  house  of  His  Holiness  our

Master  and  went  with  one  of  the  Companions,  an  Arab

named    Zahir,    to    Mawsil,    which    he    entered    before    the

arrival  there  of  His  Holiness  our  Master,  having  adopted

the  name  of  Mirza  'All.     And  since  those  [believers]  who

dwelt  there  did   not  know  him  personally,  they  supposed

him   *to    be   a  guest,  until    they  reached  Constantinople.

After  their  arrival  there,  those  who  had  accompanied  His

Holiness  our  Master  knew  him  and  understood  his  case ;

and,  since  they  used  to  associate  with  him  continually,  they

gradually  became  cognizant  of  his  character  and  condition,

and  found  him  to  be  the  contrary  of  what  they  had  supposed ;

until  they  reached   Adrianople,  where  Mirza  Yahya  again

dwelt  in  a  place  apart,  his  expenses  being  at  the  charge  of

His  Holiness  our  Master,  while  what  used  to  arrive  from

the   different  countries  was  given  to  him,  though  matters

were  at  that  time  greatly  straitened  and  embarrassed.     But

after   allowances    had    been    assigned    by    the    [Ottoman]

Government,  there  was  apportioned  to   him  and  to  those

who  were  with  him    sufficient  for  their  needs  and  more.

Yet,  notwithstanding  all  this  attention,  the  fire  of  his  [Subh-

i-Azal's]    envy  was    not   quenched,   but   was

^u  •  J  .  .'^     •         BahaVllah

rather    increased    every    moment,    until    in     promulgates

AH.  1280  (a.d.  1863)  there  was  promulgated     \^&  LawhuH-
[by  Baha'u'llah]  the  "Tablet  of  Command"     "^""''^  '^^^•
{Lawhui-Amr),  which  openly  gladdened  all  men  with  the
tidings  of  the  Advent  of  Him  who  was  promised  in  the
Baydn;  and  His  Reveren'ce  the  Servant  [of  God]  ^  bore  the

*  page  16.

^  i.e.  Mfrza  Aq^  Jan  of  Kashan.


22     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

above-mentioned  Tablet,  which  was  in  the  writing  of  the
Holy  Pen,  according  to  the  instructions  of  our  Master
Baha'u'llah,  to  Mirza  Yahya,  and  read  it  to  him.  Mirza
Yahya  did  not  openly  reject  the  Tablet,  but  the  fire  of  envy
blazed   forth  in   his  bosom   more  than    before,   and  there

appeared  then  the  schism  mentioned  in  the
bet'we'^n  ^^^^  Tablets,  and  the  days  named  "the  Days

Baha'u'llah  of  Stress  "  {al-Ayydfnu' sh'Shiddd\  and  there

Siibh-i-Azal         befell  "the  Supreme  Separation "  (aZ-i^^j-/?/'/-

Akbar),  and  His  Holiness  our  Master,  to-
gether with  his  sons  (al-Aghsdn)  and  wives  and  the  Servant,
went  forth  from  amongst  the  community,  took  up  their
abode  in  another  house,  left  all  and  ceased  to  converse  and
associate  with  them,  and  for  some  while  met  none  of  the
Companions.

Amongst  the  events  which  happened  in  those  days  was

Mirza  Yahya's  attempt  to  give  poison  to  His
attempt  to  Holiness    our    glorious    Master    Baha'u'llah.

poison^  This,   in   brief,  was  as   follows.     Before   the

"  Supreme  Separation  "  had  yet  taken  place,
Mirza  Yahya  one  day  invited  His  Holiness  our  Master  to
his  house  to  drink  tea  with  milk,  according  to  the  custom
of  the  Persians;  and  he  had  arranged  this  *  before  the  arrival
of  Baha'u'llah,  and  had  set  apart  certain  special  cups  for
His  Holiness.  So  when  one  of  the  cups  above-mentioned
was  offered  to  him,  our  Master  drank  some  of  it,  and  gave
the  remainder  to  one  of  the  wives  of  Mirza  Yahya  who  was
present.  She  drank  of  it,  and  subsequently  there  appeared
in  her  symptoms  of  poisoning,  though  the  puison  was  not  in
sufficient  quantity  to  threaten  her  life.  After  the  above-
mentioned  event,  the  health  of  His  HoHness  our  Master  was
greatly  disordered,  to  such  a  degree  that  one  of  the  faithful

*  page  17.


I.    MiRZA  jawad's  historical  epitome     23

physicians  feared  for  his  life  when  he  visited  him,  and  prayed
that  the  sickness  might  be  transferred  to  himself,  and  that
His  Holiness  our  Master  might  be  healed.  And  it  seemed  as
though  his  prayers  were  answered,  for  he  fell  sick  and  was
confined  to  his  house,  and  after  a  little  while  his  pure  spirit
left  this  transitory  life.  And  his  name  was  Dr  Chilpan.
The  illness  of  His  Holiness  our  Master  continued  for  a  long
while,  but  eventually  his  health  was  restored  for  the  accom-
plishment of  the  thing  predestined,  which  was  the  completion
of  the  Proof  to  mankind,  and  the  manifestation  of  the  Dispen-
sation promised  in  the  former  Scriptures.

Now  as  for  the  cause  of  the  "  Supreme  Separation,"  this
was  that  one  day  Mirza  Yahya  entered  the
bath  attended  by  Master  Muhammad  'Ali  of    ^J^eged

-'  /  attempt  to

Isfahan    the    barber,    according    to    custom,     assassinate

And  in  the  bath  Mi'rza  Yahya  endeavoured  to     J^^ha  u'llah

'  ■'  ^  in  the  bath,

persuade  his  attendant  to  kill  His  Holiness

our  Master  Baha'u'llah,  saying,  "  When  thou  waitest  upon

His  Holiness  Baha'u'llah  in  the  bath  and  art  preparing  to

shave  his  throat,  cut  it."    But  Muhammad  'All  after  leaving

the  bath  reported  the  matter,  which  was   bruited  abroad

amongst  the  Community,  so  that  great  disquietude  appeared

amongst  them,  in  consequence  of  which  His  Holiness  our

Master  enjoined  on  all  patience,  quietude  and  gentleness,

and  himself  went  forth  from  amongst  them  and  lodged  in

another  house.

After  this  event  Sayyid  Muhammad  of  Isfahan,  who  was

ever  bent  on  opposition  and  schism,  and  who     c>  •   .,

was  finally  expelled  on  account  of  some  of  his     Muhammad

actions,    thought   the    time    propitious,    and     ^    ^       "'

united  himself  *to  Mirza  Yahya.    The  two  busied  themselves

*  page  18,


24     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

with  mischief  and  frowardness,  both  within  and  without
[the  community] ;  but  although  they  left  nothing  undone  in
the  way  of  enmity  and  opposition,  His  Holiness  our  Master
used  to  treat  them  with  the  utmost  kindness  and  courtesy
until  one  day  Mirza  Yahya,  instigated  thereto  by  the  above-
mentioned  Sayyid  Muhammad,  sent  one  of  his  women  to
the  Government  House  to  demand  an  allowance  and  to
complain  of  His  Holiness  our  Master  Baha'u'llah  saying,
"  He  has  not  given  us  the  allowance  apportioned  to  us  by
the  Government,  yea,  he  withholds  from  us  bread  and
water."  To  such  extreme  meanness  and  such  great  injury
to  God's  affair  did  he  consent,  while  enjoying  all  sorts  of
favours  and  obtaining  all  the  means  to  honour  and  comfort !
This  thing  they  did  to  injure  the  dignity  of  His  Holiness
our  Master  Baha'u'llah ;  and  they  wrote  letters  to  the
different  countries  ascribing  all  their  own  deeds  to  His
Holiness,  and  devoting  themselves  with  all  their  energies  to
falsehood  and  calumny.

On  the  26th  of  the  Second  Rabi',  a.h.  1284  (August  26,

^  ,  1867)  a  little  before  noon  one  of  the  Persians

Open  rupture  ' '

between  named  Mir  Muhammad  of  Shiraz  presented

fnd^'"'^^^^  himself,  saying  that  he  had  come  from  Mirza
Subh-i-Azal,  Yahya  who  desired  that  a  meeting  should  take
"g-  2  ,1  7-  place  between  him  and  His  Holiness  our
Master  Baha'u'llah,  and  that  the  ordeal  by  cursing  should
be  performed,  so  that  a  discrimination  might  be  effected
between  the  True  and  the  False,  and  that  the  Truth  might
become  apparent  to  all.  And  when  this  matter  had  been
submitted  in  detail  to  His  Holiness  our  Master,  who  was
preparing  to  take  his  midday  rest,  he  arose  forthwith  and
went  forth  from  the  house,  saying  to  the  above-mentioned
Mir  Muhammad,  "  Go,  and  bid  Mirza  Yahya  come  to  the
Mosque  of  Sultan  Selim,  where  he  will  find  us."     And  from


I.      MIRZA  JAWAD'S    historical   EPITOME        2$

the  moment  of  his  exit  from  the  house  until  he  entered  the
above-mentioned  Mosque,  in  the  streets  and  markets,  he
continued  to  utter  verses  in  an  audible  voice  so  that  all  who
saw  him  and  heard  the  verses  were  astonished.  In  short,
soon  after  he  had  entered  the  Mosque,  Mir  Muhammad
arrived  saying,  "  Mirza  Yahya  asks  to  be  excused  because
to-day  it  is  not  possible  for  him  to  present  himself.  He
therefore  begs  you  to  appoint  another  day,  and  to  write
a  note  to  this  effect,  signed  *and  sealed,  that  whoever
does  not  present  himself  at  the  appointed  time  is  an
impostor."  So  His  Holiness  our  Master  Baha'u'llah  wrote
a  Tablet,  and  sealed  it  with  his  noble  seal,  and  delivered  it  to
one  of  his  disciples  named  Mirza  Muhammad  and  entitled
Nabil^  (he  it  was  who  cast  himself  into  the  sea  a  little  while
after  the  Ascension  of  His  Holiness  our  Master),  arranging  that
the  meeting  should  take  place  in  the  Mosque  of  Sultan  Seli'm.
The  author  [of  this  book]  was  there  at  the
time,  and  was  present  when  His  Holiness  ^^  "  ^J^^^j
our  Master  commanded  Nabil  to  take  the
above-mentioned  holy  Tablet  to  one  of  the  followers  of
Mirza  Yahya  named  Hasan  Aqa  that  he  should  give  them
the  Tablet  when  they  had  given  him  a  note  sealed  by  Mirza
Yahya  in  accordance  with  the  agreement  above  mentioned  ;
but  that  otherwise  he  should  keep  the  Tablet  and  not  hand
it  over  to  them.  Some  days  elapsed  after  this,  and  they
gave  him  no  such  note,  nor  did  they  appear  at  the  trysting-
place ;  for  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  Darkness  and  the  Light
can  never  meet.

*  page  19.

1  Nabil  (noble)  is  numerically  equivalent  to  Muhammad  (both  words
yielding,  in  the  abjad  notation,  a  total  of  92),  and  is  sometimes  substi-
tuted for  it  by  the  Babis.  The  Bab  himself,  whose  name  was  'Ali
Muhammad,  often  calls  Mxm^oM  *■  Ali  before  Nabil.


26     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

After  the  "  Supreme  Separation  "  Sayyid  Muhammad  of

...      J  Isfahan,  who  has  just  been  mentioned,  went

Alleged  "  ,  .

intrigues  of         to   Constantinople    to    lay  a  complaint,   and

Sayyid  Mu-         there  foregathered  with  a  man  named   Ana
nammad  and  .  ^

Aqa  Jan  Kaj-  J^"  ^"^  nick-named  Kaj-Kuldh  ("Skew-cap").
Kuldh  at  Con-  These  two  left  undone  nothing  in  the  way  of
dishonour,  mischief,  falsehood  and  calumny,
and  the  Persian  Ambassador  Mirza  Husayn  Khan,  already
mentioned,  found  in  them  a  suitable  means  for  carrying  out
the  design  which  he  constantly  harboured  in  his  bosom,
to  wit  the  injuring  of  His  Holiness  our  Master  Baha'u'llah,
and  making  mischief  between  him  and  the  Ministers  of  the
Ottoman  Government.  He  therefore  made  them  instru-
mental in  disturbing  the  understandings  of  the  Ottoman
statesmen,  and  led  them  to  suppose  that  many  of  the  people
of  Adrianople  were  followers  of  His  Holiness  our  Master
Baha'u'llah.  By  these  false  statements,  in  short,  they
troubled  the  minds  of  the  Ottoman  Ministers  and  caused
the  issue  of  an  edict  by  Sultan  'Abdu'l-'Aziz  banishing  His
Holiness  our  Master  with  three  other  persons  to  'Akka,  *this
measure  being  effected  by  the  energy  of  the  above-mentioned
Ambassador,  the  Prime  Minister  'All  Pasha,  and  the  Minister
for  Foreign  Affairs  Fu'ad  Pasha.  The  three  persons  who
were  to  accompany  His  Holiness  our  Master  were  his
brother  Aqa  Mirza  Miisa,  Mirza  Muhammad-quli  who
subsequently  rose  up  in  opposition,  and  Dervish  Sidq  'All
of  Qazwin,  one  of  the  servants  of  His  Holiness  our  Master.
One  morning  the  soldiers  of  the  Government  surrounded
the  house  of  His  Holiness  our  Master  on  all  sides,  and
sentinels  were  set  over  the  inner  and  outer  doors  to  prevent
any  one  from  going  out  or  coming  in  ;  while  such  of  the
Companions  as  were  without  the  house  they  arrested  and

*  page  20.


I.    mIrza  jawad's  historical  epitome     27

brought   to  the   Government   House.     They  also  arrested
seven  of  the  Companions  at  Constantinople     j^^  Turkish
and  imprisoned  them.    A  week  after  this  event     Government
His  Holiness  our  Master  Baha'u'llah  set  out  on     j-ra^nsf^^r
his  journey.    And  during  the  above-mentioned     Baha'u'llah
week  every  day  the  Consuls  of  foreign  Powers      °
and   some  of  the  spiritual  leaders  [of  the   Muslims]  used
to  wait  on  His  Holiness  our  Master  and  show  their  love
for   Him    and    their   favourable  disposition   towards    Him.
Their  primary  object  was  to  seize   upon  some  pretext  to
cancel  the  order  of  exile,  which  was  without  any  adequate
reason,   moral   or  political,  rendering  it    necessary.     They
unanimously  demanded  of  His  Holiness  our  Master  that  he
should  write  a  note  which  might  serve  them  as  a  pretext  for
helping   him    and  arresting  the    order  of  exile;    but   His
Holiness  our  Master  would  not  consent  to  this.     At  this
time  the  author  of  this  book  had  enjoyed  the  honour  of
being  in  attendance  on  him  and  dwelling  in  his  neighbour-
hood for  a  year  and  a  fraction  over.

To  be  brief,  Khurshid   Pasha,  the  Governor  of  Adria-

nople,  when  he  saw  the  edict  issued  for  their

....  -      -    ,  .  ,  Khurshid

exile,  disapproved  of  this  measure,  and  corre-     Pasha  inter-

sponded   with    the    Ottoman    statesmen    re-     cedes  for

^     ,,  ,  .  ,  ,.  ,  .        Baha'u'llah.

peatedly  on   this  matter,  demanding  that   it

should  be  altered,  and  emphatically  declaring,   "  There  is

absolutely    no    truth    in    what    hath    been    said     to    you

against    this    community."       His    hopes,    however,    were

disappointed,   for  they  did  not  accept  his    statement  and

insisted  on  *the  execution   of  the  order.     But  since  he

loved    His    Holiness    our    Master,    he    was    ashamed    to

convey  the  order  to  him,  so   hid  himself,  giving  out  that

he  had  gone  out  of  the  city,  and  appointed  the  Registrar

*  page  2 1 :


28     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

{Daftarddr)  to  act  in  his  place,  who  conveyed  the  purport

of  the  edict  to  His  Holiness  our  Master,  and  the  journey

was  decided  on.

When  this  matter  was  settled,  His  Holiness  our  Master

Baha'u'llah   forbade  all  the   Companions    to

Baba'u'llah  s  journey  with  him,  saying  to  them,  "  Let  me

companions  -'  -'  .      .  .

insist  on  journey  alone,   for  it  is   uncertain  what  will

accompanying  ^^j-^j^   ^^   -^^  ^j^j^  journey."     The  object    of

the  Government  in  ordering  this  journey  was,
indeed,  to  scatter  the  community,  for  it  ordered  the  trans-
portation of  four  persons  only,  as  has  been  already  men-
tioned. But  when  the  Companions  heard  what  His  Holiness
our  Master  had  said,  their  voices  were  raised  in  weeping  and
wailing,  and  they  clung  to  every  pretext  whereby  separation
might  be  avoided  and  they  might  all  accompany  His
Holiness  our  Master.

At  this  juncture  one  of  the  Companions'  named  Hajji

Ja'far  of  Tabriz  cut  his  throat  with  his  own
suicide  of  hand  in  the  Mahall-al-Barrani  in  the  house

Hajji  Ja'far  of    of  His   Holiness  our  Master  at  the  second
Tabriz.  r     i  •   i  *        i

hour   of   the    night.      At    that    moment    the

author  of  this  book  was  sitting  with  a  number  of  other

persons  in  another  room.     Suddenly  we  heard  a  terrifying

noise.     We   rushed  out,  and  beheld  the  above-mentioned

disciple  at  a  window,  having  cut  his  throat  with  a  shaving

razor,  the  blood  spouting  forth  and  the  razor  fallen  from  his

hand  outside  the  house.     A  surgeon  named  Muhammad,

who  lived  in  the  neighbourhood,  was  at  once  sent  for,  while

those   persons  who  were  at  the  gate   informed    the   local

government,  some  of  whose  representatives  came.     When

the  surgeon  examined  the  wound  he  found  that  the  [carotid]

artery  had  not  been  cut,  and  bandaged  the  man's  throat

with   a   handkerchief.      Those   present   on   behalf  of  the


I.      MIRZA  JAW  ad's   historical   EPITOME        29

Government  enquired  of  him  the  cause  of  this  action.  He
replied  that  the  cause  of  it  was  that  His  Holiness  our
Master  had  forbidden  them  to  journey  with  him,  and  that
he,  finding  this  very  hard  to  bear,  was  content  *to  part  with
his  life,  but  was  not  content  to  part  with  his  Master.  "  If
I  get  well,"  he  added,  "and  am  forbidden  to  go  forth  with
him,  I  shall  cut  my  throat  again."  In  short,  the  above-
mentioned  Hajji  Ja'far  remained  there  for  treatment,  and
his  brother  Karbala'i  Taqi  with  him,  by  the  express  wish  of
His  Holiness  our  Master,  both  having  received  permission
to  go,  after  Hajji  Ja'far  had  recovered  his  health,  to  the
town  of  *Akka,  the  place  of  banishment.

After  a  sojourn  of  five  years  or  less^  at  Adrianople  His
Holiness  our  Master  Baha'u'llah  set  out  therefrom  on  the
sixteenth   of  the   Second    Rabi',    a.h.    1285     Baha'u'llah
(August  5,  1868),  accompanied  by  his  sons  {al-     leaves  Adria-
Aghsdn),  his  family  and  his  disciples,  sixty-     ^^kka^^^
eight  souls  in  all,  and  an  official  specially  ap-     August  5,
pomted  by  the  local  government  named  Hasan
Efendi,  a  captain,  with   a   number   of  soldiers,  riding  in
carriages  and  bound  for  Gallipoli.     On  that  day  there  was
a  wonderful  concourse  of  Muslims  and  Christians  at  the
door  of  our  Master's  house,  and  at  the  moment  of  departure
it  was  a  memorable  hour.     Most   of  those   present  were
weeping  and  wailing,  especially  the  Christians.    And  on  the
fourth  day  they  entered  Gallipoli.     When  the  soldiers  sur-
rounded the  house   His   Holiness  our  Master  Baha'u'llah
began  to  promulgate  a  Holy  Ta!)let  named  the   "Tablet
of  the  Premier "  {Lawhu' r-Ra'is),  which  he  completed  at

*  page  22.

^  In  the  margin  are  added  the  words  "or  four  months,"  that  is,  four
months  under  the  five  years,  for  they  reached  Adrianople  in  Dec.  1863
and  left  it  in  August  1868.


30     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

Gyawur  Kyiiy  situated  near  Gallipoli,  at  a  distance  of  four
Publication  of  ^ours  therefrom.  In  this  Tablet  he  mentioned
the  Lawh-i-        certain   matters  and  events,  of  which   some

happened  after  its  promulgation,  while  others
remain  hitherto  unfulfilled;  whereof  the  occurrence  is
awaited.

On  arriving  at  Gallipoli  they  alighted  at  a  house  which

the  Government  had  prepared  for  them,  and
at^Galli  wH         Hasan  Efendi,  the  captain  appointed  to  take

charge  of  them,  handed  them  all  over  to
another  officer  who  had  come  to  Gallipoli  with  a  number
of  the  Companions  from  Constantinople.  This  was  a  major
named  'Umar  Efendi.  After  handing  them  over,  Hasan
Efendi  presented  himself  and  asked  permission  to  enter  the
presence  of  His  Holiness  our  Master  Baha'u'llah  to  bid  him
farewell.  On  receiving  this  permission,  he  entered  *and
seated  himself  with  the  utmost  pohteness,  and'  His  Holiness
our  Master  communicated  to  him  orally  the  prophecies
which  had  been  revealed  to  Him  in  the  Lawhu'r-RaHs.
The  purport  of  these  was  that  Adrianople  and  the  sur-
rounding territory  would  shortly  pass  out  of  the  hands  of
the  Ottoman  Sultan ;  that  affairs  would  undergo  a  great
change;  that  earthquakes^  would  appear;  that  lamentation
would  arise  and  strife  become  manifest  in  the  land,  because
of  the  oppression  which  had  befallen  them  without  due
reason.  The  above-mentioned  Hasan  Efendi  was  greatly
affected,  and  kept  repeating  continually  "  If  God  so  please."
And  His  Holiness  our  Master  ordered  him  to  conceal  what
had  been  told  him  until  the  time  for  its  fulfilment  should


come.


page  23.
^  Or  perhaps  "  political  convulsions"  are  intended.


I.      MIRZA  JAWAD'S   historical   EPITOME       3 1

Some  years  after  the  arrival  of  His  Holiness  our  Master

Baha'u'llah  at   'Akka,  'All  Pasha  the  Prime     ^  ,^,

Fulfilment  of
Minister   was   dismissed ;    Fu  ad    Pasha,   the     prophecies  in

Minister   for    Foreign   Affairs,    died;    Sultan     ihei.awk-t-

'Abdu'l-'Aziz  was  deposed  and   killed;    and

lastly  the  Russo-Turkish  War  took  place,  and  there  happened

those  troubles  and  calamities  which  His  Holiness  our  Master

Baha'u'llah  had  foretold  in  the  Lawhu! r- RaHs .

On   the  second  day  in  Gallipoli   Major  'Umar  Efendi

notified  His  Holiness  our  Master  that  he  was  commissioned

to  send  four  persons  only  to  'Akka  and  the  remainder  to

Constantinople.     Great  God  !     On  that  day  there  appeared

such  trouble  as  cannot  be  described  in  speech,  and  there

rose  up  the  sound  of  weeping  and  wailing  from  all  the  family

and  Companions  in  such  manner  as  the  pen  is  unable  to

depict.    On  the  next  day  His  Holiness  our  Master  Baha'u'llah

summoned  the  above-mentioned  'Umar  Efendi  and  said  to

him,  "  If  you  cut  these  people  in  pieces  it  is  impossible  that

they  should  separate  from   us."     So  the  above-mentioned

officer  informed  the  Sublime  Porte  of  this  by  telegraph,  and

a  reply  arrived  that  they  should  all  be  sent  to  'Akka.     So

after  the  lapse  of  some  days  in  Gallipoli,  at

the  end  of  the  month  of  the  Second   Rabi'     ^^^  ^^^^  ^^

[a.h.  1285  =  August  19,   1868)  His  Holiness     of  his  followers

our  Master  and  those  who  accompanied  him     Gallipoli  for

of  his  sons   {Aghsdn),   family,   kinsmen  and     'Akka,  Aug.

followers,    who    *were    about   seventy   souls,

embarked  in  boats  for  the  Austrian-Lloyd  steamer  and  set

out  for  'Akka  by  way  of  Smyrna  and  Alexandria.     Now  one

of  the  leading  Companions  called  Mirza  Aqa  of  Kashan  and

entitled  Jandb-i-Munir  had  been  ill  for  some  time,  and  when

^  page  24.


32     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

the  steamer  anchored  in  the  harbour  of  Smyrna  he  took  a
Death  of  ^^^^  ^^^  ^^^  worse.      So   His    Holiness   our

Mfrza  Aqa  Master  ordered  some  of  the  Companions  and

of  Kashan.  ^^^  ^^  ^^^  officers  to  carry  him  to  the  hospital

at  Smyrna.     This  transference  took  place  before  noon,  and

after  noon  'Abbas  Efendi,  the  author  of  this
with  ^^^^^"^  book,  and  two  of  the  Companions  went  into
Baha'u'llah  Smyrna   to  visit  him   at   the  hospital.      We

on  the  ^  found  him  in   the  death-agony;    and  as  the

steamer  was  about  to  weigh  anchor,  and  the
officials  who  accompanied  us  kept  urging  us  to  return,  we
returned  to  the  steamer  perforce,  leaving  him  in  that  state.
We  subsequently  learned  that  shortly  afterwards  the  sick
man  passed  away  to  God's  Mercy,  and  the  hospital  attendants
carried  him  forth  and  buried  him  in  the  Muhammadan
cemetery.  And  at  the  close  of  that  day  the  steamer  de-
parted for  Alexandria,  where  we  transhipped  into  another
Austrian  steamer.

Nabil,  who  has  been  already  mentioned,  was  at  this  time
^  , ,,  .  imprisoned  at  Alexandria  in  consequence  of  a

prisoned  at  plot  which  will  shortly  be  mentioned.     He

Aiexan  na.  ^^^  converted  in  the  prison  a  certain  Christian
named  Faris,  who  was  an  intelligent  and  cultivated  man.
So  when  the  steamer  cast  anchor  in  the  harbour  at  Alex-
andria, he  sent  by  special  messenger  to  His  Holiness  our
Master  Baha'u'llah  a  letter  containing  certain  questions,  and
our  Master  issued  in  answer  to  him  an  incomparable  Tablet,
which  he  sent  back  by  the  messenger.  And  at  the  close  of
the  day  the  steamer  sailed  for  Port  Said,  Jaflfa  and  Hay  fa.

Now  as  for  the  cause  of  Nabil's  affliction,  this  was  that
in  A.H.  1284  (a.d.  1867)  he  went  by  permission  *from
Adrianople  to  Egypt.     Shortly  before  his  arrival  there  Hajji

*  page  25.


I.     MiRzA  jawad's  historical  epitome       33

Mirza  Husayn  of  Shiraz  and  several  others  of  the  Companions

had  suffered  at  the  hands  of   Mirza  Hasan     tt--  at/   ^

Hajji  Mirza

Khan,    the    Consul-General    of    Persia,    who     Husayn  of

had  handed  them  over  to  the  Government,     ^!^u^^^^^u.,>

'      other  Baha  is

which   had  exiled  them  to  the   Sudan,     In     exiled  to  the

consequence   of  the  coincidence  of   Nabil's

arrival  with  this  event,  they  arrested  him  also,  sent  him  to

Alexandria,  and  after  imprisoning  him  there  for  a  number

of  weeks,  expelled  him  from  Egypt.

But  as  for  the  affliction  of  the  Companions  in  Egypt,  the

account  thereof  is  as  follows.     Hajji  Mirza

Haydar    'All    of    Isfahan    and    Hajji    Mirza     Causeofthe
•     -'  •  •     •'■'  banishment

Husayn  of  Shiraz^  after  they  had  had  the     of  certain

honour  of  meeting  Baha'u'llah  at  Adrianople  l^^f^^  ^°  ^^^
in  A.H.  1283  (=A.D,  1866),  went  by  his  per-
mission to  Egypt,  took  up  their  abode  at  Mansiiriyya,  and
converted  to  this  faith  a  number  of  people,  amongst  whom
was  Hajji  Abu'l-Qasim  of  Shiraz,  a  highly  considered  Persian
merchant,  who,  after  entering  this  religion,  journeyed  to
Adrianople,  and  had  the  honour  of  being  personally  received
by  His  Holiness  our  Master  Baha'u'llah.  After  his  return
to  his  home^  a  great  commotion  arose  amongst  the  Persian
merchants,  who  went  to  the  above  mentioned  Mirza  Hasan
Khan,  the  Consul-General  of  Persia,  a  native  of  Khily,  and
complained  to  him  of  the  Babis,  describing  to  him  the
increase  of  their  numbers  there.  After  this  the  above-
mentioned  Consul-General  invited  the  two  Hajjis  mentioned
above  and  some  others  of  the  Babis  to  his  house,  intending

^  These  two  men  were  the  first  notable  Babfs  whose  acquaintance
I  made  in  Persia  in  the  early  part  of  1888.  See  my  Babis  of  Persia,  i,
pp.  487 — 9,  494 — 5  ;  and  my  Year  amongst  the  Persians,  pp.  210 — 212,
271,  301  et  seqq.

2  i.e.  as  the  context  shows,  to  Egypt,  not  to  Persia.

B.  B.  3


34      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABf  RELIGION

guile ;  and  late  at  night  after  supper  he  arrested  them  and
imprisoned  them  in  his  house,  and  went  by  night  to  their
houses  and  confiscated  all  the  writings  and  papers  which  he
found  there^.  Next  morning  he  lodged  a  complaint  against
them  with  Isma'il  Pasha  the  Khedive  of  Egypt,  and  the
Ministers  and  doctors  of  Egypt  assembled,  examined  the
writings,  and  condemned  the  two  Hajjis  above  mentioned
to  perpetual  banishment,  without  any  question  *or  answer,
and  transferred  them  by  night  from  the  house  of  the  Consul
on  foot,  escorted  by  mounted  troopers,  to  the  shore  of  the
Nile,  where  they  were  imprisoned  in  the  estuary  underground
in  the  prison  set  apart  for  murderers  and  thieves.  After
the  lapse  of  a  month  they  were  sent  by  the  landward  route
to  Khartiim,  accompanied  by  a  squadron  of  soldiers.  Their
journey  lasted  six. months,  and  when  they  entered  Khartiim
the  people  of  that  city  came  out  to  gaze  at  them.  They
were  seven  in  number,  and  their  names  were  Hajji  Mirza
Haydar  'Ali  of  Isfahan,  who  latterly  set  himself  to  oppose
the  Truth^;  Hajji  Mirza  Husayn  of  Shiraz ;  Hajji  'All  of
Kirman  ;  Mirza  Husayn  of  Kashan ;  'Abdu'l-Wahhab  of
Zanjan ;  Aqa  Muhammad  Hashim  of  Niraq;  and  Hajji
Abu'l-Qasim  of  Isfahan.  There  they  remained  nine  years,
during  which  period  His  Holiness  our  Master  Baha'u'llah
sent  to  them  two  of  the  Companions  to  enquire  after  them.
After  the  lapse  of  this  period  they  were  released  and  restored
to  freedom,  by  spiritual  means  and  the  Lord's  predestination

^  Compare  the  account  of  these  events  given  to  me  at  Shiraz  in  the
spring  of  1888  by  Hajji  Mirza  Husayn  himself,  in  my  Year  amongst  the
Persians,  pp.  331 — 3.

*  page  26.

2  In  the  schism  which  ensued  after  the  death  of  Baha'u'llah  in  1892,
Mirza  Haydar  'All  took  the  part  of  'Abbas  Efendi  ('Abdu'1-Baha),
Mobile  Hajji  Mirza  Husayn,  like  the  author  of  this  book,  attached  himself
to  the  party  of  Muhammad  'AH,


I.    MfRzA  jawad's  historical  epitome      35

and   will,   by  the   instrumentality  of  the   famous   Gordon
Pasha.     Hajji  Mirza  Haydar  'AH  and  Hajji  Mirza  Husayn
after  their  release  travelled  by  way  of  Mecca  to  'Akka  in
A.H.   1290  (a.d.   1873)  and  had  the   honour
of  being  received  by  Baha'u'llah.     After  the     Baha'i  exiles
lapse  of  some  months  they  journeyed  into  the     from  Khar-
land  of  Persia.     The  remaining  exiles  con-
tinued in  the  Sildan,  where  some  of  them  passed  away  to
God's  Mercy.

The  first  trouble  which  happened  and  the  first  martyrdom
which  took  place  in  Persia  after  His  Holiness  our  Master
had  made  manifest  his  affair  occurred  at  Tabriz,  and  was  as
follows.      Shaykh    Ahmad,    Mirza    'All    Naqi   and    Sayyid
Muhammad,    all    natives   of   Khurasan,   arrived   at  Tabriz
intending  to  travel  thence  to  Adrianople.    The  Government
arrested   them,  together  with   the   author  of    ^^^    Autho
this  book,  Mirza  Mustafa  of  Niraq  and  some     arrested  at
others  of  the  Companions.     The  Governor  of       ^  ^^  ^'
Azarbayjan  in  those  days  was    [the    Crown    Prince]    Mu-
zaffaru'd-Din  [afterwards]  Shah\  and  his  chief  Minister  was
Mirza  Qahraman.     *He  communicated  by  telegraph  to  the
capital   news   of    this    matter   to   his    father    His    Majesty
Nasiru'd-Din  Shah  and  his  minister  the  Sardar  'Aziz  Khan.
After  the  lapse  of  a  month  orders  arrived  to
put  to  death  Mirza  Mustafa,  Shaykh  Ahmad     py^  to  death
and    Mirza   'Ali    Naqi,   and   on  the    2nd  of    at  Tabrfz,
Ramadan,  a.h.  1283  (8th  of  January,  1867)     J^"*  ^'  '^^^•
they  brought  forth  these  men  into  the  Maydan-i-Haft  Kachal
in  Tabriz  and  cut  off  their  heads,  and  after  they  were  dead
the  people  of  the  city  burned  their  bodies  with  fire,  while

1  He  succeeded  to  the  throne  on  the  assassination  of  his  father
Nasiru'd-Din  Shah  in  1896  and  died,  after  granting  the  Constitution,  on
January  8,  1907.  *  page  27.

3—2


36     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

from  the  author  of  this  book  they  took  much  money  and

then  let  him  go,  together  with  the  rest  of  those  arrested.

This  event  above  described  was  noised  abroad  through

all  the  provinces  of  Persia  and  led  to  the
Mfrza  Mu-  .  ^  ,         -r.  ,  ,,,

hammad  'AH      persecution  or  some  other  Baha  is,  amongst

ofZanjanput      them  Mirza  Muhammad  'Ali  the   doctor  of

Zanjan,  whom   they  arrested  in  Zanjan   and

imprisoned,  and,  after  some  days,  cut  off  his  head  in  the

,    ^      .  prison  on  a  charger.     Another  of  them  was

'All  of  Zanjan     ^^^  Najaf  'All  of  Zanjan,  who  was  in  constant

put  to  death        attendance    on    His    Holiness    our    Master

Baha'u'Uah  from  the  days  of  Baghdad  until

Adrianople,  and  who   in   a.h.    1283    (a.d.    1867)   received

permission  to  go  to  Persia.     When  he  entered  Tihran  the

Government  arrested  him,  seized  such  of  the  Holy  writings

as   he  had  with  him,  and  afterwards  let  him   go,  without,

however,  restoring  to  him   the  confiscated  writings.     He,

however,  was  not   content  to   be  released  without  having

these  writings  restored  to  him,  and  began  to  importune  the

oflficials   to  restore  them,  doing  this  repeatedly.     So  they

arrested  him  a  second  time,  and,  acting  on  d^fatwd  given  by

Hajji  Mulla  'Ali  of  Kand,  cut  off  his  head  in  the  square  set

apart  for  executions,  after  they  had  tormented  him  for  some

days  with  all  kinds  of  torments  current  amongst  barbarous

peoples.     His  whole  body  was  covered  with  wounds  so  that

he  was  unable  to  put  on  any  clothing  save  an  Arab  shirt.

Another  of  them  was  Aqa  Sayyid  Ashraf  and  Abu  Basir

'         H  A  h  af    ^^  Zanjan,  whom  the  Government  arrested  in

and  Abu  their  native  town  of  Zanjan  and  condemned

J^'il^fv''        to  death.     But  because  Sayyid  Ashraf  was
death  at  Zan-  ,      .     .

jan  in  1870.        of    the     Hashimite     Sharifs,     *  some    were

*  page  28.


I.      MIRZA  JAWAd'S   historical   EPITOME         3/

unwilling  to  kill  him.  They  therefore  sent  his  mother
to  the  prison  to  remonstrate  with  him,  that  perhaps,  after
meeting  her,  he  might  be  moved  to  compassion  for  her,  and
might  utter  some  word  proving  their  innocence  of  this  doc-
trine, that  they  might  make  her  a  means  for  releasing  him.
But  when  they  met  his  mother  addressed  him,  saying,  "  O
my  son,  to-day  is  the  day  for  steadfastness  and  endurance  !
If  thou  dost  not  sacrifice  thy  life  in  God's  Way,  or  if  thou
returnest  safe  from  the  arena  of  martyrdom,  I  will  not  make
lawful  to  thee  my  milk  nor  be  well  pleased  with  thee."  So
the  ^idamd^  seeing  matters  thus,  ordered  both  of  them  to  be
put  to  death,  and  they  were  accordingly  decapitated  in
public  by  command  of  the  Government  in  a.h.  1287
(a.d.  1870).

On  the  ist  and  2nd  of  the  month  of  Muharram^,  which
are  the   anniversaries  of  the    births  of   His
Holiness  the    Bab  and    our    Most    Glorious     g^^^g  ^^
Master  Baha'u'llah,  such  of  the  community     Baghdad
as  were  in  Baghdad  in  a.h.  1285  (a.d.  1868)     ^   P"  '  ^      )-
had  assembled  in  the  garden  of  Mirza  Miisa  al-Jawahiri  and
'Umar  Bey  to  amuse  themselves  and  enjoy  the  air.     But
the  Shi'ites  who  were  in  Baghdad  imagined  that  the  Babis
had  organized  this  assembly  in  despite  of  their  religion,
since  they  consider  the  month  of  Muharram  a  month  of
mourning,  because  in  it  the  Imam   Husayn,  the  Chief  of
Martyrs,  was  slain  at   Karbala,  together  with  most  of  his
household,  at  the  hands  of  the  Umayyad  soldiers.     They
therefore  made  a  complaint  to  Shaykh  'Abdu'l-Husayn  of
Tihran,  the  Mujtahid^  and  Mirza  Buzurg  Khan,  the  Persian
Consul   at    Baghdad,    both    of    whom    have    been   already
mentioned ;  and  the  ^ulamd  pronounced  sentence  of  death

1  April  24  and  25,  1868.


38     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

against  them,  being  supported  and  aided  by  the  above-
mentioned  Consul.  These  stirred  up  the  lowest  and  vilest
of  the  Shi'ites  to  do  them  injury :  the  fire  of  strife  was
kindled,  and  whenever  the  Shi'ites  found  any  of  the  Com-
panions in  the  markets  or  streets  they  used  to  beat  them
with  intent  to  kill  them.     One  morning  whilst  one  of  the

Companions    called    'Abdu'r-Rasul,  a  native
'Abdu'r-Rasiil         r    jk  ir  /  i   /  •  r  i

murdered  at        ^^    *Kashan,   was    carrymg    water   irom    the

Baghdad,  Tigris  on  his  back  for  the  garden  of  the  house

of  His  Holiness  our  Master  Baha'u'Uah,  the
Shi'ites  attacked  him  with  knives  and  daggers,  wounded
him  grievously,  and  cleft  his  belly  in  such  wise  that  his
bowels  protruded ;  yet  would  he  not  abandon  the  water-
skin,  but  gathered  up  his  bowels  in  his  hand  and  in  this
plight  entered  the  house,  placed  the  water-skin  on  the
ground,  and  yielded  up  his  pure  spirit.  After  this  event,
the  Companions  communicated  by  telegraph  with  His
Holiness  our  Master  Baha'u'Uah,  enquiring  as  to  their  duty;
and  the  answer  came  to  them  from  Adrianople  "  It  behoves
you  to  show  fair  patience."  And  when  the  Governor  of
Baghdad,  Taqiyyu'd-Din  Pasha,  perceived  how  the  Shi'ites
had  risen  up  against  this  community,  he  summoned  the
Companions  and  detained  them  in  the  Government  House
for  their  own  preservation,  and  informed  the  Sublime  Porte
by  telegraph  of  what  had  happened.  The  Sublime  Porte
answered  him  by  ordering  the  community  to
banished  from  ^^  banished  to  Mawsil,  in  order  to  extinguish
Baghdad  to  the  fire  of  strife,  and  thither  the  Governor
•   '  sent  them  under  an  escort  of  soldiers.     Their

expulsion  coincided  with  the  time  when  His  Holiness  our
Master  journeyed  from  Adrianople  to  'Akka.

*  page  29.


I.    MfRzA  jawAd's  historical  epitome      39

Another  of  the  martyrs  of  this  community  was  a  learned

and  accompUshed  man  of  Mazandaran  named

Mulla  'Ah'  Tan,  whom  they  arrested  with  nine     ^.^^^^  '^^'
•^      '  ■'  Jan  put  to

Others,  and  brought  to  Tihran.   This  happened     death  at
in  A.H.  1301  (a.d.  1883).     After  the  lapse  of    J^g^^"  ^"
some    days    they   put    the   above-mentioned
Mulla  'All  Jan   to  death,   while  another  of  them   named
Ustad  Ndru'llah  died  in  prison.     The  rest  they  let  go.

Another  of  them  was  one  named  Mulla  Kazim,  whom
they  arrested  in  Isfahan  in  a.h.   1295  (a.d.
r878),    besides  another    man   named   Sayyid     put  to  death
Aqa   Jan.       They   beheaded    Mulla    Kazim,     at  Isfahan  in
mutilated  his  body,  and  burned  it,  by  com-
mand of  Shaykh  Baqir  the  Mujtahid  and  the  Governor  of
Isfahan    Prince    Mas'iid    Mirza   Zillu's-Sultdn^    brother   of
Muzafifaru'd-Din    Shah.      *As    for   Sayyid   Aqa   Jan    they
tormented  him  grievously  and  expelled  him  from  the  city.
After  this  there  was  trouble  in  Rasht,  where  they  arrested
and  imprisoned  a  number  of  Babis,  amongst
them    Hajji  Nasir  of  Qazwin,   who   died   in     qY  Oazwin
prison,  being  an   old  man  of  feeble   health,     dies  in  prison
unable  to  endure  so  many  hardships.     After
his  death  the  people  subjected  his   body  to  all  sorts   of
insults  and  savage  deeds,  plucking  out  his  eyes,  cutting  off
his  nose,  and  finally  stoning  him  with  stones.     No  great
while  had  elapsed  ere  another  strange  occurrence  took  place
in  Isfahan,  the  account  of  which  is  as  follows \
Mirza    Muhammad    Hasan    and    Mirza   Mu-     oHsfahln '''^^
hammad    Husayn   were    of  the    most   noble
of  the    Sharifs   of   Isfahan,   and    the   former  was  a   most

*  page  30.

1  Concerning  these  "  Martyrs  of  Isfahan  "  see  my  Bdbis  of  Persia,  i,
pp.  489 — 491,  and  my  Year  amongst  the  Persians,  pp.  213 — 215.


40     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

distinguished  Sayyid,  noBle,  highly  considered,  and  in-
fluential. The  Imdm-Jum''a  of  Isfahan,  who  was  named  Mir
Muhammad  Husayn,  hated  the  above-mentioned  Sayyid  for
private  reasons,  and  strove  to  injure  him,  wherein  he  was
aided  by  Shaykh  Baqir  the  Mujtahid.  So  these  two  agreed
with  the  above-mentioned  Governor  to  kill  him  and  his
brother  and  to  plunder  their  possessions  and  property.  So
they  arrested  them  and  cast  them  into  prison,  and  after
some  days  beheaded  them  by  sentence  of  the  Imdm-Jum^a
and  Shaykh  Baqir  afore  mentioned,  who  plundered  their
property,  even  to  the  trees  and  flowers  in  the  garden  of
their  house.

Another  of  them   was  Mirza  Ashraf  of  Abada,  a   de-
pendency of  Isfahan,  whom  they  strangled  in
Martyrdom  of-ri'i  riz/T-.  i

Mfrza  Ashraf       Isiahan  by  sentence  ot  the  Imat7i-Ju7?ra  and

of  Abada  in         Shaykh  Baqir  in  A.H.  1306  (a.d.  1889).    After
he  had  been  strangled  the  people  of  Isfahan
stoned  his  body^

Another  of  them  was  Hajji  'Abdu'l-Majid  of  Khurasan,

a  native  of  Nishapur,  who  was  the  father  of

H?7'AbduM^    Jandb-i-Badi\  who  carried  the  letter  of  His

Majid  at  Holiness  our  Master  Baha'u'llah  to  Nasiru'd-

Mashhadin         j^^^    gj^^^2      pjg   suffered   in   Mashhad,   the

chief  town  of  the  province  of  Khurasan.
After  his  arrest  they  exerted  themselves  to  induce  him  to
repudiate  this  faith,  so  that  they  might  let  him  go ;  but  he
would  not  consent,  and  laid  down  his  life  in  the  way  of  his
Master  in  a.h.  1296  (a.d.  1878).

*In  Shiraz  also  they  arrested  Mirza  Aqa,  Mirza  Rafi',  and

^  An  account  of  Mirza  Ashraf's  martyrdom  will  be  found  in  my
Bdbis  of  Persia,  ii,  pp.  998 — 9.

^  For  an  account  of  Mfrza  Badf  see  infra,  pp.  47 — 9.
*  page  31.


r.    MiRZA  jawad's  historical  epitome     41

*Abdu'r-Nabi   the  tailor,  and  strangled  them    by  night  in
the  prison   by  sentence  of   Shaykh  Husayn     j-y^^ee  Babfs
the  tyrant  and  by  command  of  the  Governor,     put  to  death
They  were  strangled  by  forcing  handkerchiefs     ^^
into  their  throats,  and  it  was  given  out  that  they  had  com-
mitted suicide  in  prison  \

Amongst  them   also  were   Mulla   Ibrahim,    Mulla  Mu-
hammad 'All,  Rahmatu'llah,  Muhammad  'All     pj^^^  Bihis
Nawshad    and    Sayyida    Bibi.      These   they     put  to  death
arrested  in  Sultanabad  and  slew  four  of  them     ^     "  -^"^  *
by  sentence   of  Sayyid  Baqir  the  Mujtahid^   who    himself
slew    the   above-mentioned    Mulla    Ibrahim   with    his    own
hands  in  the  assembly.     As  for  Sayyida  Bibi,  they  sent  her
to  Tihran,  where  she  was  strangled  in  prison  ^

Another  of  them  was  Mirza  Baqir  of  Shiraz,  who  attained
martyrdom  in  the  Way  of  God  in   Kirman.      Martyrdom  of
And  latterly,  in  ah.    1308  (a.d.    1891)  took     Mirza  Baqir
place  the  persecution  at  Yazd^,  which  was  as
follows.     Eight  of  the  Companions  assembled  in  the  house
of  one  of  the  believers  named  Aqa  'Abdu'r-     pe,.secution  of
Rahim,  where  they  occupied  themselves  with     Babis  at  Yazd
reading  verses.     But   one   who  hated  them,     ^'^  ^  ^''
being  aware  of  their  meeting,  went  to  the  Governor  Prince
Jalalu'd-Din  Mirza,  son  of  the  Zi/hi's-Sultdn,  and  informed
him  of  their  assembly.     Thereupon  the  Governor  ordered
an  officer  to  go  to  them,  with  as  many  private  soldiers  as
might   be  necessary,   and   arrest   them.      And   when  they
perceived  what  was  happening,  the  master  of  the  house  and
one  of  the  eight  visitors  hid  themselves,  but  the  other  seven

1  Cf.  my  Yea7-  amongst  the  Persians,  p.  516.

^  For  an  independent  and  fuller  account  of  this  event  by  one  who
participated  in  it  see  my  Year  amongst  the  Persians,  pp.  514 — 517.
3  A  full  account  of  this  persecution  is  given  in  Section  vii.


42      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

were  arrested  and  brought  to  the  Government  House  and
there  imprisoned.  After  some  days  Prince  Jalalu'd-Dawla
summoned  to  his  presence  Shaykh  Hasan  the  Mujtahid  of
Sabzawar  and  others  of  the  Shi'ite  doctors,  and  also  the
seven  Baha  is  mentioned  above,  and  questioned  the  latter
about  their  faith  and  creed  in  the  presence  of  the  two
theologians  mentioned  above.  They  admitted  that  they
belonged  to  this  persuasion,  whereupon  Shaykh  Hasan  the
Mujtahid  and  the  other  doctors  pronounced  them  infidels
and  sentenced  them  to  death.  They  were  taken  back  to
the  prison,  and  after  some  days  the  Governor  sent  for  them,
and,  turning  to  one  of  them  called  *Aqa  *Ali  Asghar,  the
son  of  Mirza  Abu'l-Qasim,  ordered  him  to  revile  and  curse
his  Master,  or  else  suffer  death.  "O  Governor,"  replied  the
man,  "thou  halSt  no  power  over  my  [spiritual]  essence,  but  my
[bodily]  frame  is  thine :  do  with  it  what  thou  wilt."  Thereat
the  Governor  was  angered,  and  ordered  Aqa  'Ali  Asghar  to
be  strangled  in  his  presence,  and  he  was  strangled  ac-
cordingly. Then  he  ordered  the  rest  of  them  to  be  slain,
each  one  in  one  of  the  quarters  of  the  city.  So  they  took
them  forth  with  soldiers  and  drums,  and  beheaded  one  of
them  named  Mulla  Mahdi  near  the  telegraph-office.  Then
they  beheaded  Aqa  'Ali  the  son  of  Aqa  Muhammad  Baqir.
And  when  they  approached  the  house  of  Shaykh  Hasan  the
Mujtahid^  they  wished  to  kill  Mulla  'All  of  Sabzawar.  And
he  said,  "  O  people,  the  Chief  of  Martyrs  the  Imam  Husayn
cried  in  the  land  of  Taff,  '  Is  there  any  helper  who  will
help  me?'  But  I  say,  'Is  there  any  spectator  who  will
behold  me  ? '  "  And  they  beheaded  him.  They  also  slew
Aqa  Muhammad  Baqir  near  the  Mihriz  Gate ;  and  afterwards
they  brought  the  two  brothers  Aqa  *Ali  Asghar  and  Aqa

*  page  32.


I.      MIRZA  JAWAD'S   historical   EPITOME        43

Muhammad  Hasan  to  the  Mayddnu'l-Khdn  (Square  of  the
Inn).  The  executioner  advanced  to  cut  ofif  the  head  of  the
elder  brother  Aqa  'Ali  Asghar.  The  younger  broiher  Aqa
Muhammad  Hasan  pressed  forward,  saying,  "  Cut  off  my
head  first ! "  But  the  headsman  did  not  accede  to  his
request,  but  beheaded  the  elder  brother.  The  Khan  who
was  superintending  the  executions  exclaimed,  "  How  strong
is  the  heart  of  this  lad,  and  how  great  is  his  boldness ! "
Then  he  ordered  the  executioner  first  to  open  his  body  and
bring  him  his  heart  to  look  at :  so  he  cleft  open  his  body
and  plucked  out  his  heart  and  his  liver,  and  afterwards  they
bore  him  to  the  Mayddn  and  cut  off  his  head.  He  was
only  twenty-one  years  of  age,  and  was  newly  wedded.  After
the  martyrdom  of  these  seven  the  roughs  stoned  their  bodies
and  burned  them  with  naphtha,  after  which  they  compelled
the  Jews  to  carry  these  slashed  and  charred  bodies  away
and  throw  them  into  a  pit  in  the  plain  called  Salsabil.
Afterwards  the  Governor  Jalalu'd-Dawla  ordered  *the  city
to  be  illuminated  with  lights,  and  the  people  began  to
display  their  joy  and  delight.  Shortly  after  this  event  one
of  the  Companions  named  Ustad  Jawad  the  cotton-carder
was  missed,  and  they  found  his  body  outside  the  city.
Prince  Jalalu'd-Dawla  also  took  one  of  them  named  Hajji
Mulla  Ibrahim  outside  the  city,  where  he  and  his  satellites
hewed  him  in  pieces  by  the  light  of  the  moon\

Let  us  return,  however,  to  the  topic  which  was  engaging
our  attention,  to  wit  the  steamer  in  which  were  His
Hohness  our  Master  Baha'u'llah  and  his  family  and  servants.

*  page  3.V

1  Concerning  the  "Martyrs  of  Yazd"  see  Section  vil  infra,  where  I
shall  give  translations  of  several  narratives  received  at  the  time.  See
also  the  Rev.  Napier  Malcolm's  Five  Years  in  a  Persian  Town,
pp.   155—6,  176,  etc.


44     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

It  sailed  at  the  close  of  day  from  Alexandria  for  Port  Said,
Departure  of  J^^^  ^^'^  Hayfa,  and  on  the  12th  of  the  First
Baha'u'Uah  Jumada,  A.H.  1 285  (August  30,  1868),  about
andria  for'  ^^^    hour    after    sunrise,    the    steamer    cast

'Akka,  Aug.  anchor  in  the  harbour  of  Hayfa.  Major  'Umar
^°'  ^      ■  Efendi,   the    officer   in    charge,    landed,   and

informed  the  local  government  of  the  arrival  of  our  Master
and  those  of  his  company.  Then  he  returned  and  com-
municated to  him  the  orders  as  to  his  debarkation  at  Hayfa.
So  his  women  and  sons  and  family  first  embarked  in  the
boats  and  after  them  His  Holiness  our  Master.

Orders  had  been   issued  from   Constantinople   for  the
banishment  of  four  of  the  Companions,  who

Four  Baha'is  ^^^  ^^^^  persecuted  there,  to  Cyprus.  These
sent  to  Cyprus.  ^  '  •' ^

had  come  to  Gallipoli  under  the  escort  of  the

above-mentioned  'Umar  Efendi,  and  they  were  Mirza  *Ali,

known   as    "the  Traveller"  (Sayydh);    Mirza   Husayn  the

calligraphist,  known  as  Mushkin  Qalam ;  Aqa  Muhammad

Baqir,  coffee-maker  to  our  Master;  and  Aqa  'Abdu'l-Ghaffar

known   as    'Abdu'llah^      But  when    the  officer   in    charge

consigned  them  to  the  steamer  to  send  them  to  Cyprus,  and

the   above-mentioned   'Abdu'l-Ghaffar    saw  himself  parted

from  his  Master,  he  cared  no  more  to  live  and  cast  himself

from  the  highest  deck  of  the  steamer  into  the  sea,  crying,

"  O  Baha,  Baha  ! "     At  that  moment  our  Master  was  in  the

boat  and  had  not  yet  arrived  at  the  port,  *and  one  of  the

sailors  dived  in  and  rescued  him  alive,  and  they  again  put

him  on  board  the  steamer.     And  His  Holiness  our  Master

Baha'u'Uah  entered  the  city  of  Hayfa  about  noon  on  the

1  Full  details  concerning  these  men  and  their  families,  derived  from
the  Government  archives  in  Cyprus,  are  given  in  my  Traveller^ s  Narra-
tive, ii,  pp.  376—389-

*  page  34.


•  /  •    *
Mushkin  Qalam.


To  face  p.  44.


I.      MIRZA  JAWADS    HISTORICAL   EPITOME       45

12th  of  the  First  Jumada,  a.h.  1285  (August  30,  1868),  and
by  his  entry  were  fulfilled  the  promises  contained  in  the
Scriptures  concerning  Mount  Carmel  and  Sion.

A  sailing-vessel  had  been  set  apart  by  the  Government
of  Hayfa  for  the  passage  of  His  Holiness  our
Master  to  'Akka,  for  in  those  days  there  were     arrival  at
no  carriages  between  Hayfa  and  'Akka.    And     'Akka,  Aug.
His  Holiness  our  Master  and  those  of  his
company  entered  the  vessel  shortly  after  midday,  and  in  the
course  of  the  afternoon  arrived  at  the  harbour  of  'Akka.
His  Holiness  our  Master  was  at  that  time  fifty-two  years  of
age.    And  on  that  day  there  assembled  at  the  harbour  most
of  the  inhabitants  of  'Akka  to  see  the  sight  and  gaze  on  the
captives.     And  since  the  military  barracks  at  'Akka  were  at
that  time  empty,  the  local  government  assigned  them  as  a
lodging  for  His  Holiness  our  Master  and  those  who  bore
him  company.    So  the  barracks  had  the  honour  of  receiving
them,  and  they  locked  the  doors  and  set  military  sentinels
over  them.     That  night  we  could  obtain  no  water  to  drink,
save  such  stale  and  stagnant  water  in  the  tank  there  as  was
absolutely  unfit  for  drinking.    The  community  also  remained
without  food  that  night  until  morning.     After  that,  however,
there  were  assigned  to  each  one  three  loaves  of  bread,  but
they  were  utterly  unfit  for  food,  and  used  to  be  exchanged
in  the  market  for  two  [better]  loaves  so  that  it  might  be
possible  to  eat  them.     In  all  ways  matters  went  hard  with
this  community.     Ten  soldiers  were  always  on  guard  at  the
gate  of  the  barracks,  and  each  morning  a  number  of  the
captives  used  to  go  to  the  market,  escorted  by  some  of  the
soldiers,  for  necessary  business,  but  if  it  was  requisite  for
any  one  to  go  *to  the  market  a  second  time,  they  used  to

*  pa^ge  36  (really  35,  but  this  number  has  been  accidentally  omitted
in  the  pagination).


46     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  bAbI  RELIGION

prevent  him.     Some  time  passed  in  this  fashion,  until  the

government  altered  the  allotted  dole  of  bread  to  a  small

daily  allowance  of  money.

Since  the  arrival  of  His  Holiness  our  Master  Baha'u'llah

and  those  who  were  with  him  at  'Akka  took
Sufferings  of  ,  .     ^,  ,          -  .

the  Baha'is  on     place  m  the  summer  season,  when  for  various

arriving  at  reasons  the  climate  of  *Akka  was  very  bad,

twenty-eight    of    them    fell    sick,    and    their

sickness  was  so  grievous  that  in  the  course  of  a  few  days
three  of  them  died.    One  of  these  was  named

Death  of  three     Abu'l-Qasim,    a    man    of    Sultanabad ;    the
Baha  IS.  ^  '  . .  ■>

second  was  Muhammad  Baqir ;  and  the  third
Muhammad  Isma'il.  These  two  last  were  brothers,  and
their  deaths  took  place  within  a  few  hours  of  one  another.
At  this  time  their  means  of  liveHhood  were  greatly  straitened,
and  there  was  nothing  to  pay  for  their  winding-sheets  and
burial;  so  a  prayer-carpet  was  pawned  and  thereby  money
was  obtained  for  the  winding-sheets  and  burial.  Afterwards
the  Companions  bore  forth  their  bodies,  and  as  the  Mu-
hammadans  would  not  consent  to  their  interment  in  their
cemetery,  native  workmen  dug  a  grave  to  the  north  of  the
Muhammadan  cemetery  and  buried  the  two  dead  exiles  in
one  tomb.

In  short  the  weakness  of  sickness  overcame  these  people,
great  and  small,  men  and  women,  alike  to  an  extent  which
cannot  be  described,  and  there  was  fear  for  all  by  reason  of
the  violence  of  successive  illnesses.  Their  sighs  and  lamen-
tations rose  up,  until  His  Holiness  our  Master  promulgated
by  his  Holy  Pen  a  prayer,  which  he  commanded  them  to
read  with  perfect  sincerity  and  detachment.  And  after  they
had  continued  to  read  it  for  a  time,  matters  improved  and
health  and  healing  resulted,  by  the  abounding  Grace  and
Mercy  of  God.     Here  is  the  prayer : —


I.      MfRZA  JAWAD'S   historical   EPITOME       4/

"/«  the  Name  of  God  the  Forgiving.

"Though   my  evil   state,   O    God,    hath   rendered   me
deserving  of  Thy  scourge  and  chastisement,
yet  do  Thy  gracious  regards  and  gifts  require     prefeTvation
Thee   to    pardon   Thy   servants   and    to    be     from  sickness
merciful  to  Thy  slaves.     I  ask  Thee,  there-     Ba1i?u'lUh  ^
fore,   by  virtue  of  Thy  Name   which   Thou
hast  made  *the  King  of  the  Names,  to  preserve  me  by  Thy
Sovereignty  and  Power  from  every  affliction  and  evil  thing,
and  from  everything  which  Thy  Will  hath  not  willed.    Verily
Thou  art  Powerful  over  all  things."

In  the  year  a.h.  1286  (a.d.  1869)  there  came  to  'Akka
Aqa  Buzurg  of  Khurasan,  who  was  named  by
the  Supreme  Pen  al-Badi''  ("the  Wonderful")^     comes  to
and   "the   Pride  of  Martyrs,"  and   had   the     'Akka  in
honour   of    being    received   in   the    military     ^    ^'
barracks  by  His  Holiness  our  Master  Baha'u'llah.     There-
after he  craved  permission  to  carry  "the  King's  Letter"  to
Nasiru'd-Din  Shah,  and  set  out  for  Persia  alone,  carrying
the  holy  letter  above  mentioned l     Agreeably  to  the  com-
mands  of    his    glorious    Master    Baha'u'llah,    he   did   not
associate  on  the  way  with  any  one  of  this  community,  nor
make  himself  known   to  one  of  them,    until   he   entered

*  page  37-

^  Bad{-  is  one  of  the  most  popular  and  most  celebrated  of  the  Bah^'f
martyrs.  See  my  Bdbis  of  Persia,  ii,  pp.  956 — 7  ;  my  Year  amongst
the  Persians,  pp.  10 1,  397;  and  my  translation  of  the  Traveller's
Narrative,  ii,  pp.  xlv,   102 — 5.

^  The  Persian  portion  of  this  celebrated  document  is  given  in  the
text  of  the  Traveller's  Narrative,  i,  pp.  135 — 183  (  =  ii,  pp.  108 — 151
of  the  translation),  while  the  translation  of  the  Arabic  exordium  and  of
the  instructions  to  the  messenger  referred  to  in  the  next  sentence  is
given  at  pp.  390 — 400  of  Vol.  ii  of  the  same.  The  date  of  this  event
(see  p.  392  /(7f.  (it,)  was  July,  1869.


48      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

Tihran  the  capital  of  Persia.  And  on  a  day  when  the  Shah,
surrounded  by  his  cavalcade,  was  going  out  to  Shimran,  he
stood  in  the  way,  and  when  the  Shah  approached  he  pre-
sented the  letter  with  his  two  hands  with  the  utmost  humility,
respect,  reliance  [on  God],  and  detachment  [from  all  worldly
hopes],  saying,  "  I  have  come  to  thee  with  a  Tablet  from
Baha."  And  when  the  Shah  looked  at  him,  he  knew  that
he  was  one  of  this  community,  and  was  troubled,  because
ever  since  an  event  which  happened  at  the  beginning  of  the
affair ^  as  has  been  already  mentioned,  he  went  in  fear  of
this  community.  So  he  asked  for  water  thrice  in  a  short
space  of  time,  after  which  he  ordered  his  servants  to  take
the  letter  from  Badi\  But  he  refused  to  pi rt  with  it,  saying,
"  I  am  commanded  to  convey  it  to  His  Majesty  the  King,
from  my  hand  to  his."  They  said  to  him,  "Call  it  not  'a
letter'  but  rather  'a  petition.'"  But  he  refused,  and  while
so  doing  perceived  that  the  Shah  was  fearful  of  him.  So  he
lifted  up  the  skirt  of  his  mantle  which  he  was  wearing  and
showed  them  that  he  was  carrying  no  arms.  Then  after
they  had  searched  him  well  they  brought  him  to  the  Shah,
and  he  handed  the  letter  to  him.  Then  they  arrested  him
by  the  Shah's  command  and  tormented  him
tortured  and  much  with  all  sorts  of  tortures  that  he  might
put  to  death  make  avowal  of  his  associates,  if  he  had  any
Uuy>  ^  9)-  such;  but  he  would  not  confess  anything,
for,  according  to  his  Master's  command,  he  was  isolated,
and  had  not  held  converse,  either  during  *the  journey  or
during  his  sojourn  in  the  capital,  with  any  one  of  this
community.     They  photographed  him  sitting  on  the  ground

1  viz.  the  attempt  on  his  life  by  three  Babis  in  the  summer  of  1852.
See  pp.  5 — 6  supra  \  Traveller's  Narrative^  ii,  pp.  49 — 51  and  the
references  given  in  the  foot-note  on  p.  50,  and  pp.  3^3 — 334,

*  page  38-  '  ,


I.    mIrza  jawad's  historical  epitome     49

with  the  utmost  dignity  and  majesty,  chained  with  a  heavy
chain,  and  on  either  side  of  him  the  tormentors,  holding  in
their  hands  the  ends  of  the  chain ;  and  this  picture^  was
taken  by  the  Shah's  orders  after  he  had  been  tortured  to  the
full.  Then  the  Shah  ordered  him  to  be  put  to  death,  and
they  slew  him,  though  no  crime  can  be  charged  against  an
ambassador,  and,  according  to  all  laws  and  ordinances,  it  is
unlawful  to  slay  such  an  one.  But  after  the  Shah  had  read
the  above-mentioned  letter,  he  repented  of  killing  the  mes-
senger when  repentance  was  of  no  avail.

In  A.H.  1287  (a.d.  1870-1)  His  Holiness  "the  Branch^"
Aqa  Mi'rza  Mahdi  was  walking  on  the  roof  of
the  building  wherein  dwelt  His  Holiness  our     g^u''  mi'U'
Master  Baha'u'llah  and  the  Holy  Family  in     son  Mfrza

the  barracks,  communing  with  his  Lord,  when,        t  ,\

'  °  '  '     1207/1070—1.

in  a  fit  of  absent-mindedness  and  in  the
gathering  darkness,  he  came,  in  the  course  of  his  preoccu-
pation with  his  prayer  and  supplication,  to  a  window  in  the
middle  of  the  roof  for  the  admission  of  light  and  ventilation,
set  his  foot  on  the  aperture,  and  fell  prone  on  the  level
ground.  At  the  sound  of  his  fall  on  the  paved  floor  the
Holy  Family,  hastening  out,  found  him  lying  on  the  ground
in  a  swoon.  Their  voices  were  upraised  in  wailing  and
lamentation,  and  they  carried  him  in.  After  a  while  he
recovered  consciousness,  and  next  day  he  asked  to  see  the
Companions,  whom  he  received  with  kindness,  gentleness
and  love,  and  on  the  next  night  his  pure  spirit  ascended
into  the  Eternal  Kingdom.     Let  it  not  be  hidden  from  the

^  A  reproduction  of  it  will  be  found  in  Vol.  ii  of  Ibrahfm
Khayru'llah's  book  Bah£uUldh  (Chicago,   1900),  facing  p.   420.

^  Ghusn  ("Branch,"  pi.  Aghsdn)  is  the  title  given  to  the  sons  of
Baha'u'llah,  as  the  similar  title oi  Afndn  (which  also  means  "Branches")
is  given  to  the  relatives  of  the  Bab.

B.  B.  4


50     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

discerning  what  sorrows  befell  the  Holy  Family  in  this  severe
affliction,  while  they  were  already  overwhelmed  by  the  hard-
ships previously  mentioned.  In  short,  after  carrying  out  the
necessary  preparations,  they  bore  him  forth,  escorted  by  the
guards,  and  deposited  his  body  beyond  the  wall  to  the  north
of  the  station  of  the  Prophet  Salih ;  for  a  slight  earthquake
had  taken  place  at  that  time.

After  the  lapse  of  some  months  the  hardships  which
befell  them  gave  rise  to  doubt  in  the  minds  of  those  *who
were  of  the  company  of  His  HoHness  our  Master,  and  they
began  to  turn  aside  from  the  path  of  truth  and  steadfastness,
and  to  forsake  loyalty  and  love,  save  a  certain  number  who
continued  in  faithfulness,  sincerity  and  fidelity,  by  the  grace
of  the  Eternal  Lord.  The  schism  was  fierce,  nor  do  I  care
to  discuss  it  in  detail.  Whoever  desires  to  understand  it  in
full,  let  him  read  a  Persian  Tablet  revealed  by  the  Supreme
Pen  in  these  days  concerning  this  trouble.

After  His  Holiness  our   Master  had  continued  in  the
military  barracks  for  two  years  and  twelve  days,
quarters  as-         ^  body  of  reserve  troops  came  to  the  barracks
signed  to  for  instruction,  and  there  was  assigned  to  our

in^'Akki^^  Master  by  the  Government  the  house  of
Andraos  Malik,  which  was  in  the  western
quarter  of  the  city.  He  abode  there  eight  months,  and
[subsequently]  in  the  house  of  Mansiir  al-Khawwam  four
months,  and  in  the  house  of  ar-Rabi*a  four  months.  Thence
he  was  transferred  to  the  house  of  'Udi  Khammar,  while
some  of  those  who  were  with  him  lodged  in  other  houses,
and  the  remainder  in  the  Khanu'l-'Awamid  ("  the  Inn  of
the  Columns  ").

When   His   Holiness  our  Glorious   Master  Baha'u'llah
resolved  to  leave  the  City  of  Baghdad  and  to  go  to  Constanti-

*  page  39.


I.      MIRZA  JAWADS   HISTORICAL   EPITOME        5 1

nople  agreeably  to  the  command  of  the  Ottoman  Government,

Sayyid  Muhammad  of  Isfahan   was  one   of

those  who  bore  him  company  until  his  arrival     Muhammad  of

at  Adrianople.  Then  he  dwelt  in  the  Mahallu'l-     Isfahan's
T.       '    '   •       1      TT   1     XT  1  ,-         '     ,  -1        opposition.

Barrani  m  the  Holy  House  ;  but  after  a  while

he  began  to  display  a  contentious  spirit,  and  went  to  the
Shaykh  of  the  Mevlevi  dervishes,  took  up  his  abode  there,
allied  himself  with  Mirza  Yahya  known  as  Azai  [i.e.  Subhi-
Azal\  and  embarked  on  a  course  of  falsehood  and  calumny,
both  within  and  without  [the  community].  Then  took  place
the  "Supreme  Schism,"  and  His  Holiness  our  Master
Baha'u'llah  left  his  house  called  Bayiu  Aftirflldh  ("the
House  of  God's  Command  "),  and  took  up  his  abode  in  the
house  of  Riza  Bey,  closed  the  gate  of  intercourse  to  all,  and
left  them  to  their  own  devices.  Then  the  above-mentioned
Sayyid  Muhammad  of  Isfahan,  seizing  the  opportunity,  went
to  Constantinople  and  there  allied  himself  with  Aqa  Jan
entitled  Kaj-Kuldh  ("Skew-cap"),  who  resided  there,  *and
embarked  on  a  course  of  lies,  calumny,  sedition  and  intrigue
with  the  Persian  Ambassador,  Mirza  Husayn  Khan  of
Qazwin,  and  the  Ministers  of  the  Ottoman  Empire  in  regard
to  His  Holiness  our  Master  Baha'u'llah,  in  connection  with
the  malevolent  efforts  of  the  above-mentioned  Persian
Ambassador  to  influence  the  Prime  Minister  'Ali  Pasha  and
the  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  Fu'ad  Pasha.  So  an  edict
was  issued  by  Sultan  'Abdu'l-'Aziz  banishing  His  Holiness
our  Master  Baha'u'llah  from  Adrianople  to  'Akka,  and  the
Sublime  Porte  also  banished  the  above-mentioned  Sayyid
Muhammad  and  Aqa  Jan  from  Constantinople  to  'Akka,
where  the  local  government  lodged  them  also  in  the  military
barracks.  But  after  some  days  they  requested  the  Govern-
ment to  let  them   live  in  the  town,  and,  on  receiving  its

*  page  40.

4—2


52     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

permission,   they  transferred   their  abode  to  the  town  of

'Akka.

After  our  most  Glorious  Master  had  left  the  barracks,

and,   together   with    those    of   his   company,

mischief-  taken  up  his  abode  in  the  town,  one  of  the

making  of  followers  named  Mirza  Riza-quli  of  Tafrish  and

Sayyid  ,  .         •     ^

Muhammad        his  sister,  together  with  the  above-mentioned

and  Mfrza  Sayyid  Muhammad  of  Isfahan,  began  to  make

mischief,  and  busied  themselves  in  actions
calculated  to  excite  and  arouse  the  native  population  against
His  Holiness  our  great  Master  and  those  who  accompanied
him.  Amongst  these  actions  was  that  they  concocted  a
treatise  of  certain  holy  verses  culled  from  many  different
tracts  and  tablets,  inserting  therein  phrases  calculated  to
excite  hatred  between  different  nations,  and  of  this  they
made  numerous  copies,  which  they  distributed  amongst  high
and  low.  People  belonging  to  civilized  countries  may,
perhaps,  not  perceive  any  great  significance  in  what  has  been
mentioned  as  to  the  compilation  by  the  malignants  of  this
treatise  or  the  publication  of  copies  of  it  in  the  city,  nor
behold  in  it  a  means  of  exciting  hatred,  having  regard  only
to  what  they  enjoy  in  the  way  of  civilization,  liberty,  ethical
latitude,  education  in  religious  freedom,  and  lack  of  pre-
judice against  any  sect ;  but  if  they  consider  the  conditions
obtaining  in  Eastern  countries,  their  lack  of  religious  free-
dom, the  blood  shed  in  consequence  of  religious  fanaticism,
and  the  ruin  which  hath  encompassed  these  lands  in  conse-
quence of  sectarian  differences,  they  will  recognize  what  hath
been  mentioned  as  the  greatest  incentive  *to  mischiefs,  hard-
ships and  calamities,  since  thereby  hatred  is  stirred  in  men's
hearts,  the  fire  of  strife  and  sedition  is  enflamed  amongst

*  page  41.


I.      MIRZA  JAWAD'S   historical   EPITOME        53

the  people,  and  the  fiercest  persecutions  befall  those  who
utter  a  new  message  or  express  a  new  opinion  at  variance  with
the  opinions  of  former  churches.  Indeed  there  does  not
exist  in  uncivilized  countries  any  source  of  afflictions  greater
than  that  whereof  mention  hath  been  made,  as  is  proved  by
what  hath  befallen  this  community  in  the  land  of  Persia
during  a  long  period  of  fierce  persecutions,  as  has  been
briefly  indicated  in  this  little  treatise.  To  be  brief,  their
numerous  efforts  to  stir  up  mischief  and  their  provocative
actions  caused  bitter  sorrows  to  all  the  Friends,  and  grievous
trouble  befell  them,  because  they  conceived  these  provoca-
tive actions  and  designs  to  have  caused  the  Action  aeainst
efforts  of  the  people  to  hurt  His  Holiness  Sayyid
our  Gracious  Master,  and  feared  the  occur-  Sita'teT'^
rence  of  some  great  mischief  whereof  the  hurt  by  certain
might  chiefly  affect  our  Master  Baha'u'llah.  ^^^^'^s-
It  therefore  occurred  to  them  to  deal  themselves  with  the
evil  of  these  persons,  and  they  began  secretly  to  scheme  for
this.  But  since  this  was  contrary  to  the  will  of  His  Holiness
our  Master  they  did  not  venture  to  disclose  their  purpose.
At  this  juncture  one  of  the  Companions,  an  Arab  of  Baghdad
named  Nasir  and  commonly  called  Hajji  'Abbas,  was  in
Beyrout,  and  when  he  became  cognizant  of  the  actual
circumstances  he  set  out  for  'Akka  to  deal  with  the  evil  of
these  persons.  On  his  arrival  he  submitted  the  details  [of
his  plan]  to  His  Holiness  our  Glorious  Master,  who  sum-
moned him  and  stringently  prohibited  his  design,  issuing  for
him  a  special  Tablet  in  his  own  holy  writing,  which  ran  as
follows :

"HE  is  the  Helper.
"  I  bear  witness  that  thou  hast  helped  thy  Lord,  and  art
one  of  the  helpers.     To  [the  truth  of]  my  testimony  all
things  testify :  this  indeed  is  the  root  of  the  matter,  if  thou


54     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

art  of  those  who  know.  What  thou  dost  by  His  command
and  approval  is  indeed  the  duty  of  help  in  the  sight  of  thy
Lord  the  All-knowing  and  All-understanding.  Go  hence
*and  do  not  perpetrate  that  wherefrom  mischief  will  result !
Put  thy  trust  in  God :  verily  He  will  take  whomsoever  He
will :  verily  He  hath  power  over  all  things.  Verily  we  have
accepted  what  thou  didst  intend  in  the  Way  of  God.  Return
to  thy  place :  then  commemorate  thy  Lord,  the  Mighty,  the
Praiseworthy."

And  when  the  above-mentioned  Nasir  had  read  this  holy
Tablet,  he  abandoned  the  plan  which  he  had  conceived  and
returned  to  Beyrout,  the  place  where  he  dwelt.

But  some  of  the  Companions  held  a  secret  conclave  to
deal  with  the  evil  of  the  persons  above  men-
forbidden  °o  tioned,  and  the  author  of  this  book  was  with
take  action  them,  concurring  with  them  in  their  ideas.
Muhlmmid!"^  One  day  he  asked  permission  from  his  Mighty
Master  to  enter  his  presence,  and  when  he
appeared  before  him  he  submitted  to  him  the  ideas  of  the
Companions,  one  of  whom,  called  Aqa  Muhammad  Ibrahim
of  Kashan,  was  present.  But  His  Holiness  our  Lord
Baha'u'llah  strictly  forbade  the  author  [from  pursuing  his
design],  and  ordered  him  to  go  and  remain  in  his  house  and
not  meddle  in  such  affairs.  Then  the  above-mentioned  Aqa
Muhammad  Ibrahim  made  representation  to  His  Holiness
our  Lord,  saying,  "  Verily  our  silence  and  patience  have
encouraged  the  boldness  of  the  adversaries  and  their  per-
sistence in  mischief  and  sedition."  Then  His  HoHness  our
Master  commanded  one  of  those  present  to  expel  the  above-
mentioned  Aqa  Muhammad  Ibrahim  from  his  presence,  and
he  expelled  him,  while  the  author  of  this  book  confined

*  page  42.


I.      MIRZA  JAW  ad's    historical   EPITOME        55

himself  to  his  house,  and  withdrew  from  those  who  were

resolved  to  deal  with  the  evil  of  these  malignants.

Now  those  who  were  agreed  to  execute  the  plan  which

hath   been   mentioned   were    Ustad    'Abdu'l-

,  ,  Assassination

Karim  the  turner,  Ustad  Muhammad  'Ah  the     of  Sayyid

barber    of   Isfahan,   Ustad    Ahmad    and    his     Muhammad

,  ■    ,  ■  and  other

nephew     Mirza    Husayn    the    carpenter    of     Azah's  by

Kashan,  Aqa  Muhammad  Ibrahim  of  Kashan,     Baha'is,
Mirza  Ja'far  of  Yazd,  and  Aqa   Husayn   of
Kashan  the  cook.     These  began  to  consort  with  the  malig-
nants under  a  semblance  of  sympathy  and  concord,  for  the
better  execution  of  their  plans,  and  continued  for  some  time
to  converse  and  associate  with  them.     Then  they  came  in
unto  them  one  afternoon  in  a  house  which  was  opposite  to
the  dwelling  of  the  mutasarrif  oi  the  town,  and  killed  Sayyid
*  Muhammad,  Aqa  Jan,  and  Mirza  Riza-quli  afore- mentioned
on  the  i2th  of  Dhu'l-Qa'da,  a.h.  1288  (January  22,  1872)^
The  local  government  being  apprized  of  the  matter  arrested
the  seven  persons  above  mentioned,  and  also  all  the  Babis
domiciled  at  'Akka,  most  of  whom,  when  this  event  took
place,  were  busy  with  their  professional  avocations  in  the
markets  of  the  town.     The  administration  assembled  them
all  in   the  Government    House,    and    likewise    summoned
thither  His  Holiness  our  Master  Baha'u'llah,     ^^^       ^
his  two  sons  'Abbas  Efendi  and  Muhammad     Baha'u'llah
'All    Efendi,    Mirza     Muhammad-quli,    and     ^"d  his  sons.
Jandh-i- Khddimu' lldh  [Aqa  Jan  of  Kashan].     At  the  fourth
hour  of  the  night  they  removed  His  Holiness  our  Master,
his  two  sons  {al-Ghusnayn)  and  Mirza  Muhammad-quli  from

*  page  4.3-

1  Concerning  the  murder  of  these  Azalis,  see  my  Bdbis  of  Persia,  i,
p.  517,  and  ii,  p.  995  ;  Traveller^  Narrative,  ii,  pp.  370 — i  ;  and  my
Year  amongst  the  Persians,  pp.  5r2 — 514.


56     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  bAbI  RELIGION

the  Government  House,  and  lodged  our  Master  and  [his
son]  Muhammad  'All  Efendi  in  a  chamber  in  the  Shah-
verdi  Khan  beside  the  harbour,  'Abbas  Efendi  [his  other
son]  at  the  harbour,  and  Mirza  Muhammad-quli  in  another
place.  But  Jandb-i-Khddimu'Udh  and  the  Companions
generally  passed  the  night  in  the  prison  of  the  Government
House,  wearing  chains  on  their  feet.  But  since  His  Holiness
Milsa  Efendi^  was  in  bad  health,  and  there  was  no  one  else
to  watch  over  and  make  arrangements  for  the  wives  of  the
Companions,  they  left  him  and  his  son  Majdu'd-Din  Efendi,
who  had  not  yet  reached  years  of  maturity,  in  his  lodging  at
the  Khan,  where  most  of  the  Companions  dwelt.  But  when
the  Governor  Subhi  Pasha  was  informed  of  this  transaction,
he  was  displeased  with  Salih  Pasha,  the  commandant  of
'Akka,  for  what  he  had  done  to  His  Holiness  our  Master
in  transferring  him  from  his  house  and  lodging  him  in  the
place  above  mentioned,  and  reprimanded  him  for  this.
Next  day,  therefore,  they  assigned  a  room  overlooking  the
harbour,  set  apart  for  the  quarters  of  the  Artillery  major,  as
a  lodging  for  His  Holiness  our  Master,  with  whom  were  his
two  sons  above  mentioned,  and  Mi'rza  Muhammad-quli.  On
the  afternoon  of  the  third  day  they  brought  His  Holiness
our  Master  and  those  who  were  with  him  to  the  Government
House,  and,  after  interrogating  them,  to  the  house  [assigned
to  them].  On  the  way  thither  His  Holiness  our  Master
called  to  his  Servant  *who  was  imprisoned  in  the  Govern-
ment House  with  the  other  Companions  and  took  him  with
him  ;  and  the  above-mentioned  period  [of  his  detention]  was
sixty  hours  or  more.  Now  His  Holiness  our  Great  Master,
when  he  was  at  the  Government  House,  was  questioned,  as

1  The  brother  of  Baha'u'llah,  entitled  Miisd  Kalim,  because,  like
the  original  Moses,  he  conversed  with  God,  i.e.  Bahd'u'Ilah.
*  page  44.


Right.       Mirza  Yahya  Suhh-i-Azai.
Centre.     His  son  Aqa-yi-Nur.
Left.  His  son  Aqa-yi-Bahhaj.


Right.      Mulla  Muhammad  Ja'far  of  Kirman.
Centre.    Sayyid  Jawad  of  Karbala.

Left.         Front  row  (R.  to  L.): — Sayyid  Muhammad  of  Isfahan;
Baha'u'llah's  brother  Miisa,  entitled  "  Kalim";  Mirza
'Ali  Sirri.
Back  row  (R.  to  L.): — Aqajan  of  Kashan  (Khadimu'llah);
Sayyah  ("the  Traveller").

To  face  p.  56.


I.      MIRZA  JAWAD  S   HISTORICAL   EPITOME         57

is  customary,  concerning  his  name  and  country.  To  this  he
replied,  "  My  name  is  Baha'u'llah  and  my  home  is  Niir  "  (or
"  the  Light ''),  alluding  to  his  native  country  in  Mazandaran
which  is  called  Niir.  Then  His  Holiness  our  Master
addressed  those  who  were  present  in  the  assembly  there,  and
said,  "  O  people  of  the  assembly,  you  have  adopted  your
own  principles  and  have  cast  behind  you  the  principles  of
God.  What  ails  you  that  you  will  not  understand  ?  "  But
since  his  Honour  the  Servant  of  God  hath  written  a  detailed
account  of  this  event,  the  author  of  this  book  will  content
himself  with  this  summary.

The  period  of  detention  of  the  Companions  in  the  prison
of  the  Government  House  lasted  six  days,  and
on   the   seventh    day   they   sent    the    seven     oJ^g'^S^"^
murderers  to  the  harbour,  and  the  remainder     on  account  of
of  the  Companions  to  the  Shah-verdi  Khan,     of^'^alfs!'''''
which  is  situated  beside  the  harbour  and  is  set
apart  for  military  purposes.     These  were  sixteen  in  number,
and  their  imprisonment  lasted   six   months   and   six  days.
Towards  the  end  of  this  period  there  issued  from  the  Supreme
Pen  a  prayer  for  deliverance,  and  a  command  to  the  Com-
panions to  recite  it ;  and  by. his  Help  and  Grace  they  were
all   released,  and  reoccupied   their  lodgings  as  they  were
before.     This  prayer  was  as  follows  :

"  O  Lord  of  the  Names  and  Creator  of  the  Heaven  !
Deliver  Thy  friends  from  the  prison  of  Thine  enemies !
Verily  Thou  art  the  Ruler  of  Destiny,  who  ariseth  from  the
horizon  of  apparition.  O  Source  of  Immortality,  by  the
Life  of  Baha  cut  not  off  hope,  but  help  these  [Thy  servants] !
Thou  orderest  what  Thou  wilt,  and  in  Thy  hand  is  the
Kingdom  of  Creation.  The  fangs  [of  foes]  are  whetted  for
the  flesh  of  the  Friends :  save  the  Companions,  O  Lord  of
the  necks  [of  all  men]  and  Ultimate  Judge ! "


58     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

As  for  the  seven  murderers  above  mentioned,  they  were
Punishment  condemned,  according  to  the  law,  to  imprison-
of  the  seven  ment,  one  for  seven  years,  two  for  ten  years,
assassinb.  ^^^  ^j^^  remaining  four  for  fifteen  years,  but

during  the  years  of  their  imprisonment  they  obtained  a  miti-
gation, according  to  the  custom  current  in  this  country,
namely,  the  remission  of  a  third  of  the  period  on  certain
special  days.  But  His  Holiness  our  Master  Baha'u'Uah,
notwithstanding  the  fact  that,  apart  from  his  spiritual  control
and  inward  power,  he  had  enough  external  influence  and
authority  to  release  these  seven,  or  to  alleviate  their  duresse,
did  nevertheless  abandon  them  to  their  legal  punishment,
and  did  not  seek  to  obtain  for  them  any  release  or  miti-
gation, because  their  action  was  taken  without  his  approval
or  consent,  and  contrary  to  permanent  and  decisive  com-
mands, as  when  he  says,  "That  ye  should  be  slain  in
pleasing  Him  is  better  for  you  than  that  ye  should  slay  " ;
and  again,  "  If  anyone  is  angered  against  you,  oppose  to  him
gentleness  ;  and  if  anyone  reviles  you,  revile  him  not."

*Nine  years  elapsed  after  this  event  during  which  His

Holiness  our  Master  Baha'u'Uah  never  went

Baha'ullah  outside  'Akka.     But  when  it  was  the  12th  of

takes  up  his

residence  out-      the  First  Jumada,  A.H.   1294  (25th  of  May,

tt^^SSo!  ^^77)'  ^^  ^^"^  ^^  ^^^  Garden  of  Rizwan,
which  lies  between  the  two  rivers  to  the  east
of  the  town,  where  he  remained  nine  days  and  then  returned
to  'Akka.  And  towards  the  close  of  the  year  above-men-
tioned he  rented  the  Palace  of  'Abdu'llah  Pasha  which  lies
to  the  north  of  'Akka  at  a  distance  of  about  an  hour  and  a
half  from  the  town  ;  and  at  times  he  used  to  live  in  the  town
and  at  other  times  in  the  Palace,  until  the  year  a.h.  1298
(a.d.  1880),  when  he  rented  the  Palace  of  'Udi  Khammar

*  page  4^.


I.     MfRzA  jawad's  historical  epitome      59

situated  in  a  northerly  direction  at  a  distance  of  half  an  hour
from  'Akka.  Most  of  his  time  he  passed  in  this  Palace,  in
the  company  of  his  three  sons  and  his  family  and  his  Honour
the  Servant  of  God,  while  'Abbas  Efendi  with.his  sister  and
children  remained  at  'Akka.  Sometimes  he  used  to  visit
the  town,  and  while  he  dwelt  outside  the  town  visitors,
whether  pilgrims  or  [resident]  Companions,  used  to  have  the
honour  of  seeing  him  after  permission  had  been  obtained
by  them,  and  used  to  spend  some  days  and  nights  there,  and
then  return  by  permission  to  their  dwellings  at  'Akka.

Many  spots  in  the  town  were  honoured  by  the  approach  of
our  Master  Baha'u'llah,  and  likewise  numerous
places  and  villages  outside  it,  all  of  which  are     fxaSoIfs^in
mentioned  in  another  history  by  the  author     the  neigh-
more  detailed  than  this.    So  likewise  he  visited     l^^kkd^^  °^
Hayfa  four  times,  and  on  the  last  occasion  he
honoured  with    his    presence   the   White    House   of   Elias
{B  ay  t  J /yds  al-Abyad)  in  a.h.  1308  (a.d.  1890),  and  abode
there  three  months.     He  also  honoured  Mount  Carmel,  and
went  one  day  to  the  French  monastery  on  the  Mountain,
where  he  remained  until  the  close  of  day.     There  he  issued
a  Tablet  in  which  he  made  mention  of  His  Holiness  the
Spirit  [of  God]  ^  and  His  sufferings.

In  the  later  years  of  his  sojourn  at  'Akka  external  con-
ditions *were  the  opposite  of  those  which  first     t

^^  Improvement

prevailed,  for  his  fame  waxed  great ;  power,     of  conditions
majesty  and  triumph  were  apparent ;  and  the
eyes  of  all  were  watching  this  community  with  veneration
and  respect.     His  Holiness  our  Master  Baha'u'llah  remarked
one  day,  "  Sultan  'Abdu'l-'Aziz  banished  us  to  this  country
in    the  greatest  abasement,  and  since   his  object   was    to

^  i.e.  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  so  called  by  the  Muhammadans.
*  page  46.


6o     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION  •

destroy  us  and  humble  us,  whenever  the  means  of  glory
and  ease  presented  themselves,  we  did  not  reject  them."

In  short,  notwithstanding  these  circumstances  and
materials  of  glory,  ease  and  joy,  we  used  to  discover  signs  of
sadness  in  His  Holiness  our  Master  Baha'u'llah  to  an  extent
which  neither  writing  nor  utterance  can  express,  and  which
hath  never  been  witnessed  at  any  time,  as  appears  from
sundry  Holy  Tablets.     Thus  in  one  of  these  he  says :

"  O  thou  who  circlest  round  my  Throne  and  art  present
before  my  Face,  dost  thou  weep  for  God's  own  self  working  for
His  purpose,  or  do  I  weep  with  mine  eyes  for  it  ?  By  God's
Life,  all  things  weep  for  what  hath  befallen  this  oppressed
one  at  the  hands  of  those  who  deny,  after  we  had  created  them
for  pure  Truth,  and  had  taught  them  the  clear,  straight  way
of  God.  If  one  should  ask  thee  about  Baha,  say,  'Verily
he  is  under  the  claws  of  hatred.  Alas,  alas  for  what  hath
befallen  me  from  every  tyrant,  from  every  sinner,  from  every
liar,  from  every  careless  one,  from  every  deluded  one,  from
every  suspicious  one,  from  every  deceitful  trickster ! '  If
one  should  ask  thee  about  the  Lote-tree  (Sidra),  say,  '  Verily
it  is  under  the  swords  of  all  mankind.'  Alas,  alas  for  what
hath  befallen  this  oppressed  one  from  the  hosts  of  the
wicked !  The  smoke  of  vain  imaginings  hath  overwhelmed
some  men  :  therefore  doth  the  eye  of  my  spirit  lament  and
the  groaning  of  my  heart  rise  up.  We  ask  God,  most
Blessed  and  most  High  is  He,  to  cleanse  His  servants  from
the  defilement  of  doubts  and  the  dust  of  vain  imaginings :
verily  he  is  Powerful  over  all  things."

And  in  another  passage  he  says :

"  //f  my  Name  the  Oppressed^  from  my  most  great  Prison.
*By  my  life,  and  my  sorrow,  and  my  affliction,  if  the  Supreme
Pen  had  addressed  itself  with  the  invocation  '  O   much-

*  page  47.


I.      MIRZA   JAWAD's   historical   EPITOME        6 1

wronged  one  ! '  from  this  moment  until  the  day  which  hath
no  end,  it  would  have  the  right  so  to  do.  Oppression  in  all
its  kinds  and  forms  hath  descended  upon  the  dawning-
places  of  the  Light  and  the  day-springs  of  the  Theophany,
both  of  old  time  and  now ;  but  there  hath  descended  on
this  Oppressed  one  that  which  hath  no  likeness  and  no
similitude."

He  also  said  repeatedly,  addressing  some  of  the  Com-
panions :

"  I  desire  a  dark  and  narrow  dwelling,  that  I  may  lament
and  weep  over  my  wrongs \"

All  men  used  to  wonder  at  beholding  these  grievous
sorrows,  not  knowing  what  was  their  cause  or  who  their
originator,  for  how  should  there  occur  to  the  heart  [of  any
one]  the  events  and  circumstances  which  became  known
[only]  after  [the  death  of]  His  Holiness  our  Master  ?

On   the    1 2th    of   Shawwal,   a.h.    1309  (loth  of   May,
1892)  His  Holiness  our  Master  Baha'u'llah     Baha'u'llah
was  attacked  by  a  fever,  which  ceased  after     falls  sick,  May
two    days.     Subsequently,   however,   another     ^°'  ^  ^^~
attack  of  fever  supervened,  and  a  general  disturbance  of
health  resulted.     The  period  of  this  sickness  lasted  nineteen
days,  and  his  Ascension  [i.e.  death]  took  place  on  the  second
night  of  the  month  of  Dhu'l-Qa'da  at  dawn,
A.H.  1309  (May  28,   1892)  in  the  Palace  of     MafasfrSpT.
'Udi  Khammar  at   [the  Garden   of]  Bahja^
Alas  !  how  can  I  describe  this  awful  calamity,  this  supremely

^  Compare  Tennyson's  Maud:

"Always  I  long  to  creep
Into  some  still  cavern  deep
There  to  weep,  and  weep,  and  weep...,"
2  This   means   "Joy,"    but    Bahja    is   said    to  be  a  corruption   of
Baghcha,  the  Turkish  word  for  a  garden.     See  the  Traveller's  Narra-
tive, ii,  pp.  xxxvii — xli.


62     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

terrible  event,  whereat  tears  flowed  unceasingly  and  lamenta-
This  work  tions  arose  from  all  sides.     Even  now,  though

composed  twelve  years  have  passed  \  the  author's  eyes

ou  1904.  vveep  when  he  sets  himself  to  describe  it,  his
heart  throbs,  and  his  spirit  suffers  so  violent  a  perturbation
that  naught  can  exceed  it.  God  knoweth  and  witnesseth
what  I  say  !

The  resting-place  of  his  Holy  Temple  [i.e.  body]  is  the
Place  of  most  northerly  house  of  the  three  houses  lying

burial  of  to  the  west  of  the  Palace  above-mentioned,

Baha'u'llah.  namely  the  house  of  Hajji  Sayyid  'All  A/ndn',
the  son-in-law  of  His  Holiness  our  Great  Master,  in  the
northernmost  room  of  that  house.  The  body  was  there  laid
to  rest  before  the  last  prayer  on  the  third  *  night  of  the
month  of  Dhu'l-Qa'da  [a.h.  1309  =  May  29,  1892].

When  His  Holiness  our  Master  Baha'u'llah  had  com-
^.  ,  pleted    his    eighteenth    year   the   mother   of

children  of  'Abbas    Efendi,   whose   name  was    Nawwab,

Baha  u  llah.  enjoyed  the  honour  of  being  received  into  his
presence,  in  the  year  a.h.  1251  (a.d.  1835).  She  bore  him
first  of  all  a  son  named  Mirza  Sadiq,  who  was  born  in
Tihran  the  capital  of'  Persia,  and  died  there  after  three  or
four  years.  Secondly,  'Abbas  Efendi,  who  was  born  in
Tihran  in  a.h.  1257  (a.d.  1841).  Thirdly,  a  daughter,
Bahiyya  Khanim,  who  was  born  in  Tihran  in  a.h.  1260
(a.d.  1844);  and  these  two  are  still  living.  Fourthly,
Mirza  'Ali  Muhammad,  who  was  born  in  Tihran,  lived  seven
years,  and  died  in  Mazandaran.  Fifthly,  Mirza  Mahdi,  who
was  born  in  Tihran  and  died  in  the  military  barracks  at

^  This  indicates  a.d.  1904  as  the  date  of  composition  of  this  work.
2  The  Bab's  kinsman,  whom  I  met  at  'Akka  in  April,  1890.     See
Traveller's  Narrative,  ii,  pp.  xxxvii — xxxviii.
*  page  48.


I.      MIRZA  JAWAD'S   historical   EPITOME        63

'Akka   in    a.h.    1287    (a.d.    1870-1).     Sixthly,   Mirza   'AH

Muhammad,  who  was  born  in  Baghdad,  lived  two  years,  and

died  there*

In  A.H.  1266  (a.d.  1849)  the  mother  of  Muhammad  'All

EfendijwhosQna.mewa.sMa/id-t-'U/yd'^, enjoyed

the  honour  of  being  received  into  the  presence     second  wife,

of  His  Holiness  our  Master  Baha'u'llah.     She     ^f^^f^-

.    .         'Ulya,
bore    him    first    Muhammad    'Ah   Efendi  in     and  her

Baghdad  in  a.h.   1270    (a.d.    1853),   who  is     children.

still  living.     Secondly,  a  daughter,  Samadiyya  Khanim,  who

was  born  in  Baghdad,  lived  49  years,  and  died  in  a.h.  1322

(a.d.   1904)  in  the  Palace  of  Bahja  [at  'Akka].     Thirdly,

Mirza  'All  Muhammad,  who  was  born  in  Baghdad,  lived

two  years,  and  died  there.      Fourthly,  a  daughter  named

Sadhajiyya,  who  was  born  at  Baghdad,  lived  two  years,  and

died  at  Constantinople  during  the  days  when  His  HoHness

our  Master  was  sojourning  there  before  he  went  to  Adrianople.

Fifthly,  Ziya'ullah  Efendi,  who  was  born  at  Adrianople  in

a.h.   1282  (a.d.  1865),  lived  thirty-four  years,  and  died  in

A.H.  13 1 6  (a.d.  1898)  at  Hayfa,  *  whence  his  holy  body  was

conveyed  to  the  Palace  of  Bahja  outside  'Akka,  and  was

laid  to  rest  within  the  Holy  Place  in  a  little  space  beneath

the  feet  of  His  Holiness  our  Master.       Sixthly,  Badi'u'llah

Efendi,  who  was  born  in  Adrianople  in  ah.  1285  (a.d.  1868),

that  is  in  the  last  year  [spent  in  that  city],  and  who  is  still

living.

His  Holiness  our  Master  Baha'u'llah  abode  in  the  World

of  Creation  76  years  and  10  months,  of  which

period  24  years  were  spent  in  the.  Most  Great       5   g"j.g  ^j^

Prison  ['Akka].     During  his  sojourn  there  he     at  the  time  of

issued  letters  to  the  great  kings,  leaders  of

^  This  means  "the  Most  High  Cradle,"  and  is  the  title  generally
given  to  the  king's  mother.  *  page  49.


64     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

men  and  doctors,  in  each  of  which  he  explained  his  Mani-
festation and  the  objects  he  had  in  view.     All
SraT^'''^'*      of  them  were  collected,  headed  b);an  Intro-
Haykal:  duction,   and   [collectively]  entitled  Suratu'l-

Aqdas  Haykal^.     He  also  issued  the  Kitdbu' l-Aqdas

("Most  Holy  Book"),  in  which"  are  contained
addresses  to  certain  kings  and  men  of  leading,  and  likewise
many  other  books  and  letters,  amounting,  with  what  he
promulgated  before  his  arrival  at  'Akka,  to  a  hundred
volumes.  In  all  these  writings  he  commanded  all  men  to
reform  their  morals  and  conduct,  to  associate  with  mankind
in  love  and  harmony  with  spiritual  faculties,  and,  in  short,
enjoining  all  that  would  advantage  them  and  forbidding  all
that  would  hurt  them,  both  in  secret  and  in  public.  For  a
blessing  the  author  will  here  set  down  some  of  his  lofty
utterances,  so  that  his  readers  may  take  cognizance  of  them.
Amongst  other  passages  he  has  one  in  Persian  of  which

this  is  the  translation  :
Sclcctcci
quotations  "  ^  swear  by  the  Sun  of  Truth,  which  ariseth

from  Baha'u-       and  appeareth  from  the  horizon  of  this  Most
'llah's  Works.        ^  ^^  .  ,  ,       t^  r   t^  ■        ,

Great  Prison,  that  the  Beauty  of  Eternity  de-

sireth  not  strife  and  contention,  or  aught  whereby  men's  hearts

are  troubled.    Refer  to  the  Tablets,  where  he  says  ^ :  '  Consort

with   [the  adherents  of]  all  religions  with  spirituality  and

fragrance.'     The  purpose  of  this  Theophany  is  that  the  fire

of  Hate,  which  hath  been  kindled  in  the  hearts  of  the  creeds,

should  be  appeased  and  extinguished  by  the  Heavenly  Water^

1  See  my  Bdbis  of  Persia,  ii.  pp.  954 — "8  ;  and  Baron  V.  Rosen's
Collections  scientific] ues,  VoL  vi,  Manuscrits  Arabes,  pp.  191 — 208.  Also
the  Index  of  my  Traveller's  Narrative,  ii,  and  especially  the  Corrigenda
on  p.  Iv.

'^  This  well-known  quotation  is  from  the  Kitdb-i-Aqdas.

^  Kawthar,  commonly  believed  by  the  Muslims  to  be  the  name  of  a
fountain  or  river  in  Paradise.


I.    MiRzA  jawad's  historical  epitome      65

of  the  Divine  Counsel  and  Celestial  Admonition.  In  this
very  year,  which  is  the  year  a.h.  1306  (corresponding  to
the  year  1888  a.d.)  there  was  revealed  *a  Tablet  in  the
writing  of  this  Oppressed  One  wherein  this  most  exalted
Word  shone  forth  from  the  horizon  of  the  Supreme  Pen  :
'  O  people  !  Speak  well  of  [men  your  fellow-]  servants,  not
evil,  nor  that  whereby  their  souls  may  be  saddened.'  All
mention  of  evil,  too,  is  forbidden  in  this  Law,  because  the
tongue  [exists]  for  the  commemoration  of  the  Truth,  and
it  is  an  abomination  that  it  should  be  defiled  with  evil-
speaking,  or  should  utter  words  [apt]  to  cause  sorrow  to
God's  servants  or  to  grieve  them."

Again :

"The  most  glorious  fruit  of  the  Tree  of  Intelligence  is
this  lofty  Word :  '  All  of  you  are  the  fruit  of  one  Tree  and
the  leaves  of  one  Branch.  It  is  not  for  him  who  loves  his
country  to  be  proud,  but  [rather]  for  him  who  loves  the
whole  world.' "

Again  :

"  O  people  of  Baha  !  Ye  are  the  Rising-places  of  Love
and  the  Day-springs  of  the  Divine  Grace.  Do  not  defile
the  tongue  with  the  vituperation  and  cursing  of  any  one.
Keep  the  eye  from  that  which  is  not  seemly.  Be  not  the
cause  of  sorrow,  much  less  of  strife  and  sedition."

Again  :

"  There  hath  been  revealed  and  manifested  the  Religion
of  God  and  the  Faith  of  God  from  the  Heaven  of  the  Divine
Will  for  the  unity  and  concord  of  the  people  of  the  world.
Make  it  not,  then,  a  cause  of  difference  and  strife."

Again  :

"  The  object  of  all  that  hath  been  shown  forth  is  that

*  page  50.
B.  B.  i;


66      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  EABI  RELIGION

men's  ears  should  be  prepared  to  listen  to  this  lofty  Word,
which  is,  '  O  people  of  the  earth,  make  not  God's  Religion
a  cause  of  hatred!  Say,  "By  God's  Life,  the  Doctrine  of
God  and  His  Religion  have  come  for  unity  and  concord,  not
for  difference  and  strife.  To  this  witnesseth  the  Mother  of
theBook\""'

Again,  in  ^the  "  Book  of  the  Last  Testament "  {Kitdbu'l-
Wasiyyd) :

"  The  object  of  this  Oppressed  One  in  enduring  hardships
and  afflictions,  revealing  verses,  and  manifesting  proofs  is  to
extinguish  the  Fire  of  hatred  and  malice,  that  perchance
the  horizons  of  men's  hearts  may  be  illuminated  with  the
Light  of  Concord,  and  may  attain  to  true  Peace.  The
Light  of  this  declaration  hath  shone  forth  and  arisen  from
the  horizon  of  God's  Tablet.  Let  each  one,  then,  regard  it !
O  people  of  the  World  !  I  enjoin  on  you  that  which  will
conduce  to  the  exaltation  of  your  stations.  Take  hold  of
the  fear  of  God ;  cling  to  the  skirt  of  virtue  !  I  say,  '  The
tongue  is  for  the  commemoration  of  the  Good ;  do  not
defile  it  *with  foul  speech.  God  hath  pardoned  what  hath
passed.  Henceforth  it  behoves  that  each  one  should  speak
according  to  what  is  fitting,  avoiding  cursing  and  reviling,
and  that  whereby  man  is  rendered  sorrowful.' "

And  again  :

"  O  people  of  the  world  !  The  Way  of  God  is  for  love
and  unity  :  do  not  make  it  a  cause  of  enmity  and  discord!
There  hath  been  revealed  from  the  Supreme  Pen  what  shall
conduce  to  the  preservation,  and  cause  the  peace  and  ease,
of  God's  servants  with  those  who  possess  the  greater  insight
and  the  larger  outlook."

^   Ummt^l-Kitdb,  i.e.  the  original  Scripture,  before  it  is  translated
by  the  process  of  revelation  into  any  human  tongue.
*  page  51.


I.      MIRZA  JAWAd'S   historical   EPITOME        6/

And  again :

"  It  is  hoped  that  the  people  of  Baha  will  have  regard
to  the  Blessed  Word,  '  Say,  all  are  from  God.'  This  sublime
utterance  is  as  Water  to  extinguish  the  Fire  of  the  hatred
and  malice  enshrined  and  entrenched  in  men's  hearts  and
bosoms.  Through  this  one  word  the  different  races  shall
attain  to  the  Light  of  true  unity.  Verily  He  speaketh  truly
and  guideth  men  into  the  right  Way."

And  again  :

"  By  the  Most  Great  Name,  if  one  of  the  Companions
vexeth  any  one,  it  is  as  though  he  had  vexed  God  Himself.
Ye  are  forbidden  strife,  quarrelling,  sedition,  murder  and
the  like  thereof  with  a  stringent  prohibition  in  God's  Book."

And  again  :

"That  which  advantageth  the  world  is  acceptable  and
desirable  in  God's  sight,  whatever  it  may  be ;  and  all  else
is  repudiated,  whatever  it  may  be,  because  this  Manifesta-
tion is  for  the  salvation  of  the  world,  its  reform,  its  unity,
its  concord  and  its  comfort."

And  again :

"  I  swear  by  the  Sun  of  the  Dawning  of  the  Divine
Unity,  if  the  Friends  of  God  be  slain  it  is  better  in  the
eyes  of  this  Oppressed  One  than  that  they  should  injure
anyone.  O  [my]  servants  !  The  Beauty  of  the  All-merciful
hath  appeared  for  the  quickening  of  the  world  and  the
uniting  of  its  people,  not  to  give  rise  to  differences  and
the  shedding  of  blood."

And  again :

"  Say,  '  O  people  of  God  and  ye  divers  peoples  of  the
World !  Strive  to  help,  and  purify  the  world  of  Love  and
Affection  from  the  defilement  of  discord  and  hatred,  that
perhaps  the  souls  of  men  may  be  at  peace  and  may  attain
to  true  Freedom  !     I  swear  by  the  Sun  of  Truth  that  Baha

5—2


68      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

neither  hath  sought  nor  seeketh  aught  but  the  purification
of  the  world  from  all  matters  which  conduce  to  hurt,  harm
and  despair.  Arise  in  the  strength  of  the  Supreme  Pen*,
that  perhaps  this  aim  may  become  manifest,  and  may  save
the  world."'

Again :

"The  Supreme  Pen  hath  commanded  the  Saints,  both
during  the  nights  and  the  days,  to  do  good,  and  hath  for-
bidden them  to  do  evil.  In  one  of  the  Tablets  this  lofty
Word  hath  been  revealed :  '  Blessed  is  that  soul  which
heareth  and  doth  not  speak.  If  they  see  good  from  anyone
let  them  strive  to  reward  him,  and  if  they  see  injury,  let
them  be  patient  and  leave  [him]  to  God.  Striking,  cursing,
war,  strife,  slaying  and  plunder  are  the  actions  of  the  wild
beasts  of  the  dens  of  cruelty  and  ignorance :  the  people  of
God  are  purified  and  freed  from  all  these  things.  It  is  neces-
sary that  all  should  strive  to  reform  the  world.  The  world  is
one  country,  and  God's  servants  are  one  family,  did  they  but
know  it.  All  must  work  in  perfect  unity  and  concord  for
its  amelioration.  He  is  the  All-knowing  Counsellor  and
the  Wise  Exponent.'"

Again  :

"Say,  O  my  Saints,  cling  to  piety  and  take  hold  of  good
actions.  Adorn  your  heads  with  the  diadem  of  justice,  and
your  bodies  with  the  robe  of  trustworthiness  and  equity.
Forsake  strife  and  contention,  and  occupy  yourselves  with
unity  and  concord."

Again :

"  O  diligent  servant !  It  is  hoped  that  the  people  of
God  may  hearken  to  His  counsels,  and  may  not  do  in  any
age  or  generation  aught  but  what  God  hath  commanded
them,  but  may  be  steadfast -in  well-doing  and  reform,  in  such

*  page  52.


I.      MIRZA  JAW  ad's   historical   EPITOME        69

wise  that  though  the  greater  part  of  the  people  of  God  should
agree  in  any  matter,  and  thereafter  the  savour  of  mischief
should  [be  perceived]  from  it,  they  should  avoid  it,  for  the
following  of  such  company  is  unlawful  in  God's  sight.  Ye
are  forbidden  sedition  and  strife  in  the  Book  of  God  with  a
stringent  prohibition.  O  people  of  Baha,  unite  in  well-
doing, and  agree  in  the  reformation  of  the  world  ! "

Again  :

"  The  object  of  this  Oppressed  One  from  the  beginning
of  days  until  now  is  that  men  should  not  make  God's  religion
a  cause  of  hatred,  but  should  consort  and  deal  with  all  who
are  on  the  earth  with  spirituality  and  fragrance."

Again  :

"O  people  of  God,  do  not  concern  yourselves  *with
yourselves  :  take  thought  for  the  reformation  of  the  world
and  the  purification  of  its  peoples.  The  reformation  of  the
world  will  be  [effected]  by  good  and  pure  deeds  and  gracious
and  well-pleasing  virtues.  Deeds  are  the  ally  of  religion,  and
virtues  its  aider.  O  people  of  Baha,  cling  fast  to  virtue.
This  is  what  this  Oppressed  One  hath  decreed,  and  what
this  Sovereign  One  hath  chosen."

Again :

"  Happy  that  soul  which  weepeth  in  its  bed,  while  its
heart  is  illuminated  with  the  love  of  the  people  of  the
world ! "

Again  he  says  in  Arabic-^ :

"Look  to  what  is  beside  you^  as  ye  look  to  yourselves.
This  is  the  Way  of  God,  if  ye  are  of  those  who  know,  and
this  is  the  Religion  of  God,  if  ye  are  of  those  who  hear."

*  page  53-

^  Thus  far  the  citations  are,  apparently,  taken  from  Baha'u'llah's
Persian  writings,  translated  by  the  author  into  Arabic.
^  i.e.  to  your  other  fellow-creatures.


70     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

Again :

"  O  my  friends,  ye  were  not  created  for  yourselves,  but
for  the  world.  Put  aside  what  advantageth  you  [only],  and
adopt  that  whereby  the  world  is  advantaged."

Again :

"  O  son  of  man,  if  thou  lookest  for  virtue,  put  aside
what  advantageth  thee,  and  adopt  that  whereby  [God's]
servants  are  advantaged ;  and  if  thou  lookest  for  justice,
choose  for  others  what  thou  choosest  for  thyself.  Verily  at
one  time  humility  exalteth  man  to  the  Heaven  of  Glory  and
Power,  and  at  another  [it  abaseth  him]  to  the  lowest  station
of  abasement  and  contrition."

Again :

"  O  people  of  earth,  make  not  God's  Religion  a  cause
of  difference  amongst  you  !  Verily  He  hath  revealed  the
Truth  for  the  concord  of  all  who  are  in  the  world.  Fear
God,  and  be  not  of  the  ignorant.  Blessed  is  he  who  loveth
the  world  sincerely  for  the  sake  of  His  Gracious  Lord."

Again  :

"  Blessed  is  he  who  devotes  himself  to  the  service  of
the  world."

Again  :

"  O  my  saints,  verily  We  have  enjoined  on  you  righteous-
ness and  piety,  and  have  forbidden  you  rebellion  and  sin,
and  everything  whereby  [God's]  servants  are  saddened  in
the  sphere  of  humanity  in  creation.  Devote  your  energies
to  the  help  of  [God's]  servants  and  that  whereat  your  hearts
shall  rejoice."

Again  :

"  Beware  lest  the  lusts  of  the  flesh  and  passion  should
separate  you.  Be  like  the  fingers  on  the  hand  or  the  limbs
in  the  body.  Thus  doth  the  Pen  of  Revelation  admonish
you,  if  ye  be  of  those  who  surely  believe."


I.    MiRzA  jawAd's  historical  epitome     71

Again  :

"  Verily  we  counsel  [God's]  servants  *in  these  days
wherein  the  Face  of  Justice  is  darkened  and  the  cheek  of
ignorance  is  brightened,  and  the  veil  of  understanding  is  rent,
and  comfort  and  faithfulness  have  decreased,  and  trouble
and  affliction  overflow;  and  wherein  covenants  are  violated,
and  ties  are  broken,  and  no  soul  knoweth  what  shall  cause  it
to  see  or  make  it  blind,  or  what  shall  lead  it  astray  or  guide  it
aright.  Say,  '  O  people,  abandon  villainies  and  adopt  virtues :
be  a  good  exemplar  amongst  mankind  and  a  page  whereby
men  shall  be  admonished.  Whosoever  sets  himself  to  serve
this  Dispensation,  it  is  for  him  to  show  wisdom  and  strive  to
diminish  ignorance  from  amongst  mankind.'  Say,  'Agree
in  your  speech  and  be  at  one  in  your  judgement.  Make
your  morning  more  excellent  than  your  evening,  and  your
to-morrow  better  than  your  yesterday.  The  virtue  of  man
is  in'  service  and  perfection,  not  in  luxury,  affluence  and
wealth.  Sanctify  your  sayings  from  crookedness  and  passion,
and  purify  your  deeds  from  doubt  and  hypocrisy.'  Say,
'  Do  not  spend  the  coin  of  your  precious  lives  in  carnal
appetites,  nor  limit  your  actions  to  [the  attainment  of]  your
personal  advantages.  Spend  when  ye  find,  and  be  patient
when  you  are  in  want.  Verily  after  every  hardship  cometh
relaxation,  and  with  every  trouble  calm.  Avoid  slothfulness
and  idleness,  and  take  hold  of  that  whereby  the  world  shall
be  advantaged,  both  small  and  great,  old  men  and  widows.'
Say,  '  Beware  lest  ye  sow  the  tares  of  enmity  amongst  man-
kind, or  the  thorns  of  doubts  in  pure  and  luminous  hearts.'
Say,  '  O  friends  of  God,  do  not  that  whereby  the  purity  of
the  River  of  Love  shall  be  perturbed  or  the  fragrance  of
Charity  shall  be  cut  off.  By  my  Life,  ye  were  created  for
love,  not  for  hatred  and  frowardness.     There  is  no  glory

*  page  54.


)2      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

in  loving  yourselves,  but  in  loving  your  fellow-creatures.
There  is  no  virtue  in  loving  your  country,  but  in  loving  the
world.  Be  chaste  in  your  glances,  faithful  in  your  hands,
truthful  in  your  tongue,  *  and  mindful  in  your  heart.  Do
not  degrade  those  who  are  learned  in  [the  faith  of]  Baha,
nor  disparage  the  worth  of  the  governors  who  exercise  justice
amongst  you.  Make  justice  your  army,  reason  your  armour,
and  forgiveness,  virtue  and  that  whereby  the  hearts  of  the
saints  rejoice  your  distinctive  characteristic.'"

Again  :

"  And  those  who  work  mischief  in  the  earth,  and  shed
blood,  and  consume  men's  property  wrongfully,  from  such
we  dissociate  ourselves,  asking  God  that  He  will  not  cause
us  to  foregather  with  them  either  in  this  world  or  the  next,
unless  they  repent  unto  Him  :  verily  He  is  the  most  Merciful
of  the  merciful.  Verily  he  who  turns  to  God,  it  is  necessary
for  him  to  be  distinguished  from  all  others  in  his  actions,
and  to  follow  what  is  enjoined  on  him  in  the  Scripture.
Thus  hath  the  matter  been  decided  in  a  perspicuous  Book."

There  are  many  exhortations,  injunctions  and  wise  sayings
after  this  sort,  for  which,  did  the  author  wish  to  collect  them,
this  brief  treatise  would  not  suffice,  but  rather  it  would  need
the  compilation  of  many  volumes.  Therefore  he  hath  con-
tented himself  with  this  amount.

The  loftiness  of  the  teachings  and  counsels  of  His
Holiness  our  Great  Master  Baha'u'Uah  in  His  days  produced
a  great  effect  on  the  character  of  His  Companions  and  showed
far-reaching  results,  so  that  they  attained  in  virtuous  attri-
butes, good  manners,  humane  conduct  and  spiritual  qualities
to  a  station  where  they  were  seen,  on  occasions  of  afflictions,
sorrows,  calamities  and  troubles,  [to  be]  patient,  acquiescent,

*  page  55-


I.    mIrza  jawad's  historical  epitome      73

thankful,  acting  according  to  the  purport  of  this  Blessed
Verse  of  the  Kitdb-i-Aqdas :

''Whosoever  is  angered  against  you,  meet  him  with  kind-
ness, and  he  who  revileth  you,  revile  him  not."

And  this  verse  :

"  That  ye  should  be  slain  for  His  good  pleasure  is  better
than  that  ye  should  slay."

In  short,  by  the  elevating  influence  of  His  Holiness  our

Master   Baha'u'llah   they   used   to   meet  the

Assassination

oppressor  with  gentleness,  the  aggressor  with     of  Hdjji  Mu-

pardon.  and  the  vituperator  with  love.     In     hammad  Riza
1      J      L  1    •      ,  Tj  ,  of  Isfahan  by

many  lands  they  were  slain  but  did  not  slay,     shi'ites  at

notwithstanding    their   power   so    to   do    on     q^^'^^P^'^oo

some  occasions,  as  *  happened  at  'Ishqabad

(Askabad)  in   Russia^,  where   the   Shi'ites   dwelling   there

one  day  murdered  one  of  this  community  named   Hajji

Muhammad  Riza  of  Isfahan  in  the  public  thoroughfare  with

cutting,   wounding  iron  weapons,  such  as  daggers,  knives

and  the  like.     The  crime  was  proved  against  them  in  the

law-court,   and  sentence  was  pronounced  by  the  Russian

Government  that  the  two  murderers^  should  be  hanged.

But  when  the  gallows  was  erected  for  their  execution,  the

Companions  \i.e.   the   Baha'is]  went  to  the  Governor  and

begged  that  intercession  might  be  made  with  His  Majesty

the  Emperor  for  their  release  and  pardon.    So  the  Governor

interceded,  and  the  sentence  of  death  was  commuted,  by

command  of  the  Emperor,  to  banishment  to  Siberia.

*  page  56.

1  Concerning  this  event,  which  happened  on  September  8,  1889,
see  my  Traveller's  Narrative,  ii,  pp.  411 — 412,  and  for  a  fuller  account,
with  the  pieces  justificatives ,  Baron  Victor  Rosen's  Collections  scienti-
fiqiies.  Vol.  vi,  Manuscrits  Arabes,  pp.  249 — 250.

2  Their  names  were  Mashhadf  'A If  Akbar  and  Mashhadi  Husayn.


74     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

But  alas,  alas  for  what  we  see  to-day  !    All  these  spiritual

T         ,  ,.  virtues  and  humane  practices  have  undergone

Lamentation  ^  °

over  present  a  complete  change.  Concord  has  been  re-
^^^^"^^,^f^°"  placed  by  dissension,  constancy  by  cruelty,
and  affection  by  enmity.  Dissent  and  mutual
avoidance  have  appeared  in  this  community,  and  their  con-
catenation hath  been  dissolved  and  their  assembly  dispersed.
All  this  that  hath  been  mentioned  hath  happened  by  reason  of
the  love  of  self  and  seeking  after  supremacy  emanating  from
"the   Most   Mighty  Branch"    {al-Ghusnii'l-A'zam)   'Abbas

^         .    .  Efendi,  and  his  opposition  to  the  last  Testa-

Denunciation  .  ^   .

of  'Abbas  ment    of   His    Holiness    our    Great    Master

,Ef^ndi  ('Abdu  Baha'u'llah.  For  he  [Baha'u'llah]  says  in
Persian  (may  my  life  be  sacrificed  to  his
utterance  !) :

"  Every  soul  from  which  the  scent  of  existence  {i.e.
love  of  self)  is  perceived  to-day  is  the  cause  of  discord.'*'

He  hath  also  informed  us  in  most  of  His  Tablets  that
His  object  in  making  manifest  His  Dispensation  was  to
cause  religious  hatred  to  disappear  from  the  World,  and  to
diffuse  love  and  concord  and  kindliness  amongst  the  nations.
But  after  His  Ascension  \i.e.  His  death]  events  took  place
and  sayings  became  current  which  produced  great  discord
and  mutual  avoidance  within  the  community,  by  reason  of
what  issued  from  'Abbas  Efendi,  as  has  been  stated,  so  that
antagonism  and  separation  arose  between  father  and  son,
brother  and  sister,  *  husband  and  wife,  and  so  forth;  nay,
God  be  our  refuge  !   even  enmity  and  hatred.

In  this  connection  I  will  mention  certain  events  and
matters  which  gradually  came  to  pass  after  the  death  of
His  Holiness  our  Great  Master  Baha'u'llah,  some  of  which
I  beheld  with    my  own   eyes,  while   others   I  heard  from

*  page  57.


I.    MiRzA  jawad's  historical  epitome     75

trustworthy  witnesses.     These  I  will   mention   briefly,  lest

the  reader  be  wearied,  so  that  the  Guardians

of  the  Divine  House  of  Justice  and  all  just     J^bMs^^  ""^

and  fair-minded   people   may  be  the   better     Efendi's

informed    and    admonished,    and    may   set     ^lUeged  am-

'  -'  Ditiousactions.

themselves  to  amend  what  hath  happened.

The  first  difference  which  happened  after  the  death  of

His  Holiness  our  Great  Master  within  this     ^

,  ,  Part  of

community  was  that  'Abbas  Efendi  concealed     Baha'u'llah's

some  part  of  the  book  of  [Baha'u'llah's]  Testa-     ^^^^^^^JJ^^
ment  entitled  "the  Book  of  my  Testament/'     'Abbas
which  book  was  given  to  him  by  Baha'u'Uah     Efendi.
in  his  own  holy  writing^

The  detail  of  this  is  that  on  the  ninth  day  after  the
Ascension  [i.e.  the  death  of  Baha'u'Uah]  'Abbas  Efendi
chose  nine  persons  from  amongst  the  Companions,  one  of
whom  was  the  author  [of  this  book]  and  disclosed  to  them
this  document,  concealing,  however,  a  portion  of  it  with  a
blue  leaf  [of  paper]  without  any  reason  or  justification,  and
gave  it  to  them  that  they  might  enjoy  the  blessing  of  its
perusal.  One  of  them,  named  Aqa  Riza  of  Shiraz,  read  it
at  a  sign  from  him  down  to  the  place  concealed  by  the  blue
leaf,  whereupon  'Abbas  Efendi  said  to  the  persons  above
mentioned,  "  Verily  a  portion  of  this  book  is  concealed  for
a  good  reason,  because  the  time  doth  not  admit  of  its  full
disclosure."  On  the  afternoon  of  that  day  Majdu'd-Din
Efendi  read  it  again,  by  command  of  'Abbas  Efendi,  in
the  Holy  Place,  before  a  company  of  the  Aghsdn  (sons  of
Baha'u'Uah),  4/^^'^Kkinsmen  of  the  'Ekh^Afuhdjirin  (Exiles),
Mujdwirin  (settlers  in  'Akka)  and  Musdfirin  (temporary  visi-
tors), down  to  the  afore-mentioned  passage,  as  narrated  above.

1  The  Arabic  text  of  this  Testament  has  been  published  in  Russia.
See  Section  iii  infra.


jG      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

Let  it  not  be  hidden  from  persons  of  discernment  that
the  injunctions  set  forth  in  the  above-mentioned  book  all
refer  *to  this  community  generally;  how  then  could  it  be
right  for  'Abbas  Efendi  to  disclose  what  he  wished  and  con-
ceal a  portion  thereof  ?  For  there  is  no  doubt  that  if  what
was  so  concealed  had  not  been  suitable  [for  general  publica-
tion] His  Holiness  Baha'u'Uah  would  not  have  written  it  in
His  august  writing.

The  duty  of  sons  is  to  carry  out  the  testamentary
instructions  of  their  father,  not  to  reveal  a  portion  and
conceal  a  portion  thereof,  according  to  their  private  ideas
and  opinions  or  personal  inclinations,  for  His  Holiness
Baha'u'llah  says  :  "  O  [Divine]  Beauty  !  Verily  I  have  spent
my  soul  and  my  spirit  for  the  glorification  of  the  Word
and  the  exalting  of  the  Dispensation  of  thy  Glorious  and
Beneficent  Lord.  If  we  see  one  of  the  'Branches'  {Aghsdn,
that  is  sons)  otherwise  than  as  God  willeth,  we  will  rightfully
drive  him  away :  verily  I  am  the  Mighty,  the  All- Powerful."

The  second  difference  was  that  His  Holiness  our  Great

^,    ^    ,  Master  hath  said  in  numerous  places  in  his

No  further  .  ^        .

Manifestation      Holy  Scriptures,  plainly  and  explicitly,  that

to  take  place  j^q  fresh  Manifestation  shall  take  place  until
for  I  coo  years.

a  full  thousand  years  shall  have  passed  from

this  Theophany ;  and  that  if  anyone  advances  a  claim  to
any  such  position  before  the  completion  of  the  above-
mentioned  period,  whosoever  he  be,  and  from  whatsoever
place  he  be,  he  is  a  vain  pretender  worthy  of  rejection ;  as
when  he  says  in  the  "  Most  Holy  Book  "  {Kitdb-i-Aqdas) :

"  Whosoever  layeth  claim  to  a  [new]  Dispensation  before
the  completion  of  a  full  thousand  years  is  a  liar  and  pre-
varicator. . .  And  whosoever  construes  this  verse  or  interprets
it    otherwise   than   as   it  hath   been   obviously  revealed  is

*  page  58.


I.      MIRZA  JAWADS   HISTORICAL   EPITOME        7/

deprived  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  of  His  Mercy  which

encompasseth  all  the  worlds.".

But  'Abbas  Efendi.  after  he  had  attained  to  supremacy,

clearly  and  explicitly  adopted  the  position  of  originality',  and

claimed  such  lofty  stations  and  high  degrees     , ., ,  ,

.  ...  .  Abbfls

as  belong  exclusively  to  Divme  Theophanies,     Efendi's

and  even  proclaimed  in  public  in  America     claim.

that  he  was  the  Messiah  and  the  Son  of  God,  and  in  India

that  he  was  the  promised  Bahram^     Thus  he  says  in  one

of  his  writings  :

"The  Dispensation  in  its  entirety  hath  reverted  to  this

visible  place^,  *and  it  is  not  [permissible]  for  anyone  to  stir

save  after  his  permission."

And  again  :

"Whosoever  calls  on  men  in  my  Name,  verily  he  is
from  me."

[But]  His  Holiness  our  Great  Master  says :

"Whosoever  lays  claim  to  any  station,  rapture,  ecstasy
or  craving  otherwise  than  in  this  [my]  Name,  verily  he  is  of
[the  number  of]  the  most  lost,  though  he  speak  with  all
utterance ^  and  cause  rivers  to  burst  forth  from  rocks,  and
control  the  winds,  and  cause  the  clouds  to  rain."

And  'Abbas  Efendi  says  in  Persian  :

"  Say,  '  the  Goal  and  Sum  of  all  are  the  products  of  this
Pen,  and  the  Proof  is  that  which  this  tongue  utters.' "

[But]  His  Holiness  our  Great  Master  says  in  Persian  :

"  What  this  Oppressed  One  desireth  of  all  is  Justice  and
Equity.  Let  them  not  be  satisfied  with  listening,  but  let
them  ponder  on  what  hath  been  manifested  by  this  servant.

^  i.e.  of  being  the  bearer  of  a  new  Revelation,  and  not  merely  the
interpreter  and  maintainer  of  that  given  by  Baha'u'llah.
"^  The  expected  Saviour  of  the  Zoroastrians  or  Parsees.
^  Meaning  himself.  *  P^ige  59.

^  Or,  "  with  all  the  Bayan,"  i.e.  all  the  "  utterance  "  of  the  Bab.


y^      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

By  the  Sun  of  the  Baydn  arising  from  the  horizon  of  the
heaven  of  the  Kingdom  of  [God]  the  All-merciful,  had  there
been  found  anyone  [else]  to  explain  or  to  speak,  we  would
not  have  made  ourselves  the  object  of  men's  revilings  and
calumnies."

And  again,  in  the  "  Chapter  of  the  Pen "  {Siiratu'l-
Qalani) :

"  Say,  '  Into  the  heart  of  whomsoever  it  entereth  to  rival
this  Pen^,  or  to  associate  himself  therewith,  or  to  approach
it,  or  to  know  what  is  revealed  by  it,  let  it  be  surely  known
that  the  Devil  hath  whispered  into  his  soul :  thus  hath  the
matter  been  revealed,  if  ye  would  know  it.' "

'Abbas  Efendi  says  in  Persian  :

"This  servant  is  the  expositor  of  the  Perspicuous  Book,
and  whatever  of  God's  writings  is  not  confirmed  by  this
servant  is  not  worthy  of  credence."

His  Holiness  our  Great  Master  says :

"  The  Covenant  was  taken  at  the  time  of  the  Dawn  from
those  who  believe  that  they  should  not  worship  [aught]  save
God,  nor  work  mischief  in  the  earth."

'Abbas  Efendi  ascribes  all  the  covenants  and  vows
mentioned  in  the  Sacred  Books  to  himself,  as  his  words
prove.     Thus  he  says  in  Persian :

"  In  short,  verily  from  the  beginning  of  Creation  until
now  there  hath  not  happened  or  appeared  any  plain  covenant
or  clear  promise  like  unto  this.  Yea,  there  have  been
promises,  but  they  were  not  *  beneath  the  shadow  of  the
Tree  of  Prophecy  and  the  Lote-tree  of  the  Limit,  but  were
only  suggested  by  allegories.  But  in  this  great  Cycle  and
luminous  Epoch  the  Object  of  the  Covenant  is  visible
in  the  horizons  and  the  Centre  of  the  Promise  is  known
amongst  the  people  of  the  world."

^  i.e.  Baha'u'Uah  himself.  *  page  60.


I.    MiRzA  jawad's  historical  epitome      79

His  Holiness  our  Great  Master  says  in  Persian :

"Though  one  should  adduce  all  the  scriptures  in  the
world,  yet  speak  otherwise  than  as  God  willeth,  he  is  men-
tioned in  God's  Book  as  of  the  Fire,  and  is  [so]  inscribed  by
the  Supreme  Pen."

'Abbas  Efendi  says  in  Persian  :
"  The  Dispensation  in  its  entirety  reverts  to  the  recognized
and  acknowledged  place,  and  this  Station  is  distinguished,
witnessed  and  explicitly  differentiated,  like  the  Sun  in  all  its
phases,  from  all  that  is  on  the  earth."

And  he  has  many  other  utterances  of  this  sort  in  his
treatise,  available  to  all  in  a  text  lithographed  from  a  copy
made  by  one  of  his  well-known  disciples.  Let  him,  there-
fore, who  desires  [further]  information  peruse  this  treatise
entitled  "  the  Production  of  the  Proof\"  for  therein  is  what
amply  sufficeth.

The  third  difference  is  that  His  Holiness  our  Great
Master  Baha'u'llah  in  many  passages  of  his  writings,  as  also
in  the  Book  of  his  [last]  Testament,  commanded  this  com-
munity to  do  away  with  discord,  to  extinguish  the  fire  of
sectarian  hatred,  and  to  consort  with  all  religions  with  kind-
ness and  friendliness,  as  he  says  in  Persian^ :

"  By  the  Sun  of  Truth  arising  from  the  horizon  of  the
heaven  of  this  prison  [i.e.  'Akka],  never  did  the  Beauty  of
Eternity  desire  strife  and  discord,  or  aught  whereby  [men's]
hearts  are  troubled  !  Refer  to  the  Tablets  :  He  saith,  '  Con-
sort with  [all]  religions  with  spirituality  and  fragrance.'  The
object  of  this  Theophany  is  the  extinction  *of  the  fire  of

^  Ity ami  d-D alii  li-man  yuridti' I- Iqhdl  ila  siwd'is-Sabil,  litho-
graphed (in  Egypt?)  on  Safar  i,  131 8  (  =  May  31,  1900).  See  pp.
188 — 9  infra.

^  Compare  pp.  64 — 5  supra,  where  the  same  passage  is  cited.

*  page  61.


80     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

hatred  kindled  in  the  hearts  of  the  creeds,  and  the  abatement
thereof  by  the  Kawthar^  of  the  utterance  of  Divine  Counsel
and  Celestial  Admonition.  In  this  very  year,  a.h.  1306
[-  1888-9],  a  Tablet  was  revealed  in  the  writing  of  this
Oppressed  one  wherein  this  Sublime  Word  shone  forth  from
the  horizon  of  the  Supreme  Pen :  '  O  people,  speak  well  of
[God's]  servants,  and  speak  not  of  them  evil,  or  that  whereby
their  souls  may  be  troubled.'  The  mention  of  evil  hath
also  been  forbidden  in  this  Law,  because  the  tongue  is  for
the  commemoration  of  the  Truth,  and  it  is  pitiful  that  it
should  be  defiled  by  backbiting  or  uttering  words  which
cause  sadness  and  grief  to  [God's]  servants."

He  says  also  in  Persian  in  "  the  Book  of  my  Will " :

"  The  object  of  this  Oppressed  One  in  bearing  hardships
and  afflictions  is  the  revealing  of  Verses  and  the  showing
forth  of  Proofs,  so  that  the  fire  of  malice  and  hatred  may  be
quenched;  then  perhaps  the  horizons  of  men's  hearts  may  be
illuminated  with  the  light  of  concord  and  may  attain  to
true  Peace."

And  again  in  the  same  Book  :

"  O  people  of  the  world !  God's  religion  exists  for  Love  and
Concord :  do  not  make  it  a  means  to  enmity  and  discord  ! "

But  'Abbas  Efendi  hath  nullified  this  most  great  gift  and

most  high  and  glorious  aim,  since  he,  for  his

Enmity  and        private  ends  and  personal  aims,  hath  insti-

dissension  *  5

fostered  tuted  hatred  and  discord  amongst  the  people

by  'Abbas  ^  Baha,  in  such  wise  that  he  hath  introduced

Efendi.  '

division  and  separation  between  brother  and

sister,  fathers  and  sons,  husband  and  wife,  friend  and  old

comrade ;  and  whosoever  does  not  agree  with  him  in  his

ideas  and  statements,  and  does  not  speak  evil  concerning  his

brother  Muhammad  'All  Efendi  "the  Most  Great  Branch"

1  The  name  of  a  fountain  or  river  in  Paradise,


I.      MIRZA  JAW  ad's   historical   EPITOME        8 1

{al-Ghusmi  l-Akbar)  and  the  Holy  Family  is  accounted  a
"violator"  {Ndqiz)  of  the  Covenant  and  a  "vacillator"
{Mutaza/zil)^  nay,  an  infidel,  wherefore  they  avoid  him  and
hold  it  unlawful  to  speak,  or  converse,  or  have  any  dealings
with  him.*  Let  it  not  be  hidden  from  the  intelligent  that
the  causes  of  discord  are  numerous,  but  the  author  has  not
touched  on  them  fully  from  a  desire  for  brevity.  The  sum
of  the  matter  is  that  this  schism  took  place  on  account  of
what  hath  been  mentioned,  and  for  [other  reasons]  which
have  not  been  mentioned,  so  that  this  cleavage  resulted,  and
this  community  became  two  communities,  schism  aft
On  the  one  hand  are  the  followers  of  'Abbas  Baha'u'Uah's
Efendi,  who  constitute  the  majority.  Most  of  ^^^  '
these  believe  him  to  be  possessed  of  the  Supreme  Im-
maculacy and  to  be  the  Mirror  of  "  He  doeth  what  He  will,"
as  is  witnessed  by  their  published  treatises  in  handwritings
well-known  [to  all].  They  ascribe  to  him  the  high  degrees
and  lofty  stations  peculiar  to  the  Divine  Manifestations,
and  name  themselves  "the  steadfast"  (atk-T/idbiMn).

On  the  other  hand  are  the  minorityj  who  find  'Abbas
Efendi  and   his   claim,   his   sayings,  and  his     Muhammad
ideas  at  variance  with  the  commands  of  His     'Alf  and  his
Holiness    our    great    Master ;     who    regard      ^  owers.
Muhammad  'Ali  Efendi  as  submissive  to  God  and  obedient
to  the  commands  of  His  Holiness  Baha'u'llah  ;   and  who
conceive  of  him  as  of  a  finger  who  points  to  his  Master,  so
that  they  agree  and  unite  with  him,  and  are  called  "  Uni-
tarians" {ahlu^  t-Tawhid).

When  it  became  certain  that  a  schism  had  taken  place,
Muhammad  'Ali  Efendi  and  those  who  were  with  him,  in
conformity  with  the  commands  of  His  Holiness  our  Great
Master,  where  he  says  in  the  Kitdb-i'Aqdas :

*  page  62.

B.  B.  6


82      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

"  If  ye  differ  in  any  matter,  refer  it  to  God,  so  long  as
the  Sun  continues  to  shine  from  the  horizon  of  this  heaven^ ;
and  when  it  hath  set,  then  refer  to  what  hath  been  revealed
by  Him  :  verily  that  sufficeth  the  worlds  " ;  and  in  another
place  in  Persian  :

''  O  divers  peoples,  turn  towards  unity,  and  become
illuminated  with  the  Light  of  Concord  :  meet  in  some  place
in  godly  fashion,  and  put  away  from  amongst  you  whatever
is  the  cause  of  difference*  ;

[ —  in  accordance  with  these  precepts,  I  say]  they  re-
peatedly communicated  with   'Abbas  Efendi
Muhammad  .  .       ,  .  .  ...  „     _    ,  .

'All's  fol-  askmg  hmi  to  appomt  a  sittmg  m  godly  lashion

lowers  demand  a^^j  |-q  choose  a  few  representatives  from  both
sides  to  discuss  the  matter  with  the  utmost
loving-kindness  as  regards  the  disagreement  and  its  causes  ;
to  make  the  efforts  necessary  to  remove  it ;  to  weigh  words
and  thoughts  in  the  balance  of  God's  Scripture ;  and  to  dis-
tinguish the  Truth  from  all  else  by  the  criterion  of  His
[Baha'u'Uah's]  words.  Moreover  they  besought  the  accept-
ance of  this  proposal  with  the  extreme  of  supplication  and
sincerity,  and  repeated  their  request  many  times,  but  obtained
no  answer  from  him  [i.e.  'Abbas  Efendi],  nor  would  he  in
any  wise  consent  to  this,  perceiving  that  reference  to  the
verses  explanatory  [of  this  question]  would  be  contrary  to
his  private  ideas  and  personal  advantage,  and  knowing  that
the  truth  would  be  revealed  by  reference  to  them,  and  that
all  men  would  recognize  the  vanity  of  the  ideas  and  expres-
sions current  in  the  assemblies  of  'Abbas  Efendi  and  his
followers  and  contained  in  their  writings.  So  hatred  and
aversion  increased  between  the  two  parties,  and  matters
reached  a  pitch  which  one  dislikes  to  describe  in  detail,  and
they  uttered  with  regard  to  Muhammad  'All  Efendi  and
^  i.e.  "So  long  as  Baha'u'llah  is  alive."  *  page  63.


1.    MiRZA  JAW  Ad's  historical  epitome     83

the  Family  of  the  House  of  Greatness^  statements  and  alle-
gations at  which  reasonable  people  were  horrified,  paying  no
heed  to  the  injunctions  of  His  Holiness  our  Great  Master
where  he  enjoins  in  His  honourable  writings  respect  for  the
"  Branches  "  (Ag/tsdn^),  wives  and  family,  even  as  he  says  in
the  Book  of  His  Testament,  "  Respect  and  heed  for  the
'  Branches '  {Aghsdn,  i.e.  sons)  is  incumbent  upon  all  for
the  glorifying  of  the  Dispensation  and  the  uplifting  of  the
Word."

The  fourth  difference  was  that  the  more  the  followers  of
'Abbas  Efendi  increased  in  exaggeration  of  his
praise,  and  described  him  by  names  and  attri-     f^vour^  iho"e*
butes  proper  only  to  the  Divine  Majesty,  the     who  most

more  he  ma2;nified  his  dfts  to  them  and  the     ^^^.ggeiate

,  ^  his  position,

more  graciously  he  treated  them.     So  they

exaggerated  the  more,  *and  carried  matters  to  the  point  of

polytheism^,  exceeding  all  limits  in  respect  to  him.     Thus

they  took  certain  verses  of  the  Stira/u'/- A mr  sind  made  them

a  separate  Tablet,  which,  they  asserted,  was  'Abbas  Efendi's,

so  that  they  might  establish  for  him  a  glory  proper  only  to

Divine  Theophanies.     And   'Abbas   Efendi  himself  made

alterations  in  one  of  the  Servant's^  letters  to  Muhammad

Mustafa  of  Baghdad  in  Beyrout,  that  is  to  say  added  to  it

and  diminished  from  it,  saying  that  it  was  a  Tablet  which

the  Lord  had  revealed  to  him.    Moreover  he  claimed  that  the

Holy  Tablet  specially  addressed  to  his  brother  Muhammad

'Ali  Efendi  was  shared  by  himself.  Again  the  Servant^  during

^  z'.e.  other  members  of  Baha'u'llah's  family  who  rejected  the  claim
of  'Abbas  Efendi.

2  i.e.  as  already  explained,  the  sons  of  Baha'u'llah.

*  page  64.  '  '

^  Shirk,  i.e.  associating  partners  with  God.

^  i.e.  Mirza  Aqa  Jan  of  Kashan,  the  special  attendant  and  amanu-
ensis of  Baha'u'llah,  commonly  c^W^d /andb-i-Khddimu'' lidh.

6—2


84     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

the  days  when  His  Holiness  our  Great  Master  sojourned  at
Adrianople,  had  written  a  tract  wherein  he  made  mention  of
the  Mischief  of  the  days  of  the  Manifestation.  This  tract
'Abbas  Efendi  named  "  the  Tablet  of  the  Mischief,"  saying
that  it  was  a  Holy  Tablet  revealed  from  the  Supreme  Pen,
and  ordered  it  to  be  read  in  the  assemblies,  his  object  therein
being  to  cast  doubts  into  men's  hearts,  so  that  they  might
imagine  that  the  utmost  importance  belonged  to  his  days.
Again  our  Great  Master,  before  he  made  known  his  Mission,
warned  us  of  the  advent  of  "  the  grievous  days,"  meaning
thereby  the  days  of  His  Manifestation.  But  after  the  Mani-
festation He  declared  in  one  of  the  Holy  Tablets  that  they
had  come  to  an  end.  But  'Abbas  Efendi  said  in  answer  to
a  question  concerning  "the  grievous  days"  that  they  were
the  year  of  the  Ascension \  in  order  to  establish  the  import-
ance of  his  own  days,  as  hath  been  mentioned.  And  not-
withstanding all  that  we  have  mentioned,  he  asserted  that
his  brother  Muhammad  'Ali  Efendi  had  tampered  with  the
published  Divine  Verses,  I  mean  the  [edition  of  the]  KitabuH-
Zr<2ji^/^«/ lithographed  in  the  days  of  His  HoHness  our  Great
Master,  whereof  many  copies  exist  in  the  writing  of  Zayn
[u'l-Muqarrabin]^(who  is  well  known  amongst  this  community
and  who  collated  this  lithographed  edition),  and  said  that
the  verses  which  were  not  confirmed  by  him  were  not  to  be
relied  on,  intending  thereby  to  prevent  his  followers  from
referring  to  these  Divine  Verses,  lest  they  should  become
aware  of  his  [-Abbas  Efendi's]  opposition  to  the  Holy
Writings*  in  word,  deed,  declaration  and  writing.

In  the  fourth  year  after  [the  death  of]  His  Holiness  our

^  i.e.  of  the  death  of  Baha'u'llah.

2  See  my  translation  of  the   Traveller's  Narrative,  ii,  pp.  412 —
418.

*  page  65.


I.      MIRZA  JAW  ad's    historical   EPITOME        85


'Abbas  Efendi
deprives  his
brothers
of  their
allowances.


Great  Master^  the  partisans  of  'Abbas  Efendi  held  a  meeting
in  his  audience-chamber  at  his  suggestion,
took  counsel  with  one  another,  and  agreed  that
what  was  given  of  the  necessaries  of  life  to  the
Holy  Family  and  to  his  brothers  was  on  no
account  permissible ;  wherefore  Abbas  Efendi
cut  it  off  completely,  so  that  he  compelled  them  to  borrow  for
household  expenses,  because  they  were  deprived  of  means.
This  was  a  wrongful  act  on  his  part,  because  what  [revenue]
reached  him  from  the  different  countries  was  not  his  private
property,  but  belonged  to  the  entire  Holy  Family,  as  will
not  be  hidden  from  the  discerning.  Yet  he  cut  it  off  from
them,  and  spent  it  on  whom  he  would  of  the  officials  and
men  of  influence,  in  order  to  effect  his  personal  aims,  not
acting  conformably  to  truth,  justice  and  equity.

In  the  sixth  year  after  [the  death  of]  His  Holiness  our
Great  Master^  a  grievous  sickness  overcame     ^    t^    f
Ziya'u'llah  Efendi,  by  reason  of  the  vehement     Ziya'u'llah,
emotion  caused  in  him  by  the  existing  events  ^°'  ^  ^

and  differences.  After  some  days  he  went  for  change  of  air
to  Hayfa,  where  the  malady  increased  in  gravity.  And
during  the  days  of  his  illness  neither  'Abbas  Efendi  nor  any
of  his  family  or  followers  came  to  visit  his  sick  brother  or  to
enquire  after  him  ;  until  the  signs  of  dissolution  appeared,
on  the  afternoon  of  the  14th  of  Jumada  11,  a.h.  13 16
(October  30,  1898),  when  'Abbas  Efendi  came,  stayed  a  few
minutes,  and  then  returned  to  his  lodging.  Next  morning
he  came,  accompanied  the  corpse  to  the  gate  of  the  town
['Akka],  and  after  a  short  while  went  to  the  Palace  (of  Bahja)
tarried  a  while  there,  and  returned  to  'Akka,  but  was  not
present  at  the  funeral,  nor  anyone  of  his  family  and  followers.

1  i.e.  about  1896.

2  i.e.   about  1898.


S6     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

They  did  not  even  close  their  shops  and  offices  on  that  *day,

as  is  customary,  but  on   the  contrary  manifested  joy  and

gladness  and  quaffed  the  drinks  commonly  used  on  festivals.

This  behaviour  [on  their  part]  astonished  all,  whether  present

or  absent,  kinsmen  or  strangers.

Ziya'u'llah  Efendi  had  a  wife  whose  parents  and  brothers

. ,,       , ,  were  followers  of  'Abbas  Efendi,  who  sum-

Attempt  to  '

abduct  the  moned  them  to  his  presence,  desiring  by  their

^■^?,\?t  means  to  draw  her  to  himself.     But  since  after

Ziya  u  llah.

her  husband  s  death  she  chose  faithfulness  [to

his  memory]  and  the  service  of  Her  Holiness  his  mother,  with
whom  she  dwelt  in  the  Palace  of  Bahja,  'Abbas  Efendi  sent
her  parents  and  her  brother  to  the  Holy  Place.  They  sent
a  certain  woman  of  the  partisans  of  'Abbas  Efendi  to  her
mother-in-law,  demanding  an  interview  with  the  girl,  that  is,
the  wife  of  Ziya'u'llah  Efendi,  in  the  Holy  Place;  which
request  being  granted,  she  came  in  company  with  the  above-
mentioned  woman  to  the  Holy  Place  and  met  her  parents
and  her  brother,  who  held  her  in  conversation  with  enquiries
as  to  her  condition  and  declarations  of  affection,  walking
meanwhile  towards  the  gate,  on  emerging  from  which  her
parents  and  brother  seized  her  by  force,  and  carried  her  off,
holding  her  hands  and  feet  to  drag  her  to  the  place  where  a
carriage  was  in  readiness  to  carry  her  away.  'Abbas  Efendi's
wife  was  present  in  person  to  superintend  the  arrangements
above  mentioned,  while  some  of  her  relations  and  followers
were  helping  the  parents  in  her  abduction,  she  being  bare-
headed and  bare-footed,  crying  out  and  asking  for  help,  and
saying  "  O  Baha,  help  me  !  They  have  taken  me  by  force  ! "
This  event  happened  at  a  time  when  Muhammad  'Ali  Efendi
and  Badi'u'llah  Efendi  were  absent,  and  no  one  was  present

•  page  66.


I.      MIRZA  JA wad's    historical   EPITOME        8/

except  the  Servant  of  the  Presence^,  and  a  few  of  the
Unitarians^.  The  author  of  this  history  and  some  others  of
the  Companions  were  proceeding  towards  the  Holy  Place
to  visit  it,  *and  we  happened  to  be  there  when  they  brought
her  out  crying  for  help.  We  and  the  Servant^  hastened  to
the  spot  and  delivered  her  out  of  their  hands.  But  'Abbas
Efendi,  when  he  perceived  that  he  was  foiled  in  his  scheme
and  saw  that  it  had  not  succeeded,  ordered  some  of  his
followers  to  write  a  pamphlet  in  which  the  matter  was  entirely
misrepresented,  and  sent  it  with  the  signature  of  the  ill-used
lady's  father  (I  mean  the  widow  of  Ziya'u'llah  Efendi)  to
Egypt  to  Hajji  Mirza  Hasan  of  Khurasan,  who  printed  and
published  it  in  the  lands  by  his  command.

In  the  fifth  year  [after  Baha'u'llah's  death],  on  the  26th
of  Dhu'l-Hijja,  a.h.  1314  (May  28th,  1897)^     Protest  of
the  Servant  of    God   invited   all   the    Com-     Mirza  Aqd
panions  to  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Holy     Jan  {/.a;««<^-z-
Place  in  Bahja,  where,  after  they  had  partaken     Uldh),
of  food  and  drunk  tea,  he  stood  up  about  the     ^^^  ^^'  ^^97.
time  of  the  afternoon  [prayer]  and  addressed  the  people
saying :

"This  servant  hath  been  silent  all  this  time  and  hath
not  uttered  a  word,  for  fear  of  giving  rise  to  dissension.
Now,  however,  I  perceive  that  my  silence  causeth  increase
of  discord  in  God's  Religion ;  therefore  I  say  unto  you  that
the  deeds  and  words  which  have  issued  from  'Abbas  Efendi
and  his  company  are  all  contrary  to  God's  commands,  and
at  variance  with  His  injunctions  revealed  in  the  Holy  Scrip-
tures.    The  Covenant  and  Promise  mentioned  aforetime  in

1  i.e.  Mirza  Aqa  J^n  of  Kashan,  caWed  Jandh-i- Khddinm^ lldh.

2  This  was  the  name  adopted  by  the  followers  of  Muhammad  'AH.
See  p.  81  supra.  *  page  67.

^  This  was  the  fifth  anniversary  of  Baha'u'llah's  death,


88      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  bAbI  RELIGION

the  Immaculate  Writings  refer  exclusively  to  previous  and
subsequent  Theophanies,  but  'Abbas  Efendi  hath  appro-
priated them  to  himself,  and  ye  have  so  accepted  them,
wherein  ye  have  greatly  erred."

One  of  'Abbas  Efendi's  followers^  informed  him  of  the

Servant's  words,  whereupon   he  at   once  ap-
Ill-treatment  .  ,  •      ,   ,  •       ,        ,       ,         ,

o{  Jandb-i-         peared  on  the  scene,  seized  him  by  the  hand

Khddi-  and  expelled  him  from  the  house  bare-headed

and  bare-footed,  while  his  followers  beat  him
on  the  head  and  face,  he  crying  out  meanwhile  in  a  loud
voice,  addressing  them,  "Verily  ye  *are  now  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  the  Holy  Place,  while  I  am  speaking  to  you
with  discriminating  signs  (verses),  that  thereby  the  true  may
be  distinguished  from  the  false  and  the  polytheist  from  the
Unitarian."  Yet  not  one  of  them  listened  to  him,  but  they
continued  to  beat  him  and  to  drag  him  to  the  Holy  Place,
where  'Abbas  Efendi  struck  him  with  his  hand  a  painful
blow.  From  the  Holy  Place  they  took  him  by  command  of
'Abbas  Efendi  and  imprisoned  him  in  a  stable,  after  they  had
taken  from  him  such  writings  and  letters  as  he  had  on  him.
After  that  they  denounced  him  as  reprobate,  apostate,
croaker,  hypocrite  and  devil,  notwithstanding  the  recom-
mendations of  His  Holiness  our  Great  Master  concerning
him  and  His  command  to  them  in  the  Book  of  the  [last]
Testament,  and  in  other  Tablets  also,  to  honour  the  Servant ;
even  as  He  says  in  a  Tablet  in  His  own  holy  writing  "  And
after  the  '  Branches '  {Aghsdn,  i.e.  the  sons  of  Baha'u'llah)
show  honour  to  the  Servant  who  stands  before  the  Throne  in
a  laudable  station  ^"

^  Sayyid  Hadi  was  the  informer.
*  page  68.

^  The  events  here  narrated  form  the  subject  of  a  separate  tract  of
i6  pages,  lithographed,  entitled  Wdqi''a-i-ha'ila-i-Khddirn-i-Abhd  dar


I.      MIRZA  JAWAD's   historical    EPITO.ME        89

In  short,  after  this  event  the  Servant  attached  himself  to
the  Place  of  our  Great  Master,  and  used  to  spend  his  time
with  Muhammad  'Ali  Efendi  and  the  Holy  Family  in  comme-
morating the  Lord  (glorious  in  His  State)  and  in  the  service
of  the  Catholic  Word,  as  is  proved  by  his  writings  in  his  own
well-known  hand.     And  after  a  time  he  went  one  morning
to  the  house  of   'Abbas  Efendi  at   'Akka  to  discuss  and
confer  about  the  actual  conditions  and  existing  differences ;
but  they  shut  the  door  in  his  face  and  prevented  him  from
entering,  and  he  sat  before  them  on  the  ground  for  the  space
of  two  hours,  begging  'Abbas  Efendi  and  his  partisans  to
produce  the  holy  verses  and  Tablets  in  their  possession,  so
that  he  might  discuss  with  them  and  they  with  him  according
to  their  purport,  in  order  that  it  might  appear  what  actions
and  words  were  conformable  or  contrary  to  them,  and  which
thereof  were  acceptable  in  God's  sight  and  which  displeasing.
But  none  would  give  ear;  and  finally  'Abbas  Efendi  sent
his  son-in-law  named   Mirza   Muhsin   to   the  Government
to  say  to  the  [Turkish]  officials  that  the  Servant  had  come
to  make  mischief    Thereupon  an  officer  came  and  took  *  the
Servant  to  the  Government  House,  where  they  detained  him
for  a  while,  after  which  they  drove  him  out  from  the  Palace.
So  he  continued  worshipping  and  commemorating  God  and
elucidating  the  Supreme  Unity  until  he  fell  sick.     His  sick-
ness lasted  fifteen  days,  and  on  the  29th  of
Muharram,  a.h.   1319  (May  17th,   1901)  he     ?f^fjj.^?/
responded  to  the  call  of  his  Master  in  the     Khddimu
Palace  of  Bahja,  and  was   buried  with  the     Mav'17   too
utmost  reverence  at  Abi  'Ataba,  Muhammad

Rau'za-i-Mubdraka-i-^Ulyd  ("The  Dreadful  Calamity  of  the  Servant
of  Baha  in  the  Blessed  and  Supreme  Garden  ").     The  persecutors  were
twelve  in  number,  of  whom  eight  are  named.
*  page  69.


go  '    MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

'All  Efendi  and  the  Unitarians  seeing  to  what  was  necessary
for  him  in  the  way  of  washing,  shrouding  and  burial.

The  Servant  during  his  days  [of  life]  had  repeatedly
expressed  his  wish  to  the  Friends  that  all  of  the  Holy
Writings  which  belonged  to  him  should  return  to  God,  and
that  after  his  death  they  should  all  be  deposited  in  the
Holy  Place.  So  after  his  death  Muhammad  'All  Efendi,
Badi'u'Uah  Efendi,  and  some  of  the  Unitarians,  including  the
author,  went  one  day  to  a  house  in  the  neighbourhood  of
the  Holy  Place  and  examined  the  Sacred  Mementos  which
the  Servant  had  left.  These  included  twelve  Holy  portraits,
two  hundred  and  seventeen  Holy  Tablets  produced  by  the
Supreme  Pen,  and  a  number  of  the  Holy  head-dresses \
garments  and  hairs,  besides  many  Sacred  Books  and  a  mass
of  correspondence,  bound  and  unbound,  and  private  posses-
sions, and  a  number  of  tracts  composed  by  the  Servant
concerning  the  Divine  Unity  and  the  Supreme  Immaculate-
ness.  All  these  they  wrote  down  [in  a  list],  and  placed  in
three  boxes,  which  they  sealed  with  two  seals
Kt'd"^'  ^"^  deposited  as  a  trust  in  the  house  of  Sayyid

Hldh's  books        'All  Efendi,  the  son-in-law  of  His   Holiness

and  papers         ^^^  Great  Master,  because  he  was  a  Russian

appropriated  '

by  'Abbas  subject ^    SO   that   they  might   be   protected

M     h'      8        from    interference  at    the  hands   of  tyrants.

Recently,    however,  it   appears    that   'Abbas

Efendi    in  the  month  of  Safar,  a.k.  1326  (March,   1908)

obtained  the  consent  of  the  Blessed  Leaf  and  the  Holy

Spouse,  and  of  Sayyid  'Ali  Efendi  Afndn^^  and  sent  *his

^   Tijdn,  literally  "Crowns,"  i.e.  the  tall  felt  caps  which  Baha'u'Uah
used  to  wear.

2  And  therefore  not  liable  to  be  molested  by  the  Persian  or  Turkish
Government.

3  So  called  because  he  was  related  to  the  Bab,  whose  kinsmen  are
called  4/'m«  ("  Branches").  *  page  70.


I.      MIRZA  JAWADS    HISTORICAL   EPITOME       9I

son-in-law  Mirza  Muhsin  and  Aqa  Riza  of  Shiraz  by  night  in

his  private  carriage  to  Bahja  to  bring  him  the  three  boxes

deposited  in  trust  as  above  mentioned  without  the  knowledge

of  anyone.     And  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  carrying  out  of

this  transaction  secretly  by  night  is  a  clear  proof  that  it  was

contrary  alike  to  the  Holy  Law  and  its  ordinances,  and  to

the  Common  Law  and  its  provisions,  for  it  was  effected  by

theft  and  larceny.     For  Muhammad  'AH  and  those  who

were  with  him  had  left  the  boxes  there  under  seal  as  a

trust,  for  the  carrying  out  of  the  Servant's  last  testament

and  in  order  to  give  effect  to  it.    How  then  could  it  be  right

for  'Abbas  Efendi  to  appropriate  them  in  the  fashion  above

mentioned,  or  that  this  treachery  should  be  committed  by

him?

After  'Abbas  Efendi  had  attained  to  supremacy,  he  made

a  great  display,  by  reason  of  the  moral  and

material  prestige  which  he  now  possessed.    So     Increased

.  .  stringency  of

likewise  his  followers  did  not  observe  pru-     control  by

dence,  wisdom  or  moderation  in  affairs,  whence     ^^  .  ^^^

omcials.

arose  many  troubles  and  difficulties,  so  that
orders  were  issued  by  the  Ottoman  Government  to  confine
him  and  his  brothers  in  the  fortress  of  'Akka.  After  a  while
there  appeared  four  inspectors  to  investigate  and  enquire  into
the  circumstances  of  certain  of  the  officials  and  exiles,  and
they  examined  his  ['Abbas  Efendi's]  affairs  also.  After  a  while
Khalil  Pasha  the  Governor  of  Beyrout  appointed  an  inspector
to  watch  him  and  ascertain  who  associated  with  him  of  the
people  of  the  country  and  others  ;  and  when  he  chanced  on
such  an  one,  he  used  to  bring  him  to  the  Government
House,  where  he  was  examined  to  ascertain  the  cause  of
his  frequenting  the  society  of  'Abbas  Efendi.  He,  however^
ascribed  all  that  had  happened  to  his  brother  Muhammad
'Ali   Efendi,   spreading  this  report  abroad  in  the  country,


92      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

and  thereby  filling  the  hearts  of  his  followers  with  hatred,
enmity  and  aversion,  so  that  they  used  to  display  the
extreme  of  dislike  and  detestation  in  regard  to  Muhammad
'Ali  Efendi  and  the  Holy  Family,  and  used  to  speak  un-
seemly words  concerning  them.  But  when  Muhammad
'Ali  Efendi  discovered  that  his  brother  ascribed  these
occurrences  to  him,  he  communicated  with  him  repeatedly
by  means  of  some  of  the  officials  and  inhabitants  of  the
city  and  some  of  his  followers,  *and  begged  him  to  agree  to
appoint  a  time  and  men  to  enquire  into  the  truth  of  these
matters,  investigate  these  events,  and  ascertain  their  reasons
and  causes.  This  happened  during  the  presence  of  the
inspectors,  and  he  requested  him  to  appoint  two  persons  on
his  behalf  that  they  might  go  together  to  the  local  govern-
ment and  to  the  Board  of  Inspectors  and  formally  demand
[the  production  of]  a  note  of  complaint,  if  such  were  in
their  possession,  on  the  part  of  Muhammad  'Ali  against  his
brother  '^Abbas  Efendi,  or  an  assertion  that  they  were  cog-
nizant of  some  direct  complaint  on  his  part.  For  all  official
papers  and  legal  complaints  are  preserved  in  the  originals
as  well  as  in  copies  by  the  Government  in  its  records.  But
'Abbas  Efendi  would  not  accept  this  or  agree  to  it,  because
he  sought  by  these  falsehoods  and  slanders  to  give  effect  to
his  plans,  and  if  he  had  appointed  such  persons  and  they
had  gone  to  the  above-mentioned  official  quarters  and  made
investigations,  it  would  have  become  plain  to  all  that  these
accusations  were  false,  and  these  reports  devoid  of  truth
and  reality.  For  it  is  not  hidden  that  the  False  loves  the
darkness  and  hates  the  light,  lest  its  evil  circumstances  and
deeds  should  become  apparent.  In  short  this  schism  and
its  results  were  manifold,  but  space  does  not  allow  more  [to
be  said]  than  what  I  have  mentioned,  so  I  have  contented

*  page  71.


I.    MiRzA  jawad's  historical  epitome      93

myself  with  this  summary,  having  already  set  forth  most  of

[the  facts  connected  with]  it  in  another  treatise.

The  Conquest  of  America  for  the  BahdH  religion  by

meufts  of  Dr  Ibrahim  George  KhayruUldh^   literally

transcribed  from  what  the  above-mentioned  Khayru'lldh

zvrote,  putting  himself  in  the  position  of  a  third  person^.

Ibrahim  George  Khayru'Uah  was  born  on  November  ii,

1849  (26th  of  Dhu'l-Hijia,  a.h.  1261:)  in  the     „.         , .    ,
.  ^  •    jj   '  w"/  Biographical

village  of  Muhammadiln^,  one  of  the  villages     sketch  of

of  Mount  Lebanon  in  Syria.  Ibrahim

.  .  .  (jreorge

His  father  died  while  he  was  still  a  child     Khayru'Uah.

at  the  breast^  and  his  mother  undertook  his     ^^^^  ■^°^'  "'

.         .  .  .  1849.

education,  placing  him  first  in  the  primary

schools,  and  then  sending  him  to  the  College  of  al-Bustani

in    Beyrout,    and    thence    to   the   American

University   College,    where,    in    1870   *(a.h.     BeTou?"^  ^^

1287),  he  obtained  the  degree  of  Bachelor  of

Science ^     He  was  one  of  the  five  [students]  who  were  the

first-fruits  of  this  celebrated  college.

In  A.D.  1872  (ah.  1289)  ^^  ^^ft  Syria  and  took  up  his
abode  in  Egypt  for  a  period  of  about  2 1  years.     Goes  to  Egypt

There  he  foregathered  with  the   late    Hajji     }"  ^^^2,  and
°  ,  .      ^  '     ■'■'        becomes  ac-

'Abdu'l-Karim  Efendi  of  Tihran,  one  of  the     quainted  with

followers  of  His  Holiness  Baha'u'llah  (glorious     JJ^JJ/  'Abdu'l-

.  .  Karim  of

is  His  mention  !),  who  gave  him  good  tidings     Tihran.

^  Since  this  translation  was  made,  Dr  Khayru'Uah  has  published  the
substance  of  the  information  given  below  in  a  book  entitled  O  Christians!
why  do  ye  believe  not  in  Christ?  pp.  165 — 192.  This  book  was  pub-
lished in  1917  in  the  U.S.A.,  probably  at  Chicago,  though  no  place  is
specified  on  the  title-page.    I  cite  this  as  the  "  English  Autobiography."

2  "Behamdon"  in.  the  English  version  mentioned  in  the  last  foot-
note.

'^  •'  When  I  was  two  years  old."

*  page  72.  ^  "B.A."


94     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

of  this    Most   Great  Manifestation.    At   first   he   did   not

believe    these    tidings,    and    began    to   study   the    Divine

Scriptures-^  with  the  object  of  demonstrating  therefrom  the

falsity  of  this  claim,  and  he  remained  an  unbeliever  for  a

number  of  years,  until  God  opened  his  eyes  and  he  saw  the

Truth  as  it  is.    Then  he  forwarded  a  letter  of  contrition  and

belief  to  His  Holiness  Baha'u'llah  (glorious  is  His  praise !),

and  there  was  revealed  for  him  a  Holy  Tablet  from  the

Heaven  of  Virtue  gladdening  him  with  the  announcement

that  his  cry  had  been  heard  and  his  request  answered,  and

f-.^^^     .  that  he  had  been  commemorated  with  a  men-

Baha'f  faith  in     tion    whereby    [all   men's]    hearts    would   be

^  9°'  attracted.     This  happened  in  a.d.  1890  (a.h.

1308),  and  the  text  of  the  above-mentioned  Tablet  is  inserted

for  a  blessing  at  the  end  of  his  book  entitled  Bahd^u'lldh^

which  he  composed  in  the  English  language  to  prove  the

truth  of  this  most  great  and  wonderful  Theophany.

On  the  19th  of  June,  1892  (24th  of  Dhu'l-Qa'da,  a.h.

^      ^    c*.  i^oq)»  about  three  weeks  after   the   Ascen-

Goes  to  St  ^   "-"

Petersburg  in  sion^  of  His  Holiness  Baha'u'llah,  the  above-
June,  1892.  mentioned  Ibrahim  Khayru'llah  journeyed
from  Cairo  to  St  Petersburg,  the  capital  of  the  Russian
Empire,  to  finish  some  business  which  he  had  there.  His
intention  was  to  return  to  Egypt  after  three  months,  but,
being  unable  to  finish  his  business  there,  he  went  to  Berlin,

.    .      .  thence  to  Le  Havre  in  France,  and  thence  to

Arrives  in  ^  '

New  York,  America  on  a  German  ship  named  "  Swabia."
Dec.  1892.  jjg  reached   New  York  in  December,   1892

(Jumada  11,  a.h.  13 10),  three  or  four  days  before  Christmas.


^  i.e.  the  writings  of  the  Bab  and  Baha'u'llah.

^  Vol.  ii,  pp.  544 — 5.    See  also  p.  166  of  the  English  Autobiography.

^  i.e.  death.  ^


I.      MIRZA  JAWAD'S   historical   EPITOME        95

*In  July,  1893  (Muharram,  a.h.  131 1),  he  left  New  York
and  went  to  Michigan  to  earn  his  livelihood,
and  wherever  he  went  he  used  to  sow  the     ^^g  American
seed  of  this  wonderful  Theophany,  so  far  as     propaganda,
was  possible  having  regard  to  his  weakness  at
that  time  in  the  English  language ;  until  he  reached  Chicago
in  February,   1894  (Shawwal,  a.h.  1312),  which  he  adopted
as  his  dwelling-place  and  the  centre  of  his  activities.     Then
he  began  to  preach  the  Advent  of  the  Kingdom,  and  after
he  had  spent  about  two  years  in  missionary  work  and  had
found  receptive  ears,  he  wrote  to  the  late  'Abdu'l-Karfm
Efendi  of  Tihran  informing  him  of  how  he  had  devoted
himself  to  preaching  the  good  tidings  in  America,  and  of
the  success  which  he  had  met  with  there.     At  the  same
time  he  also  wrote  by  the  hand  of  the  above-mentioned
'Abdu'l-Karim  a  letter  to  His  Holiness  'Abbas  Efendi  "the
Most  Mighty  Branch"  {al-Ghusnu'l-A^zam).

At  this  time  also  he  desired  his  Greek  wife  to  leave
Egypt  and    come   to    America  to   help  him     ^     .
there,  but  she  refused  to  come.     So  he  di-     English  wife,
vorced  her,   and,   in    a.d.    1895    (^-H-    ^S'^)     ^  ^^'
married  an  English  ladyS  and  they  went  together  to  England
and  France,  returning  thence  after  two  months  to  his  home
in  Chicago,  where  he  applied  himself  day  and  night,  without
wearying,  to  teaching  the  people.     In  this  year,  after  his
return  from  Europe,  an  opening  was  vouchsafed  to  him  in
the   city   of   Kenosha   in    the   State   of  Wisconsin,  which
place  is  distant  about  fifty  miles  from  Chicago.     Thither
he  used  to  go  and  preach  to  the  people  one  day  in  every
week.


page  73-
^  Miss  Marian  Miller.     See  p.  167  of  the  English  Autobiography.


96      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

In  A.D.  1896  (a.h.  13 14)  the  feet  of  seekers  [after  Truth]

crowded    on    one    another   in    Chicago   and
Publishes  a  t^  ,         u,        ,     ,        ,     , .  ,

book  entirled       Kenosha,  *ana  the   behevers   were   counted

Bdbu'd-Din,  by  hundreds.  At  this  period  he  composed  a
book  which  he  named  Bdbu!d-Din  ("the  Gate
of  Religion"),  and  in  a.d.  1897  (a.h.  1315)  he  went  to
Kansas  State,  to  the  city  of  Enterprise,  where  he  spent
eight  weeks  during  the  summer  season  in  search  of  rest ;
but,  finding  there  a  number  of  people  seeking  spiritual
knowledge,  he  preached  the  message  to  them,  and
there  were  converted  of  them  at  that  time  twenty-one
persons.

Towards  the  end  of  that  year  (a.d.  1897)  Mr  [Arthur]
Dodge  and  Mrs  [Lida  H.]  Talbot,  who  had
in  New  York      ^^^^  Chicago  and  settled  at  New  York,  invited
and  Ithaca  him   to   proceed   thither  and  evangelize  the

above-mentioned  city.  At  that  time  also  one
of  the  believing  women  ^,  who  had  gone  from  Chicago  to
visit  her  family  in  New  York  State,  invited  him  to  come
to  her  help  in  the  city  of  Ithaca,  where  by  his  permission
she  was  teaching  certain  people.  Therefore,  on  his  way  to
New  York,  he  passed  by  Ithaca  and  spent  some  days  there
in  missionary  work,  until  some  of  them  believed.  Then  he
left  them  and  went  to  New  York,  where  he  and  his  wife
lodged  in  the  very  same  house  in  which  Mr  Dodge  was
living.  Before  leaving  Chicago  he  appointed  there  and  at
Kenosha  male  and  female  missionaries  to  impart  to  students
the  same  teachings  which  they  had  received  from  him.
Thus  was  the  mission  extended,  while  the  number  of  en-
quirers increased  daily.

*  p.  74-

^  Apparently  Mrs  Getsinger.     See  p.    169  of  the    English  Auto-
biography.


I.      MIRZA  JAWAD'S   historical   EPITOME       9/

Finding  that  the  number  of  enquirers  in   New  York
exceeded  two  hundred,  he  divided  them  into
three  classes.     He  used  to  instruct  the  first     ^^^t'/^^^'j^^n
class  in  the  house  where  he  lived  with  Mr     in  Baha'f
Dodge,  the  second  class  in  the  house  *of  the     o^giniled.
celebrated  Dr  Gurnsey,  one  of  the  notables  of
New  York,  and  the  third  class  in  the  hall  known  as  "  Nine-
teenth Century  Hall."

At  the  end  of  four  months  one  hundred  and  forty-one  of
the  enquirers  believed,  and  he  formed  them  into  a  congrega-
tion and  set  over  them  as  evangelist  {muballigli)  Mr  Howard
MacNutt.  And 'during  the  period  of  his  sojourn  in  New
York  he  used  to  visit  the  city  of  Philadelphia  to  help  one
of  the  women  evangelists'  whom  he  had  sent  there.  And
in  that  city  eighteen^  souls  believed.  Thus  did  God  open
[to  the  Faith]  New  York  and  Philadelphia  in  a  short  time.

In  the  beginning  of  June,  1898  (Muharram,  a.h.  1316),
he  visited  Chicago  and  Kenosha  to  investigate  the  condition
of  the  believers  there.  Then  he  returned  to  New  York,
whence  he  went  with  his  wife  and  one  of  the  believing
women,  Mrs  Anna  Bell,  to  the  city  of  Lubeck  in  the  State
of  Maine.  There  he  spent  nine  weeks,  engaged  from  six  to
nine  hours  daily  in  dictating  orally  to  Mrs  Bell,  while  she
wrote  down  what  he  dictated  with  the  type-writer,  until  he
had  nearly  completed  the  composition  of  his  book  entitled
Behd^uHldh.  At  this  juncture  there  reached  him  a  telegram
from  California  informing  him  that  Mrs  Phoebe  Hearst
wanted  him  and  his  wife  to  meet  her  at  New  York  to  go
with  her  as  her  guests  to  'Akka  to  visit  the  tomb  of  His
Holiness  Baha'u'llah  (to  whom  be  glory !),  and  to  meet  the

*  page  75-

1  Mrs  Sara  G.  Herron.     Op.  cit.,  p.  170.

'^  "About  twenty-five  souls."     Op.  cit.,  p.  170.

B.  B.  7


98      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

members  of  the  Holy  Family.  He  accepted  this  invitation,
returned  to  New  York,  and  prepared  for  the  journey.

Khayru'llah  carried  on  his  missionary  and  evangelizing

efforts  amongst  the  people  in  America  for
character  of  ^^^^  ^^  ^^^^  without  any  remuneration  at  all,
Khayru'llah's      so  that  *he  used  even  to  refuse  the  presents

which  were  offered  to  him.  ^  This  rule  he
made  binding  on  himself  and  on  all  the  evangelists,  male
and  female,  whom  he  appointed  to  teach.  He  used  to  earn
his  livelihood  by  his  lawful  profession,  which  was  the  healing
of  the  sick,  and  oftentimes  he  expended  his  own  private
property  [in  such  ways]  as  the  hire  of  premises  for  assemblies
of  the  believers  and  evangelizing  work.

Towards  the  end  of  June,  1898^  (Muharram,  a.h.  13 16)

Ibrahim    Khayru'llah  sailed   in    the    steamer

Khayru'llah  "  Fiirst  Bismarck "  in  company  with  Mrs
sails  for  ■  .

Europe  and         Phoebe    Hearst.     He  stayed  some    days   in

Syria,  June  Paris,  where  he  completed  the  conversion  of
1898.  .        ^

the  above-mentioned  lady  by  giving  her  and

some  of  her  attendants  the  Most  Great  Name.  He  also
explicitly  instructed  such  of  the  believers  as  dwelt  in  England
and  France  and  had  received  the  Most  Great  Name  to
preach  the  Advent  of  the  Father  and  His  Kingdom  upon
earth.  In  this  way  was  inaugurated  this  Most  Great  Evangel
amongst  the  Christians  of  Europe.

After  this   he    travelled  alone    from   Paris   making  for
'Akka.     He   disembarked   at  Alexandria   in
andTpartyof    Egypt  to  visit  his  two  daughters,  who  were
Americans^         living  there   at  that  time  with  their  grand-
mother,   stayed    with    them    three    weeks,
preached  the  Doctrine  to  them  and  converted  them.    Thence

*  page  76.

I  "In  July,  1898."     Op,cit.,^.  171.


I.    MiRZA  J  AW  Ads  historical  epitome     99

they  followed  him  to  'Akka  to  perform  a  visitation.  So
likewise  Mrs  Hearst  and  those  who  accompanied  her  arrived
in  successive  parties,  one  after  another,  at  'Akka,  the  total
number  of  American  visitors^  together  with  his  own  family
amounting  to  sixteen  persons.

Ibrahim  Khayru'llah's  stay  in  'Akka  and  Hayfa  some-
what exceeded  six  months,  in  the  course  of  which  important
events  happened,  some  of  which  it  is  necessary  to  mention
for  the  making  plain  of  the  truth.

About  twenty-four  hours  after  he  had  disembarked,  he

set  off  from  Hayfa  in  a  carriage  with  *  Husayn
,        „       .  -     ,  .„  -    _^-  ,  Reception  of

the    Persian,   or    the   village    or    Khamna,   a     Khayru'llah

dependency    of  Tabriz,   who    had    been    ap-     by  'Abbas

Efcndi
pointed  by  'Abbas  Efendi  to  meet  the  pilgrims,

and  the  two  went  together  to  'Akka,  and  alighted  at  the

house  where  dwelt  His  Holiness  'Abbas  Efendi.     There,  in

the  reception-room  on  the  upper  floor,  'Abbas  Efendi  entered

and  greeted  Khayru'llah,  saying,  "  Welcome  to  the  friend  ! "

Then  he  clasped  him  to  his  breast  and  kissed  him,  saying,

"  Welcome  to  thee,  O  Baha's  Peter,  O  second  Columbus,

Conqueror  of  America  !"     Then  he  sat  down  talking  to  him

kindly  and  affectionately,  and  asking  him  about  the  pilgrims

who  were  coming  from  America,  and  about  the  believers

there.     Then  he  asked  him  to  stay  with  him  in  the  house,

and  he  agreed  thereto  and  stayed  there.     And  on  the  next

day  a  military  officer  came  and  put  a  fez  on  Khayru'llah's

head  instead  of  a  hat,  saying  to  him,  "Verily  'Abbas  Efendi

has  ordered  this  fez  for  Baha's  Peter,  Columbus  the  Second,

the  Conqueror  of  America."     After  this  the  believers  there

began  to  send  congratulations  on  this  distinction,  calling

^  "  Of  visitors  who  were  originally  Christians."     Op.cit.,^.  172.
*  page  77.

7—2


lOO     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

him  at  one  time  Columbus  the  Second,  Conqueror  of
America,  and  at  another  Baha's  Peter.

When  'Abbas  Efendi  brought  Khayru'llah  into  the  room
wherein  was  deposited  the  body  of  His  HoHness  our  Master
Baha'u'llah,  he  told  him  that  he  was  the  first  pilgrim  to
whom  the  door  of  this  chamber  had  been  opened  for  entrance
thereunto  and  to  perform  the  ceremonies  prescribed  for  the
visitation.  And  thereafter  he  began  to  open  it  for  the
entrance  of  other  pilgrims.

Another  of  the  distinctions  which  he  enjoyed  was  that
Khayru'llah  ^^^  ^^^  'Abbas  Efendi  came  to  Hayfa  and
helps  to  lay  alighted  at  the  house  in  which  Khayru'llah
tion-stone^of  ^^^  lodging  with  his  family,  and  invited  him
the  Bab's  to  accompany  him  to  Mount  Carmel  to  par-

mauso  eum.  ticipate  with  him  in  laying  the  foundation-
stone  of  the  mausoleum  which  was  to  be  erected  to  receive
the  body  of  the  "  First  Point "  His  Holiness  the  Bab,  this
honour  being  assigned  to  him  instead  of  to  'Abbas  Efendi's
brother  "  the  Most  Great  Branch  "  Muhammad  'Ali  Efendi,
*So  they  went  together,  and  there  on  Mount  Carmel  'Abbas
Efendi  took  a  pick-axe  and  gave  Khayru'llah  another  pick-
axe, which  one  of  the  attendants  had  brought  for  this
purpose,  and,  after  asking  help  from  God,  they  both  began
to  dig  the  foundations,  while  the  servant  who  was  present
removed  the  excavated  earth.  Thus  the  work  continued
for  a  few  minutes,  when  'Abbas  Efendi  laid  aside  his  pick-
axe and  ordered  Khayru'llah  to  do  likewise.  Then  he  said
to  him,  "This  is  an  honour  which  none  of  the  believers
except  thee  has  enjoyed."  And  he  kept  praising  his  action
and  his  instruction  of  the  Americans  before  the  assembly  of
the  believers ;  and  often  did  he  make  mention  thereof  in
his  writings.     He  also  entitled  him  "the  Shepherd  of  God's

*  page  78.


I.      MIRZA   JAWAD's   historical   EPITOME      10 1

flocks  in  America,"  and  presented  him  with  the  works  of
His  Holiness  Baha  (to  whom  be  glory !).  As  for  'Abbas
Efendi's  followers,  they  treated  Khayru'Uah  with  all  kindness
and  affection.

It  is  worth  mentioning  here  that  Her  Holiness  Bahiyya
Khanim  "  the  Blessed  Leaf,"  the  sister  of  'Abbas  Efendi,
gave  Khayru'Uah  her  book,  which  was  written  in  a  i^eautiful
hand  and  contained  a  number  of  Holy  Tablets  revealed  by
the  Supreme  Pen ;  and  told  him  that  it  was  a  present  from
her  to  Baha's  Peter,  the  Conqueror  of  America,  who  had
wrought  for  the  extension  of  the  Faith  what  no  other  of  the
missionaries  had  achieved.  And  he  thanked  her,  and  put
it  by  with  other  precious  writings.

Notwithstanding  that  Khayru'Uah  had  repeatedly  begged
His  Holiness  'Abbas  Efendi  before  he  went  to  visit  him  to
send  him  a  volume  of  the  Holy  Verses  which  had  been
revealed  by  the  Supreme  Pen  so  that  he  might  compare
them  with  his  teachings,  in  order  to  guard  against  the
incidence  of  error,  and  His  Holiness  'Abbas  Efendi  had
promised  him  this,  yet  he  sent  him  nothing  of  what  he  had
demanded.  So  Khayru'Uah  determined  when  he  went  to
'Akka  to  attain  this  supreme  aim,  to  wit  the  acquisition  of
knowledge  at  first  hand;  and,  whenever  he  foregathered
with  'Abbas  Efendi  he  used* to  explain  to  him  the  teachings
which  he  gave  to  the  Americans,  even  translating  lengthy
sections  thereof,  and  asking  His  Holiness  to  correct  what
was  erroneous.  But  His  Holiness  confirmed  them  and
praised  them  publicly  before  all  the  believers,  both  Easterns
and  Americans.  He  repeatedly  declared  explicitly  to  the
American  pilgrims  that  all  which  Khayru'Uah  had  taught
was    correct;    but   whenever    he    had    explained    to    the

*  page  79.


I02      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABf  RELIGION

Americans  any  matter,  and  afterwards  understood  that  his
explanation  was  not  in  accordance  with  that  given  by
Khayru'llah,  he  used  to  avoid  disagreement  by  saying  that
everything  had  two  meanings,  one  spiritual  and  the  other
material,  and  that  the  explanations  given  to  them  by  himself
and  by  Khayru'llah  were  both  correct

Now  since  His  Holiness  'Abbas  Efendi  used  to  post-
pone the  explanation  of  the  questions  which
S'docTrke'^'  Khayru'llah  put  to  him,  excusing  himself  on
the  ground  of  the  multiplicity  of  his  affairs,
Khayru'llah  took  to  propounding  them  to  the  missionaries
{niuballighifi)  who  were  there  at  that  time,  such  as  Ibnu'l-
Abhar^  and  his  followers,  and  there  appeared  between  them
the  most  complete  difference  of  opinion  on  numerous  im-
portant matters,  such  as  the  immortality  of  the  human  spirit,
and  the  question  of  the  "return"  {rij^at)  or  coming  back
[to  the  life  of  the  world],  etc.  So  'Abbas  Efendi  appointed
a  special  time  for  the  hearing  of  the  two  parties  and  the
pronouncing  of  judgement.

After  long  discussions  His  Holiness  'Abbas  Efendi  said

to  Khayru'llah,  "  Verily  the  argument  which
Discussion  on  ,  ,  ..,.,.,

the  Nature  y^^    have   advanced   is    plausible,    but   your

of  God's  assertion  that  God's  Essence  is  limited   by

His  Essence  is  a  sheer  error."    So  Khayru'llah

begged  that  he  might  hear  the  proof  to  establish  this,  saying,

"  Since  everything  which  is  known  is  Hmited,  and  since  God

knows  all  things,  and  since  He  is  necessarily  known  to  His

Essence  by  His   Essence,  therefore  it  is  possible  to  say,

without  incurring  the  charge  of  error,  that  God's  Essence  is

limited  by  His  Essence,  since  He  is  known  to  Himself."

1  Probably  identical  with  the  "  Ibn  Abhar  "  mentioned  at  p.  426  of
my  Persian  Revolution.


I.    mIrza  jawad's  historical  epitome    103

But  'Abbas  Efendi  answered  saying,  "  It  is  necessary  that

no  difference  [of  opinion]  should  arise  between  thee  and  the

learned  men  of  Persia,  and   therefore  it  is  necessary  that

*thou  shouldst  say  that  God  is  unlimited,  and  that  He  is

exempt  from    [the  attributes  of]  Piis  creatures."     To  this

Khayru'llah  answered  saying,  "  O  Sir,  is  not  the  statement

that  God  is  exempt  from  [the  attributes  of]  His  creatures

in  itself  also  a  kind  of  limitation  ?  "     Then  'Abbas  Efendi's

countenance  changed,  and  he  regarded  Khayru'llah  with  a

frown :  then  he  smiled,  and  rose  up  saying,  "  We  will  return

to  this  discussion  some  other  time,  if  God  please."     Thus

did  he  close  the  first  and  last  conference  on  these  matters.

After  this  conference  there  came  about  an  evident  change

in  the  treatment  of  Khayru'llah  by  the  mis-

/        7    77-   7  r   \  1      1     •       r  11  Disinclination,

sionaries    {miwalUgnin)   and    their   lollowers,     Qf  gaha'fs  to

and  by  some  of  the  American  pilgrims,  and     argue  with

amongst  them  his  wife,  who  was  with  him  on

this  visit.     When  he  asked  one  of  the  missionaries  about

any   religious    question,    the   answer   would    be    that    His

Holiness  'Abbas   Efendi  alone  was  able  to  explain  these

questions,  and  that  Khayru'llah  must  ask  him.     But  when

an  opportunity  occurred  and  he  asked  'Abbas  Efendi  about

it,  His  Holiness  would  postpone  his  reply  until  some  other

occasion.

Then   Khayru'llah   requested   'Abbas   Efendi  to  obtain

[for  him]  the  books  which  had  been  printed

in    India    by    command    of    His    Holiness     tu^es  withheld

Baha'u'llah  (to  whom   be   glory)  and  in   his     f'oii^

days ;    but    he    did    not   grant   this    request,

saying,  "  These  books  are  not  to  be  found  in  'Akka."     But

Khayru'llah  obtained  them  in  Egypt  whilst  he  was  returning

to  America.

*  page  80.


104     MATERIALJ>  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  bAbI  RELIGION

Then  there  occurred  numerous  unpleasant  events  during

^       .  the  visit,  which,  if  they  did  not  shake  the  faith

Growing  '  ^

estrani^ement       of  Khayru'llah  and  his  two  daughters  in  the

KhaTu'lIah  ^^^^^  ^^  ^^^^  yi.o?X  Great  Theophany,  did
and  'Abbas  none  the  less  trouble  the  cup  of  their  joy,
Eiendi.  ^^^  caused  them  to  wonder  at  the  arbitrary

conduct  of  'Abbas  Efendi.

Only  after  their  return  to  America  did  God  open  their
eyes  so  that  they  saw  the  Truth  as  it  is.  Then  indeed  they
began  to  call  to  mind  these  events,  and  to  wonder  how  they
failed  to  understand  them  at  the  time,  and  to  realize  the
truth  that  *the  apprehension  of  facts  and  the  understanding
of  them  only  come  by  degrees  and  with  time.  And  in
order  to  make  known  the  Truth  Khayru'llah  mentioned
some  of  these  occurrences,  as  will  be  seen,  but  drew  a  veil
over  many  of  them  from  motives  of  courtesy.

One  feature  of  the  policy  of  'Abbas  Efendi  was  to  attach
to  every  pilgrim  who  came  to  'Akka  men
taken  by  ^^    ^^^    ^^^    faction,    to   consort   with   that

'Abbas  Efendi  stranger-pilgrim  with  the  utmost  kindness  and
strangers  from  tenderness,  wait  upon  him,  remain  with  him
meeting  his  night  and  day,  and  accompany  him  wherever
.  he  went.  Thus  passed  the  days  of  his  visit
without  the  pilgrim*  being  able  to  meet  one  of  the  Holy
Family  or  their  followers,  so  that  he  would  return  without
being  informed  of  the  truth  of  the  matter,  or  of  the  causes
of  the  dissension  which  had  arisen  between  'Abbas  Efendi
and  Muhammad  'Ali  Efendi.

But  if  any  one  [of  the  pilgrims]  was  so  bold  as  to  ask
His  Holiness  'Abbas  Efendi  to  permit  him  to  meet  his
brother  Muhammad  'Ali  Efendi  or  his  followers,  he  would

*  page  8i.


I.    mIrzA  jawAd's  historical  epitome    105

grant  such  permission  to  the  seeker,  with  a  smiling  and
cheerful  countenance,  to  go  to  meet  his  brother  Muhammad
'All  Efendi,  expressing  an  eager  desire  to  be  reconciled  with
his  brother;  but  at  the  same  time  he  would  hint  to  the
enquirer  that  there  was  absolutely  nothing  to  be  gained  by
this  action  of  his.  Then  he  would  enjoin  his  partisans  and
attendants  to  make  it  clear  to  that  pilgrim  that  it  would  be
a  great  mistake  for  him  to  foregather  with  Muhammad  *Ali
Efendi,  or  any  of  his  followers,  or  to  speak  with  them,  and
that  it  was  one  of  the  things  which  would  distress  the
sensibilities  of  'Abbas  Efendi.  So  the  pilgrim  would  refuse
to  meet  anyone  of  the  rival  faction,  even  as  happened  to
Khayru'llah  himself,  when  he  refused  to  meet  His  Holiness
the  Branch  {Ghusn)  Badi'u'Uah  Efendi  when  the  latter
came  to  call  upon  him  at  the  inn  where  he  was  staying  in
the  city  of  Hayfa.  For  he  refused  to  meet  the  above-
mentioned  Badi'u'llah  Efendi,  in  consequence  of  *  what  had
been  suggested  to  him  by  His  Holiness  'Abbas  Efendi  and
his  followers.

In  consequence  of  what  has  just  been  set  forth,  none  of
all  the  American  pilgrims  went  to  interview  His  Holiness
Muhammad  'All  Efendi,  or  Her  Holiness  the  Mother  of  the
"  Branches  "  (A^/isdn).

Besides  what  has  been  mentioned,  'Abbas  Efendi  used
to  take  every  opportunity  in  the  presence  of     ^  ,
Khayru'llah  to  rise  up  and  speak  amongst  his     prejudice  the
followers  and  attendants,  and  in  the  presence     visko'rs^'^
of  the  pilgrims  and  the  Americans,  explaining     against  Mu-
to  them  how  he  was  wronged,. and  the  vexa-     ^^"^"^^^  '^^^•
tions  which  he  daily  suffered  at  the  hands  of  the  Govern-
ment and  its  agents,  the  origin  of  all  of  which  he  ascribed

*  page  82.


I06     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

to  the  treacherous  intrigues  of  his  brother  Muhammad  'Ali
Efendi,  inciting  them  to  avenge  him,  inspiring  in  their
minds  angry  suspicions  and  the  very  spirit  of  hatred  and
enmity,  and  relating  to  them  stories  to  the  prejudice  of  the
Members  of  the  Holy  House,  at  which  the  natural  instinct
revolted.  So  likewise  his  followers  also  imitated  his  pro-
cedure, communicating  to  the  pilgrims  the  infamies  which
they  ascribe  to  the  Members  of  the  Holy  House.  Conse-
quently some  of  the  American  pilgrims  communicated  these
scandalous  stories  to  the  believers  in  America  after  their
return  from  'Akka.

Is  not  such  conduct  diametrically  opposed  to  the  Baha'i
Spirit  and  Truth,  to  the  Christian  Spirit,  and  to  the  Spirit
of  the  Prophets  and  Apostles  ?

The  political  sagacity  of  'Abbas  Efendi  and  the  ways  in
which  he  meets  the  pilgrims  with  every  display
sanctioned  ^^  affection,  and  the  proffenng  of  abundant

by  'Abbas  distinctions  and  honours  to  them,  as  Hkewise

his  training  of  his  followers  and  attendants  to
manifest  towards  him  and  also  the  pilgrims  tender  love,
kindness  and  complete  humility,  assure  him  an  absolute
sovereignty  over  their  intellects  and  win  for  him  their  blind
confidence,  so  that  they  regard  him  *as  great  and  perfect  to
such  a  degree  that  if  he  bids  them  perform  actions  which
God  hath  declared  unlawful,  they  do  them  unwittingly.  As
an  instance  of  this,  'Abbas  Efendi  invited  Colonel  Bedri
Bey,  the  commanding  officer  of  the  Turkish  troops  there,
to  partake  of  food  at  his  table  with  the  American  pilgrims
who  were  there  at  that  time.  Before  they  entered  the
dining-room,  however,  'Abbas  Efendi  commanded  them
through  their  interpreter  at  the  time,  Bahiyya  the  daughter

*  page  83.


I.      MIRZA  JAWAd'S   historical   EPITOME      10/

of  Khayru'Uah,  to  deny  all  knowledge  of  the  French  language
if  Bedri  Bey  should  desire  to  converse  with  them  in  that
tongue.  So  when  all  were  gathered  at  the  table,  Bedri  Bey
enquired  if  any  of  the  Americans  was  conversant  with  the
French  language,  for  if  so  he  would  like  to  converse  with
them  in  it,  since  he  did  not  know  English.  In  obedience
to  'Abbas  Efendi's  command  they  all  denied  such  know-
ledge, though  four  of  these  respected  ladies  spoke  French
very  well,  namely,  Mrs  Hearst,  Mrs  Kruper,  Mrs  Thornbourg
and  Mrs  Aberson,  Verily  God  and  His  servants  cannot
teach  their  followers  to  deny  the  truth,  for  assuredly  a  lie  is
hateful  in  God's  sight,  whatever  be  the  object  in  view,  and
truly  what  God  hath  forbidden  cannot  become  right.

Amongst  those  events  which  can  hardly  be  believed  is
that  one  day  when  we  were  sitting  at  table  prophecies
'Abbas  Efendi,  addressing  his  remarks  to  of  'Abbas
some  of  the  most  respected  of  the  American
pilgrims,  described  to  them  certain  important  events  in  their
past  lives  of  which  he  was  already  cognizant  by  means  of  one
of  the  American  pilgrims^  who  wrote  them  down,  desiring
that  they  should  be  translated  into  Arabic  for  the  information
of  'Abbas  Efendi.  Then  he  addressed  his  conversation  to
one  of  the  notable  and  respected  ladies  and  prophesied  to
her  about  the  life  of  her  son  in  the  future  and  the  renown
he  would  attain,  saying,  "After  ten  thousand  years  his
journal  will  be  sent  *as  a  present  of  great  price  from  one
king  to  another  king."  After  he  rose  from  the  table,
Khayru'Uah  approached  him  and  showed  how  unfavourably
he  had  been  impressed  by  what  had  happened.  But  'Abbas
Efendi,  smiling,  laid  his  hand  on   Khayru'llah's   shoulder,

^  Mr  Getsinger.     Op.  cit.,  t^.  177.
*  page  84.


I08     MATERIALS  fOR  STUDY  OF  TFIE  BABI  RELIGION

and  said  to  him,  "  Verily  this  was  for  a  good  reason  which
thou  canst  not  understand  at  present."

Amongst  his  prophecies  was  also  the  following.      We

were    with    him  at  table    when   one  of   the

'Abbas  American  pilgrims^  asked  him  to  permit  them

Efendi's  to  take  his  photograph,  for  it  had  never  been

prophecies.  ^  ,  i  i_  r

^    ^  taken    save  when    he  was  a  young  man   oi

twenty-seven  in  a.h.  1284  (a.d.  1867).  He  refused,  how-
ever, to  grant  permission,  saying  that  it  would  only  be  taken
when  his  Father's  crown^  should  be  placed  on  his  head  and
he  should  be  led  forth  to  martyrdom,  when  thousands  of
rifle  bullets  should  piece  his  body.  His  words  had  a  great
effect,  so  that  some  of  the  auditors  wept  bitterly  ^  So  like-
wise in  his  writings  and  speeches  he  laments  and  mourns
on  account  of  the  vexations  and  calamities  which  have  be-
fallen and  will  befall  him  in  God's  Way.  And  this  he  did  that
men's  hearts  might  incline  towards  him,  and  that  he  might
stir  in  them  sentiments  of  compassion  and  partisanship.
And  amongst  the  things  which  awakened  Khayru'llah  to

,„,, ,       the  double-faced  policy  of  'Abbas  Efendi  was
Khayru  llah  s  ....

wife  leaves  that  when  he  arrived  with  his  wife  and  his  two

daughters  at  Port  Said  in  Egypt  on  their  return

from  the  pilgrimage  [to  'Akka]  en  route  for  America,  his  wife

left  him  and  travelled  alone  without  saying  one  word  to

them  or  fulfilling  the  formalities  of  leave-taking.     Those  who

beheld  this  were  amazed  thereat,  having  regard  to  the  fact  that

'Abbas  Efendi,  when  he  bade  them   farewell,   emphatically

enjoined  on  them  that  they  should  live  together  in  love  and

concord.

^  Mr  Getsinger.     Op.  cit.,  p.  178.

2  TdJ,  i.e.  in  this  case  the  tall  felt  cap  which  Baha'u'lMh  used  to  wear.

3  "  He  has  been  photographed  many  times  since,  and  his  prophecy
has  not  been  fulfilled."     Op.  cit.,  p.  178.


I.      MIRZA  JAWAUS   HISTORICAL   EPITOME       IO9

Another  thing  which  warned  Khayru'llah  and  generated

doubt  in  his  heart  was  the  letter  which  reached

Alleged

him  two  months  after  his  return  to  America  duplicity  of
from  'Abbas  Efendi,  written  in  'Abbas  Efendi's  '^'^^^f.^
own  handwriting  and  signed  with  his  [usual]
Signature  "pp"^i  which  *letter  is  preserved  and  can  be
produced  when  necessary.  This  letter  is  a  reply  to  a  letter
sent  by  Khayru'llah  from  Paris  to  'Abbas  Efendi  asking
him  to  make  known  in  what  way  he  desired  Mrs  Hearst  to
send  him  the  money  which  she  had  promised  to  send.  For
when  Mrs  Hearst  met  Khayru'llah  in  Paris  as  he  was
returning  from  the  pilgrimage  [to  'Akka],  she  asked  him  to
correspond  with  'Abbas  Efendi  about  this.  So  there  came
to  him  this  letter  above-mentioned,  wherein  'Abbas  Efendi
praised  him  in  the  most  exaggerated  terms,  ascribing  to  him
lofty  qualities  wherewith  none  should  be  credited  save  only
the  Divine  Manifestations.  Such,  for  instance,  were  his
words  :  "  Verily  thou  art  a  centre  of  the  Circle  of  God's
Love,  the  pivot  of  consecration  and  humility  to  God."  Now
as  regards  the  men  of  God,  the  world  and  the  treasures
which  it  contains  preoccupy  them  not,  so  that  if  one  of  them
passes  by  a  valley  of  pure  gold,  his  spirit  doth  not  incline
to  take  anything  therefrom ;  nor  is  it  possible,  things  being
so,  that  money  should  impel  him  to  write  praise  like  that
recorded  above,  which  tore  the  veil  from  the  eyes  of  Khayru
'llah,  so  that  he  saw  the  Truth  and  comprehended  this
double-faced  policy.  More  particularly^  he  discovered  after
careful  investigation  that  'Abbas  Efendi,  before  the  time
when  he  wrote  this  panegyric,  had  written  another  letter
censuring  Khayru'llah,  which  had  been  Communicated  to
some  of  the  American  pilgrims  who  were  there  at  the  time,

1  The  initials  of  'Abbas  'Abdu'1-Baha.
*  page  85.


no     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

and  who,  after  their  return,  communicated  it  to  the  American

believers  as  it  had  been  revealed  to  them  by  'Abbas  Efendi.

From  this  moment  Khayru'Uah  began  to  read  the  Holy

Verses,  to  compare  therewith  'Abbas  Efendi's
Khayru'llah  ,    .  ,  ,  ,  .  •   ,      i

renounces  claims,  acts  and  teachmgs,  to  weigh  them  m

'Abbas  Efendi     the  balance  of  reason,  and  to  measure  them
his  brother  ^^^^  ^^^  measure  of  the  Holy  Law  revealed

Muhammad  from  the  Supreme  Pen.  [Having  done  so]
he  found  no  escape  from  abandoning  'Abbas
Efendi  and  thereafter  turning  towards  His  Holiness  the
Most  Great  Branch  \al-Ghusnu'l-Akbar\  Muhammad  'Ali
Efendi,  in  obedience  to  the  command  contained  in  the  Book
of  my  Testamefit,  So  ere  seven  months  had  elapsed  from
the  time  of  his  pilgrimage  *  Ibrahim  Khayru'llah  joined
himself  to  the  ranks  of  His  Holiness  Muhammad  'Ali  Efendi,
and  about  three  hundred  of  the  believers  in  Chicago  and
Kenosha  followed  him,  and  likewise  a  small  number  from
every  city  wherein  believers  were  to  be  found.  Most  of  the
believers,  however,  continued  to  follow  'Abbas  Efendi.
Now  as  for  the  emissaries  and  ambassadors,  'Abdu'l-
Karim  of  Tihran,  Asadu'llah  of  Isfahan,  Hajji
missionaries  Mirza  Hasan  of  Khurasan,  Mirza  Abu'1-Fazl  of
sent  to  Gulpayagan  and  their  followers,  whom  'Abbas

reclaim^or  Efendi  sent  to  America  with  the  object  of

confute    ^  bringing  back  Khayru'llah  to  him,  and  what

ayru  a  .  j^^  suffered  at  their  hands  and  from  the
American  followers  of  'Abbas  Efendi  in  the  way  of  divers
vexations  and  lying  rumours,  all  these  matters  will  be  men-
tioned, if  it  please  God,  in  another  book,  which  shall  be  a
memorial  from  which  shall  be  diffused  the  fragrance  of
patience,  forbearance  and  steadfastness  in  God's  religion,

*  page  86.


I.      MIRZA  JAWADS   HISTORICAL   EPITOME      III

and  the  enduring  of  afflictions  in  His  way.     So  likewise
there  will  be  recorded  in  it  the  three  reasons  which  induced
Khayru'llah  to   forsake   'Abbas   Efendi  and  adhere  to  his
brother  Muhammad  'All  Efendi.     These  reasons  were  :
Firsts   'Abbas   Efendi's  claim    to   Divinity,   in  that  he

declared  himself  to  be  the  Manifestation  of  ^,

.   ,     .       ,                                              .    .  T.  he  three
Service,  which  is  the  greatest  of  the  Divine  stumbling-
Manifestations,  and  peculiar  to  the  Father,  ll'j^^'^^  ^[, ,,
the  Lord  of  Hosts  (Jehovah)  alone.     This  is  (i)  'Abbas

the    supreme   limit   of   Manifestation,  which     Efendi  s  claim

^    ,  .  ,       to  Divinity,

none  claimed  save  only  His  Holiness  Baha

(to  whom  be  glory),  who  explicitly  declared  in  numerous
Tablets  that  He  was  the  Servant,  and  the  Visage  and  Very
Self  of  the  Eternal  Essence.  Again  he  declares  himself  to
be  the  Enunciator  {mubayyiji),  that  is,  God,  as  the  Supreme
Pen  has  explicitly  declared  in  different  passages.  So  like-
wise he  claims  to  be  the  Centre  of  the  Covenant,  which  is
God  alone,  Baha,  who  Himself  covenanted  with  Himself
before  the  creation  of  the  heavens  and  the  earths  that  man
should  worship  none  save  God  alone ;  as  when  He  says,
exalted  is  He  :  "He  took  the  Covenant  at  the  time  of  the
Dawn^  from  those  who  *  believed  that  they  should  worship
none  but  God  " ;  and  [he  advanced]  other  pretensions  which
it  is  unnecessary  to  mention.

Secondly,  that  'Abbas  Efendi's  teachings  were  at  variance

with  the  teachings  of  His  Holiness  Baha'u'llah     ,  ,  ,,.

°   ,  (2)  His  teach-

in  all  respects,  and  were  contrary  to  reason.        ings  incon-

Thirdly,  that  the  conduct  of  'Abbas  Efendi     ^f^^"^^  ^^^h
1    ,  •       1   -1  •  1-1         ,  r  ^hose  of

and  his  daily  actions  were  like   those  of  a     Baha'u'llah.

double-faced  man,  which  is  forbidden  in  the     (3)  His

Scriptures.  ^^"P'^^^^^-

^  i.e.  of  the  Manifestation  or  Theophany.
*  page  87.


112     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

Fourthly^  that  whereas  His  Holiness  Baha'u'llah  in  many

,  ,  ^.  .  passages  of  His  works  and  in  the  Book  of  His
(4)  Dissension      ^  o

and  discord         Testament,  commanded  this  community  in

produced  by  ^^  most  categorical  manner  to  put  aside  dis-
nis  actions.  .         .  ^     .

cord,  to  extinguish  the  fire  of  sectarian  hatred,

and  to  consort  with  [the  adherents  of]  all  religions  and  sects
in  courtesy,  love,  spirituality  and  fragrance,  'Abbas  Efendi
made  naught  of  this  most  great  gift  and  most  high  and
glorious  aim  ;  in  that  he,  for  his  private  ends  and  personal
ambitions,  laid  the  foundations  of  hatred,  rancour,  discord
and  diversity  amongst  the  People  of  Baha,  in  such  wise
that  he  produced  separation  and  discord  between  brother
and  sister,  husband  and  wife^  and  father  and  son.  We  seek
refuge  in  God  the  Preserver,  the  Almighty,  from  Whom
help  is  invoked  !

Finished  in  the  month  of  Safar,  a.h.  1322  {April ^
1904)^;  written  and  compiled  by  Muhammad  Jaivdd
of  Qazwin^  the  Persian^  at  '■Akkd.

^  The  English  Autobiography  goes  down  to  1914  and  the  estabhsh-
ment  of  the  National  Association  of  the  Universal  Religion  (N.A.U.R.).


II


IBRAhIM    GEORGE    KHAYRU'LLAh     AND
THE  BAHA'I  propaganda  IN  AMERICA


B.  B.


The  account  of  Khayru'llah's  life  given  by  our  author
Muhammad  Jawad  may  be  regarded,  so  far  as  it  goes,  as
perfectly  authentic,  since  it  is  based  on  his  own  statements ^
I  shall  here  endeavour  to  add  such  further  details  about  the
propaganda  in  which  he  took  so  great  a  part,  and  generally
about  the  Baha'i  movement  in  America,  as  I  have  been  able
to  glean  from  the  sources  at  my  disposal,  which  include,
besides  various  published  works.  Eastern  and  Western,  a
number  of  letters  written  to  me  at  various  dates  between
December  1897  and  x^ugust  1906  by  some  dozen  American
Baha'is,  and  three  American  newspapers  (of  August  12,
1900;  February  16,  1902;  and  December  18,  1904)  which
Dr  Goldziher  of  Budapest  was  kind  enough  to  send  me,  and
each  of  which  contains,  besides  illustrations,  some  account
of  the  progress  of  the  movement.

Khayru'llah,  as  we  have  seen,  reached  America  in  the
course  of  the  year  1893,  and  almost  immediately  began  his
propaganda  in  Chicago^,  which,  as  Mr  Thornton  Chase
wrote  to  me  ten  years  later  (October  29,  1903),  "■  still  remains
the  stronghold  and  practical  centre  of  the  teachings  in  this
country,"  and  maintains  a  "House  of  Spirituality  "  (founded
later  by  Mirza  Asadu'llah  of  Isfahan  by  command  of  'Abbas
Efendi  ''Abdul-Bahd)  and  a  "  Baha'i  Publishing  Society,"  for
which  translations  of  the  most  notable  Baha'i  writings  were

^  As  already  mentioned  (p.  93  supra,  n.  i  ad  calc.)  the  original
autobiography  has  lately  (19 17)  been  published  in  English.

2  In  the  Preface  to  his  work  Beha'ti'lldh,  dated  Jan.  i,  1900,  he  says
that  he  began  to  preach  the  Baha'i  gospel  "  over  seven  years  ago,"

8—2


Il6      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

prepared  by  the  above-mentioned  Asadu'llah  and  later  by
his  son  Mirza  Farid  Ami'n,  who  came  to  Chicago  about  the
end  of  1 90 1.  For  five  years,  during  which  he  published
(in  1896)  his  pamphlet  entitled  Bdbu^d-Din^  Khayru'llah's
propaganda  went  quietly  but  steadily  forward,  without  inter-
ference, and  without  attracting  much  notice  outside  the
United  States,  especially  in  Chicago,  New  York  and  Ithaca,
until  in  June,  1898,  he  set  out  with  a  few  American  believers
on  the  visit  to  'Akka  which  has  been  fully  described  above,
and  in  which  were  sown  the  first  seeds  of  the  estrangement
between  him  and  'Abbas  Efendi  ^AbduH-Bahd.

The  most  interesting  of  my  American  correspondents
was  a  Miss  A.  H,  of  Brooklyn, .  New  York,  from  whom,
between  May  and  September  1898,  I  received  five  letters,
together  with  notes  of  the  first  thirteen  lectures  given  by
Khayru'Uah  in  his  course  of  instruction  to  enquirers.  These
throw  so  much  light  on  the  methods  employed  by  him  and
the  form  given  to  the  Baha'i  doctrine  in  America  that  I  think
it  worth  while  to  quote  them  in  full.

1st  Letter  {May  15,  1898).

My  dear  Dr  Browne  :

The  only  apology  which  I  have  to  offer  for  this  in-
trusion is  that  I  most  earnestly  desire  information  concerning
Babism,  and  that  you  are  the  only  one  known  to  me  com-
petent to  give  it.  .

A  most  ardent  follower  of  Beha'u'llah^  is  teaching  here,
and  I,  with  many  others,  have  been  attending  the  classes.
The  lecturer,  a  Dr  Kheiralla^  has  made  the  most  astounding
statements  regarding  Beha\  but  the  proofs  brought  forward
are  sadly  inferior  to  the  claims  set  forth,  so  it  seems  to  me.
Most  of  them  are  verses  taken  from  the  prophetic  books  of
^  I  follow  the  spelling  adopted  by  the  writer.


II.      BAHA'I    propaganda    in    AMERICA         II /

the  Bible.  [According  to  this  doctor,  Beha  was  God  Himself.
He  teaches  that  God  did  not  manifest  through  the  personality
of  Beha,  as  in  the  case  of  Jesus,  but  that  He  really  was  God,
and  that  He  will  not  come  again  during  this  cycle.  We  are  all
called  upon  to  believe  this,  or  else  forever  lose  our  chance  of
salvationTj  Believing  it  makes  us  the  adopted  children  of  God,
and  we  are  given  the  power  of  creation.  Prayer  is  taught,
and  little  type  written  prayers  composed  by  Beha  are  given
to  the  students,  and  they  are  told  to  pray  for  spiritual  things,
which,  however,  they  have  no  right  to,  else  they  would  have
received  them,  and  there  would  be  no  need  of  asking  for
them.  This  is  one  of  the  principal  points  in  the  teachings.
The  first  prayer  given  is  really  the  most  inclusive  and  truly
beautiful  one  I  have  ever  known.  Angels  are  placed  lower
than  man,  for  they  are  controlled  by  God,  and  man  is  not,
but  has  free  will  and  the  power  of  choosing.  iThose  who
die  without  hearing  of  Beha  are  reincarnated  and  have
another  chance;  those  who  have  already  heard  do  not?
Believers  see  their  friends  who  are  not  in  the  earth-body.
God  never  takes  a  female  form  as  he  selects  the  stronger
one  to  manifest  Himself.  There  is  to  be  a  great  time  in
the  future  when  Napoleon  IV,  who  is  now  a  colonel  in  the
Russian  army,  will  war  against  the  religion  of  Christ,  aided
by  Russia,  and  the  "  Red  Dragon  "  the  Pope.  France  is  to
be  an  empire.  The  Napoleons  are  the  Antichrists.  Mirza
Yahya^  is  scarcely  spoken  of,  but  when  he  is  mentioned  he
is  called  Satan.  I  think  very  few  of  the  students  know
anything  about  him.  These  are  a  few  of  the  many  state-
ments made  in  the  course  of  thirteen  lessons ;  but  there  is
not  the  slightest  reference  throughout  the  entire  course  to
the  development  of  character,  and  those  who  claim  an  inner
guidance  are  particularly  censured  and  ridiculed.     Certain

^  i.e.  Subh-i-Azal.


Il8      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  bAbI  RELIGION

forms  of  metaphysical  thought  that  have  proved  helpful  to
hundreds  of  people  here  receive  a  severe  drubbing.  Every-
thing seems  to  be  on  the  outside — just  a  belief  in  the  "Mani-
festation" is  what  the  doctor  calls  "Truth,"  so  far  as  I  have
been  able  to  learn,  and  that  one's  actions  have  nothing  what-
ever to  do  with  the  case.  At  the  last  lecture  the  people  are
told,  if  they  believe  in  the  "Manifestation,"  to  write  a  letter  to
'Abbas  Efendi,  who  is  a  reincarnation  of  Jesus  Christ,  stating
their  beHef  and  begging  to  have  their  names  recorded  in  the
"  Book  of  the  favorites."  They  are  informed  that  xA^braham,
Jacob,  Moses,  Joshua,  and  Daniel  are  reincarnated  and  are
at  Acre,  the  "  Holy  Place."  (The  doctor  further  says  that
he  has  been  sent  by  the  Father  and  Jesus  Christ  to  deliver
the  message  concerning  the  "  Manifestation  "  to  the  people
of  this  countr^T]  He  claims  there  are  fifty-five  million
believers  at  the  present  time.  A  great  mystery  is  made  of
•the  whole  thing  and  the  ideas  are  given  out  in  minute
portions,  as  we,  it  seems,  are  accounted  slow  of  understanding
in  this  country.  The  "  message  "  or  "  pith,"  as  it  is  called,
is  not  given  until  the  eleventh  lesson.  The  effect  upon  the
people  is  very  strange.  I  never  knew  any  one  idea  to  create
so  many  different  and  curious  impressions.  You  will  no
doubt  be  surprised  to  hear  that  six  hundred  persons  in
Chicago,  where  Dr  Kheiralla  taught,  are  said  to  have  declared
themselves  to  be  believers  and  that  about  two  hundred
persons  in  New  York,  so  I  am  told,  have  written  the  letters
to  'Abbas  Efendi.  The  teachings  are  all  free  and  are
given  with  a  sincerity  and  earnestness  which  I  heartily
admire.  Such  untiring  devotion  must  appeal  to  all  fair-
minded  persons,  no  matter  how  much  they  may  differ  as  to
the  truth  of  the  teachings.

This  is  the  first  that  I  have  known  of  Babism,  so  I  am
very  ignorant  concerning  it.    What  I  want  so  much  to  know


II.      BAHAI   PROPAGANDA   IN    AMERICA         II9

is  whether  these  ideas  are  held  in  general  by  the  Behai's,  and
above  all  if  Beha'u'Uah  himself  believed  he  was  God,  the
Almighty,  and  that  the  salvation  of  the  race  rests  upon  that
belief.  We  have  been  taught  nothing  about  the  life  and
character  of  Beha.  To  me  it  seems  perfectly  absurd  to
believe  in  the  vanishing  form  of  a  man.

I  found  your  interesting  books  in  a  reading  library,  and  I
go  there  to  read  them ;  but  I  have  not  yet  been  able  to  find  out
for  sure  that  Beha  was  what  this  Babi  doctor  claims  for  him.

When  I  began  this  letter  I  had  no  idea  it  would  assume
the  proportions  of  a  small  book  ;  but  perhaps  you  will  pardon
its  length  when  I  tell  you  I  really  could  not  make  it  shorter
and  say  what  I  wished  to.

With  respect,  I  am,

Most  sincerely,

(Miss)  A.  H.

2nd  Letter  (^  June  \^^  1898).

My  dear  Dr  Browne,

Your  kind  letter  of  May  29th  has  reached  me,  and  I
am  much  surprised  to  learn  of  the  error  made  in  the  number
of  Beha's  followers,  for  I  sincerely  believe  that  Dr  Kheiralla
would  not  wilfully  make  a  false  statement.  I  have  noticed
that  his  intense  zeal  and  love  for  the  cause  make  him  at
times  use  extravagant  language,  and  I  have  made  due  allow-
ance for  this.  For  instance  he  told  me  a  few  weeks  since
in  speaking  of  the  "  believers  "  in  America  that  every  one
of  them  would  lay  down  his  life  for  the  cause.  He  is  rather
excitable,  but  he  has  an  extremely  kind  and  sweet  heart,  and
I  am  sure  that  could  he  but  suffer  martyrdom  he  would  be
supremely  happy.  How  he  has  come  to  give  the  statistics  so
remarkable  a  twist  I  cannot  imagine.  Besides  stating  that
there  are  at  present  fifty-five  rnillion  believers,  he  told  us  in


I20     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

his  last  lecture  that  there  were  forty  millions  at  the  time  of
Beha's  death  in  1892.  The  New  History  I  have  not  yet
read,  but  I  found  your  articles  on  Babism  in  the  Journal  of
the  Royal  Asiatic  Society  for  1889  and  '92.  Much  of  it  I
was  unable  to  read  on  account  of  its  being  written  in  Persian  ;
the  English  language  is  the  only  one  that  I  know.  But  when
I  found  the  summary  of  the  "  Most  Holy  Tablet "  I  was
very  happy  because  it  gave  me  some  knowledge  of  Beha.
I  have  enjoyed  it  very  much,  especially  whenever  there  was
anything  about  the  Babi  who  visited  Beha  so  many  times.
What  you  wrote  in  your  letter  concerning  the  two  views  of
God's  way  of  dealing  with  man  is  exceedingly  helpful,  for
things  have  been  a  trifle  hazy  since  I  haye  been  investigating
Babism,  and  you  will  understand  why  when  you  know  more
of  its  propaganda.  My  belief  is  very  simple  in  spite  of  a
great  fondness  for  metaphysics,  and  there  is  nothing  I  love
so  well  as  to  hear  about  the  ways  to  God.  The  mystics  have
always  a  wondrous  charm  for  me.  It  must  be  true  that  the
Father  manifests  in  all  His  children,  but  that  some  minds
are  purer  and  are  better  media  for  the  Light  to  shine  through;
that  He  is  with  each  of  us  at  all  times.  If  God  is  omni-
present, surely  He  is  with  every  soul.  You  see  that  I  can
accept  a  "  Manifestation,"  and  when  I  first  heard  of  Beha
and  'Abbas  Efendi  I  was  very  glad,  as  I  have  wished  many
times  to  know  some  great  soul  on  the  earth  who  had  made
the  "union."  I  have  had  so  many  teachers  and  I  find
alas  !  they  really  know  nothing  about  God ;  most  of  their
words  are  born  on  their  lips  and  they  have  not  the  slightest
perception  of  the  profound  ideas  which  they  voice  ;  but  when
I  met  Dr  Kheiralla  I  saw  that  at  last  I  had  found  one  who
really  believes  his  own  teaching  and  is  giving  all  that  he  has
to  spread  what  he  thinks  is  true;  right  or  wrong  he  is
faithful.     Beha  must  have  been  a  marvellous  personality  to


II.      BAHA'I   propaganda   in   AMERICA         121

so  control  another.  I  wanted  to  know  of  the  great  force
back  of  this  new  teacher,  and  I  listened  to  the  teachings  very
closely ;  but  nothing  that  I  was  in  search  of  came.  [  So  one
day  I  went  to  Dr  Kheiralla  and  asked  him  if  he  meant  to
simply  declare  the  "  Manifestation  " — if  that  was  not  his  only
message.  He  said  yes,  and  that  was  all  he  had  to  do— just
to  bring  the  people  to  God.  No  ethics,  no  religious  life
does  he  pretend  to  teach.H  But  he  does  such  a  peculiar
thing ;  at  the  end  of  the  thirteenth  lesson  all  teaching  ends
for  those  who  do  not  write  the  letter  to  'Abbas  Efendi ;  but
those  who  do  are  received  into  the  fold  and  are  given  further
instructions.  The  following  is  a  fairly  accurate  form  of  the
letter  given  to  the  students  :
''  To  the  Greatest  Branchy

In  GotVs  Name,  the  Greatest  Branch,  I  huinbly  confess  the
oneness  and  singleness  of  the  Almighty  God,  my  Creator,  and
I  believe  in  His  appearance  in  the  human  form  ;  I  believe  in
His  establishing  His  holy  household ;  in  His  departure,  and
that  He  has  delivered  His  kingdom  to  Thee,  O  Greatest  Branch,
His  dearest  son  and  mystery.  I  beg  that  I  may  be  accepted  ift
this  glorious  kingdom  and  that  my  name  may  be  registered  in
the  '  Book  of  Believers.''  I  also  beg  the  blessings  of  worlds  to
come  and  of  the  present  one  for  myself  and  for  those  who  are
near  and  dear  to  me  {the  individual  may  ask  for  anything  he
likes) ,  for  the  spiritual  gifts  which  Thou  seest  I  am  best  fitted
for — for  any  gift  or  power  for  which  Thou  seest  me  to  be  best
fitted.

Most  humbly  thy  servant,  "

It  is  impossible  for  me  to  write  such  a  letter,  for  the
doctor  has  not  proved  to  my  satisfaction  that  Beha  was  a
particular  "  manifestation  "  and  there  is  really  nothing  in  the
letter  that  I  can  honestly  say  I  believe — except  the  "  oneness
and  singleness  of  the  Almighty  God."     Besides,  to  beg  for


122      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

spiritual  gifts  and  blessings  of  any  human  being  at  Acre  or
anywhere  else  is  to  me  positively  shocking.     The  idea  of
favoritism  is  also  very  repulsive.     But  I  want  very  much  to
learn  all  that  I  can  of  Beha  and  'Abbas  Efendi,  and  the
ethics  and  religious  life  of  the  sect.    The  believers  are  given
some  mysterious  name  which  openly  they  always  call  "  The
Greatest  Name."     It  is  given  very  privately  and  in  a  very
solemn  manner.     They  are  supposed  to  make  use  of  it  when
in  need.     I  am  sorry  to  say  that  some  people  have  sent  the
letter  for  the  sake  of  the  rest  of  the  teaching  and  for  a
mysterious  something  which  they  hope  to  get.     This  propa-
ganda is  the  strangest  and  the  most  unique  one  that  America
has  ever  known  and  I'm  quite  sure  that  you  cannot  form  a
correct  idea  of  it  unless  you  have  heard  something  of  every
one  of  the  lectures,  and  in  the  order  in  which  they  were
given.     I  have  therefore  concluded  to  send  you  what  I  can
of  the  leading  ideas  of  each  one.     Many  things  I  cannot
explain,  for  explanations  were  not  given,  but  we  were  told
that  we  should  know  in  the  future.     That  future  has  never
come — it  may  be  reserved  for  the  believers.     Besides  the
doctor  requested  the  students  to  take  no  notes  up  to  about
the  tenth  lecture,  when  the  use  of  pencils  and  paper  was
allowed.     The  "  message  "  is  given  in  the  eleventh  lesson.
After  each  lecture  I  jotted  down  what  I  could  remember  of
the  main  ideas.     There  will  be  a  good  deal  of  fog,  but  I  hope
you  will  be  able  to  see  through  it.     The  doctor  repeatedly
declares  that  this  is  a  teaching  where  everything  is  proved
and  I  should  like  you  to  know  just  how  he  proves  the
"Manifestation."

With  this  letter  I  send  the  first  two  lectures.    I  will  send

the  others  later  on.

Sincerely  yours,

A.  A.  H,


II.      BAHA'i    propaganda   in   AMERICA         1 23

-^rd  Letter  {July  10,  1898).

My  dear  Dr  Browne,

Enclosed  you  will  find  four  more  lectures.  The
meaning  of  the  sixth  lesson  is  distressingly  obscure  in  my
mind,  and  I  could  not  do  otherwise  than  place  it  so  on
paper.  But  I  have  tried  to  do  Dr  Kheiralla  justice,  and
trust  that  I  have  given  everything  just  as  I  heard  it.  I
believe  there  are  two  different  "images,"  but  I  am  not  at  all
sure.  The  doctor  does  not  seem  to  be  able  to  express  his
ideas  in  our  language  so  clearly  as  the  Hindoo  exponents  of
the  Vedanta  philosophy  and  other  forms  of  Oriental  thought.
The  students  are  in  utter  ignorance  as  to  what  the  religion  or
sect  really  is  until  the  eleventh  lesson ;  it  was  called  the
"  Religion  of  God  "  ;  at  first  we  were  told  it  is  in  all  parts  of
the  world,  even  in  the  heart  of  Africa.  To  our  amazement
we  find  out  when  we  reach  the  last  lesson  that  there  is  some
literature  on  the  subject.  As  the  taking  of  notes  is  seldom
allowed  the  memory  is  mainly  depended  upon,  and  the  result
is  that  at  the  end  of  the  course,  the  Bab,  'Abbas  Efendi  and
Beha'u'llah  are  most  ludicrously  confounded :  under  the
circumstances  perhaps  Mirza  Yahya  has  fared  better  by  being
kept  out.  I  asked  one  of  the  most  enthusiastic  believers
about  Subh-i-Ezely  and  she  said  that  she  had  heard  him
lecture ;  she  thought  he  was  one  of  the  Hindoo  Swamis  !
When  I  told  her  I  meant  Satan  she  seemed  to  know.  This
confusion  exists  in  New  York  I  am  sure,  as  I  have  talked
with  a  number  of  the  people  who  have  listened  to  the  entire
course  and  have  repeated  the  lectures.  A  woman  who  has
been  a  believer  for  more  than  three  years  and  is  now  a
teacher  (there  are  more  than  twenty  teachers  in  Chicago),
told  me  a  few  weeks  since  that  she  has  never  read  any  of  the


124      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

books  on  the  subject.  It  is  my  impression  that  very  few  of
the  believers  have.  This  may  not  be  the  case  with  those  in
Chicago.  Some  New  York  people  have  sent  recently  for
copies  of  the  Traveller  s  N'arrative.  There  is  little  chance
for  discussion  at  any  lecture,  as  the  doctor  has  an  ex-
tremely funny  way  of  telling  people  who  oppose  his  views
in  the  class  that  they  are  "excused."  Of  course  they  have  to
leave,  and  in  profound  silence  the  surprised  offender  arises,
packs  up  what  belongs  to  him  and  makes  as  graceful  an  exit
as  he  can  under  the  trying  conditions.  The  lesson  is  then
resumed  with  great  serenity  on  the  doctor's  part.  At  the
first  lecture  the  people  are  requested  not  to  talk  over  what
they  are  told  with  outsiders.  An  air  of  mystery  is  over  the
whole  affair  and  infinitesimal  things  are  most  enormously
magnified,  and  the  way  in  which  [some]  matters  are  mini-
mized in  order  to  maximize  other  points  in  the  teaching  is
truly  remarkable;  I  mean  interpretations  of  the  English
Bible.  Many  people  hear  all  they  care  to  in  a  very  few
lessons.  The  doctor  works  hard  and  faithfully,  starting  class
after  class  until  there  are  seven  or  eight,  all  receiving  the
same  lectures.  One  can  repeat  a  lecture  a  number  of  times
provided  one  has  heard  the  previous  lesson.  If  a  student
loses  one,  Mrs  Kheiralla  sometimes  gives  the  main  points
privately.  Public  talks  on  reincarnation,  evolution,  and
Bible  interpretation  are  given ;  but  the  "  Manifestation  "  is
not  taught  outside  of  the  classes,  or  in  some  private  way.  A
great  deal  is  made  of  visions ;  they  are  seeing  Acre,  'Abbas
Efendi,  the  old  man  at  Acre  that  we  were  told  is  Joshua
reincarnated,  and  others  of  the  household.  The  visions  are
told  to  the  doctor,  and  he  does  the  best  he  can  with  them
and  there  is  great  satisfaction.  The  believers  have  organized
in  New  York  with  a  president  and  several  vice-presidents.
The  first  vice-president  told  me  that  they  are  107  or  109  in


II.      BAHA'i    PROPAGANDA   IN   AMERICA         12$

number  and  that  they  call  themselves  an  "  Assembly."  The
believers  (I  do  not  know  that  this  includes  the  Chicago
people)  have  collected  about  one  thousand  dollars.  The
movement  was  started  in  New  York  last  February  by  a
Mr  Dodge,  formerly  of  Chicago,  who  is  now  president  of  the
New  York  organization.  He  sent  for  Dr  Kheiralla  who  was
living  in  Chicago,  paid  the  expenses  of  the  doctor  and  his
wife  while  in  New  York,  and  provided  the  rooms  for  the
classes  which  ended  in  June.  The  lessons  are  to  be  begun
again  in  the  fall.  I  most  sincerely  hope  that  'Abbas  Efendi
will  send  others  that  we  may  know  whether  these  ideas  are
held  in  common  by  the  sect ;  one  gets  a  very  imperfect  idea
from  only  one  representative.  I  asked  Mr  Dodge  how  many
believers  there  are  now,  and  he  said  about  fifty-five  or  sixty
millions  !  I  was  very  much  amazed  at  the  sudden  rise  in
numbers.  This  gentleman  is  exceedingly  generous  and  is
working  hard  upon  an  invention  by  which  he  hopes  to  make
one  miUion  dollars.  His  wife  told  me  that  he  intends  to
put  all  of  this  money  into  the  movement ;  this  was  not  told
me  in  confidence  \

I  enclose  two  prayers  which  Dr  Kheiralla  gave  me  in  the
class,  that  you  might  see  the  exact  form  in  which  they  were
given.     Will  you  kindly  return  the  smaller  one  only,  marked

"4th  Lesson"  at  your  leisure I  am  on  a  summer  tour,

but  I  have  all  the  lecture  notes  with  me  and  can  send  them
just  the  same.     I  hope  the  first  two  reached  you.

Respectfully  yours,

A.  A.  H.


^  Mr  A.  P.  Dodge  came  to  England  in  November,  1900,  when  I
met  him  in  Cambridge.      See  p.  148  infra.


126     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

dfth  Letter  {Aug.  20,  1898).

My  dear  Dr  Browne,

Enclosed  are  five  more  lectures.  In  the  tenth  lesson
Dr  Kheiralla  is  entirely  wrong  about  the  Christian  Scientists.
They  teach  that  man  is  a  reflection  of  perfect  Mind  or
Principle — never  that  he  is  God.  No  Christian  Scientist
ever  says  "  I  am  Brahma "  as  a  Vedantist  of  the  Adwaita
school  does.  I  think  he  has  confused  the  two.  He  has  a
queer  conception  of  some  of  the  ideas  promulgated  here ;
he  thinks  that  those  who  teach  the  mother  principle  of  God
mean  that  He  is  a  woman.  A  few  of  the  dates  in  the
nth  lesson  concerning  the  "  Manifestation"  the  doctor  was
not  sure  about,  as  he  relied  upon  his  memory  only.  The
book  written  by  Beha  is  at  Acre  and  in  the  Sultan's  library.
The  doctor  says  that  his  people  do  not  call  themselves
Babi's  but  others  do.  I  believe  that  I  have  not  mentioned
the  doctor's  healing ;  he  assured  me  that  he  gives  no  medi-
cine, but  to  some  patients  he  gives  a  hubble-bubble  to
inhale  the  fumes  of  certain  herbs  ;  of  course  this  is  medicine.
He  has  another  way  of  healing.  A  person  who  has  rheu-
matism in  her  fingers  told  me  that  she  went  to  him  twice  for
treatment  and  he  sat  very  quietly  and  held  her  fingers  for  a
time.  This  patient  was  not  helped ;  she  was  not  a  believer.
But  a  believer  told  me  he  had  cured  her  of  some  trouble,
and  Mrs  Kheiralla  informed  me  that  he  has  quite  a  practice
in  Chicago.  The  lessons  are  free,  but  the  treatments  are
two  dollars  each.  Healing  is  said  to  be  a  gift,  but  I  have
not  read  anywhere  that  Babis  heal  mentally.  In  lesson  five
it  is  clearly  stated  that  Beha  was  a  Manifestation  of  God,  but
in  lesson  eleven  he  is  God  Himself.  I  was  much  puzzled
and  asked  Dr  Kheiralla  about  it.  He  very  humbly  attempted
to  explain  and  began  by  saying  that  Beha  was  a  Manifesta-


II.      BAHA'i   PROPAGANDA   IN    AMERICA         12/

tion  only,  but  before  he  ended  he  certainly  spoke  of  him  as
being  God.  I  asked  if  Behd'ul-Abhd  is  the  "  Most  Sacred
Name  "  and  was  told  that  it  is  not ;  that  is  one  of  the  names
of  Beha.  I  think  the  name  contains  nine  letters^  as  the
place  where  it  is  omitted  on  the  slip  of  paper  which  I  sent
contains  nine  dots.

A.  A.  H.

t^th  Letter  {Sept.  i8,  1898).

My  dear  Dr  Browne,

The  enclosed  two  lectures  are  the  last  in  the  course  of
thirteen  delivered  by  Dr  Kheiralla  on  the  religion  of  the
Beha'is.  1  have  sent  eleven  others  at  different  times,  which
I  hope  have  reached  you.  Perhaps  you  may  not  care  for
the  notes ;  but  it  occurred  to  me  that  since  you  had  spent
so  much  time  in  investigating  Babism  and  in  helping  others
to  learn  what  it  is,  possibly  you  might  like  to  know  just  what
is  being  taught  in  America  concerning  it,  especially  as
Doctor  Kheiralla  was  sent  by  Beha  himself.  I  have  tried  to
be  accurate  and  to  give  as  full  notes  as  lay  in  my  power,  but
lack  of  interest  prevented  me  from  remembering  more,  which
I  now"  regret,  as  I  fear  it  has  hindered  me  from  presenting
the  teachings  quite  fairly.  However,  I  do  not  think  that  I
have  omitted  anything  which  was  given  as  "proof"  of  the
"  Manifestation."

With  hearty  appreciation  of  your  earnest  study  of
spiritual  ideas  and  of  the  aid  which  you  render  to  others  in
increasing  their  knowledge  of  religious  thought,  I  am,

Sincerely  yours,

A.  A.  H.

1  This  is  correct  as  regards  the  Arabic  form  ^*yJ*^UVyJ.


128      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABf  RELIGION

Miss  A.  A.  H.'s  Abstracts  of  Dr  Khayru'llAh's

Lectures.

isf  Lesson.

Proof  of  soul  and  its  immortality. — Matter  is  inde-
structible.— Silver  dollar  used  as  illustration. — Its  qualities,
as  weight,  density,  smoothness,  hardness,  etc.  spoken  of. —
Back  of  every  quality  is  an  essence. — The  essence  is  un-
known ;  the  qualities  prove  the  essence.  We  can  never
know  an  atom  in  our  present  condition.  .  The  soul  has
nine  qualities ;  namely,  perception,  will,  reason,  judgment,
memory,  consciousness,  mental  taste,  imagination  and  ab-
straction. Back  of  the  qualities  there  must  be  an  essence.
Matter  has  none  of  these  qualities.  If  matter  is  indestruc-
tible, how  much  more  the  soul.  The  consciousness  carries
things  to  the  soul ;  it  is  a  reporter.  Perception  and  intuition
are  only  a  strong  power  of  classification  (an  intuitive  person
knows  just  how  to  place  things).  Man  has  not  the  creative
power,  he  only  combines.  God  is  perfection ;  nothing  can
be  added  to  Him  or  taken  from  Him.  He  cannot  be
divided ;  we  are  not  parts  of  Him.

2nd  Lesson.

What  mind  is. — In  all  languages  mind  means  that  which
protects  us  from  what  is  harmful,  and  is  the  receiver  of  that
which  is  good.  In  Syriac  it  means  a  fort  built  on  a  hill.
Mind  is  a  collective  name  given  to  the  nine  qualities  or
faculties  of  the  soul  when  they  are  in  operation.  The
qualities  act  together,  never  singly.  They  are  always  fighting
for  us ;  they  hurry  us  to  the  table  when  hungry,  they  tell  us
to  protect  ourselves  when  cold,  etc.  There  is  no  mortal
mind,  no  universal  mind.     Each  one  has  a  mind  and  a  soul


II.      BAHA'I    propaganda   in    AMERICA         1 29

or  spirit.  The  mind  is  eternal,  because  the  essence  or  soul
is  eternal,  and  its  qualities  are  eternal.  We  can  receive
nothing  except  through  mind.  Thought  is  the  action  of  the
mind's  nine  qualities.  The  action  is  never  the  actor.  When
we  remember,  it  is  the  action  of  the  mind. — We  are  not
memory;  when  we  judge  we  think,  when  we  reason  we
think.  Contact  with  the  outside  develops  these  qualities ;  a
child  left  alone  would  still  be  a  baby  at  forty  years  of  age.
What  is  called  subjective  and  objective  mind  is  the  same
mind,  only  different  operations  or  conditions  of  that  same
mind.  Mind  has  an  internal,  or  subjective,  and  an  external,
or  objective,  action.  We  have  not  two  minds.  Different
workings  of  a  fort  Hkened  to  the  qualities  of  the  soul.  The
officer  (reason)  commands  the  soldiers  (will),  etc.  God  is
not  Love,  He  is  Loving  ;  God  has  Power,  He  is  not  Power ;
He  is  not  Mind,  and  those  who  say  so  blaspheme.  God  is
limited  to  Himself,  because  He  knows  Himself;  to  us  He
is  limitless.  He  is  manifested  through  everything,  but  He
is  not  the  thing  manifested.

^rd  Lesson.

The  needs  of  the  Soul  and  the  Body. — The  body  needs
food,  drink,  and  protection.  God  has  given  us  kitchens,  to
wit  the  mineral,  vegetable,  and  animal  kingdoms,  where  we
can  supply  the  needs  of  the  body,  and  we  do  not  need  to
pray  for  such  things.  Man  spends  most  of  his  time  in  taking
care  of  the  body.  This  teaching  has  nothing  to  do  with  the
body.  The  teaching  is  for  the  soul  and  is  spiritual;  the
food  for  the  soul  is  not  material.  What  we  eat  does  not
make  us  spiritual,  'i  he  animals  are  for  us  to  eat.  (The
condition  of  India,  which  was  spoken  of  as  a  place  of  plague
and  famine,  kept  in  subjection  by  a  few  red-coats,  was
here  compared  with  America,  and  the  vef^etarians  were
B.  B.  9


1  30     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

unmercifully  criticised.)  The- soul  needs  food,  drink,  and
protection.  The  food  of  the  soul  is  the  knowledge  of  God  ;
the  drink  of  the  soul  is  faith ;  the  protection  of  the  soul  is
love.  We  should  ask  for  knowledge,  faith,  and  love.  The
knowledge  of  God  produces  faith.  We  are  taught  to  believe
only  what  we  know.  We  cannot  love  God  if  we  do  not  know
Him.  (I  have  heard  the  doctor  say  that  we  can  never  know
God)  When  we  know  Him  we  shall  love  each  other,  and
we  shall  also  know  why  knowledge  is  knowing  facts,  while
wisdom  is  knowing  how  to  use  knowledge.

Jesus  was  the  greatest  one  ever  on  this  planet.  (A  great
difference  is  made  between  Jesus  and  Beha ;  God  is  said  to
have  manifested  through  Jesus.)

4th  Lesson.

Prayer  : — Nine  is  a  sacred  number ;  everything  in  nature
is  planned  on  the  number  nine  (this  was  not  explained).
There  are  nine  openings  in  the  body  ;  the  navel  opening
was  locked  and  you  are  going  to  know  why  (this  too  was
never  explained).  The  sacred  number  nine  is  in  this  prayer.
(I  have  marked  the  divisions  in  the  prayer.)  19,  29  and  90
are  also  sacred  numbers,  but  9  is  the  most  sacred  one.  In
our  religion  prayer  is  called  commune.  We  need  to  pray  :
God  does  not  need  our  prayers.  We  do  not  need  to
ask  for  those  things  which  God  has  given  us  the  power  to
get,  things  out  of  the  earth,  etc. — but  we  should  ask  for
what  we  have  not  received  yet — what  is  not  our  right  to
have — and  we  shall  receive  if  we  ask  earnestly.  We  should
pray  for  spiritual  things.  Some  pray  for  material  things;
some  pray  and  use  the  wrong  Name ;  they  will  not  receive ;
some  think  they  are  gods,  and  have  no  need  of  prayers.
We  believe  in  prayer.  We  are  here  to  battle  and  we  need
help.     We  will  not  develop  if  we  do  not  pray.     We  should


II.      BAHA'I    propaganda   in    AMERICA         I3I

not  beg  but  ask  earnestly.  We  are  to  share  God's  majesty
and  glory  through  prayer.  We  communicate  with  God
through  talking  with  Him.  Use  of  the  right  Name  is  the
pass-word.  When  you  become  "  believers  "  the  "  Greatest
Name"  will  be  given  you  to  be  used  in  time  of  need.
Prayers  are  pass-words  and  we  have  used  prayers  of  our  own
making ;  have  used  the  wrong  pass-word  ,  should  not  com-
pose them.  If  we  do  not  use  the  right  pass-word  God  will
hear,  but  He  will  not  answer.  We  prove  our  teachings  in
three  ways :  by  science  and  logic,  by  the  prophets  and
teachers,  and  by  revelations.  We  believe  that  we  have  the
absolute  truth.  If  you  use  these  prayers  earnestly  you  will
have  dreams  or  visions  which  will  come  to  pass.  I  promise
you  that  you  will  have  revelations  if  you  use  them.  All  do
who  use  them ;  but  we  do  not  depend  upon  revelations  for
proof  of  the  truth.  [The  doctor  told  the  students  to  tell
him  their  visions,  and  if  they  came  to  pass  they  would  know
them  to  be  true.]  You  can  have  dreams  and  visions  through
hypnotism.  [Some  Eastern  practices  for  spiritual  develop-
ment were  spoken  of  and  condemned.]  Gazing  at  the  tip  of
the  nose  is  the  most  powerful  form  of  hypnotism.  Don't  con-
centrate :  you  will  go  crazy,  as  professional  chess-players  do.
The  real  dreams  and  visions  will  be  those  that  come  to  pass.
pMany  have  been  sent  by  God,  Noah,  Moses,  and  others;
but  the  teachings  were  all  corrupted.  When  they  become
so,  God  sends  another.  At  last  He  sent  Jesus,  His  Beloved
Son.  Brahmins  and  Buddhists  do  not  know  what  their
true  religion  is.  The  Mohammedan  is  the  most  corrupt
of  all.  A  few  days  (I'm  not  sure  about  the  exact  number
of  days)  after  the  death  of  Mohammed  his  teaching  was
corrupted."]

Truth  IS  to  know  God.     We  must  know  God  if  we  are
to  love  Him,  otherwise  we  love  our  imaginations.

9—2


132      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

^th  Lesson.
Second  prayer  given.  There  are  27  [?  28]  letters  called
the  "Letters  of  Luddon'^,^^  and  every  letter  signifies  a  great
power  which  can  only  be  received  by  special  permission
from  head-quarters  (x^cre).  Luddon  means  presence  of  God,
or  presence  of  the  Almighty.  This  prayer  is  very  important,
as  it  asks  for  growth  "  by  that  letter  "  ;  letter  means  growth,
not  creation.  "The  fruits  appeared";  the  tree  came  first
and  then  the  fruit.  God  created  one  man  and  one  woman  ;
they  obeyed  the  law  of  multiplication  and  wove  a  tent  for
another  soul.  "  The  trees  began  to  thrive,"  God  made  one
tree  and  from  the  seeds  came  others.  "The  traces  were
destroyed " ;  in  all  material  growth  the  last  destroys  the
traces  of  the  first.  "  The  curtains  were  torn  asunder "  ;
here  the  spiritual  part  of  the  prayer  begins.  The  finite
cannot  comprehend  the  infinite ;  this  is  what  is  between
God  and  us.  (Read  from  Isaiah  xlii,  lo^andSt  John  i,  18.)
God  is  forever  unknowable.  He  wished  to  make  Himself
known,  and  as  the  finite  cannot  comprehend  the  infinite
He  made  a  form,  He  chose  a  "  Face^"  that  through  that  He
might  become  known  to  us.  He  is  not  the  form ;  it  only
represents  Him.  He  is  back  of  it,  and  is  not  confined  to
the  form.  "The  faithful  hurried":  when  the  faithful  hear
of  this  "  Face  "  of  God  they  hasten  to  live  with  this  form  of
God  for  ever.  The  "  face  "  is  called  by  diff'erent  names  ;  as,
"The  Chosen,"  "my  Son  David,"  etc.  He  came  here  that
we  might  gain  higher  limitations.  We  receive  the  Letters
of  Luddon  in  our  new  limitations.     Jesus  had  12  powers,  8

^  Probably  \^^^  '^Jj'*"  i^^  the  original  Arabic  phrase.

^  Though  I  have  done  my  best  to  verify  and  correct  these  references
to  the  Bible,  here  and  in  some  other  cases  I  have  failed  to  do  either,  and
so  leave  them  as  they  stand.

^   Wajh  (a^-j),  a  term  which  the  Bab  often  applied  to  himself.


II.      BAHAI    PROPAGANDA   IN   AMERICA         1 33

first,  then  4  (did  not  say  what  they  all  were).  One  power
is  to  communicate  without  material  means ;  another  one  is
sight.  The  teacher  has  no  "power  to  convey  to  another
these  powers  given  by  head-quarters.  We  gain  by  being
active  not  passive,  but  gain  nothing  by  sleep.  (The  spiritual
were  censured  for  "  sitting  development.")  There  is  such
a  thing  as  "  sitting  in  the  silence."

Jesus  came  to  teach  the  Kingdom  of  God.  (Read
Luke  iv,  43.)

The  soul  does  not  leave  the  body  until  death.  We  do
not  travel  in  the  astral  [body]  and  see  places.  People  say
that  they  have  seen  a  thread  connection  \  but  we  know  it
is  not  so.  We  see  things  as  if  the  light  were  reflected  in
one  mirror  and  then  in  another  and  another.  The  soul
thinks  it  is  moving  when  something  is  only  passing  before  it.

6/^  Lesson.
I  This  is  a  very  important  lesson,  as  it  tells  where  we
came  from,  why  we  are  here,  and  where  we  are  going^
Eden  means  the  paradise  of  God.  It  is  not  a  place.  No
tree  of  knowledge  and  evil  can  grow  in  the  soil ;  it  is  not  a
real  tree  (read  Revelation  xxii,  2  as  one  proof).  Rivers
mentioned  in  Genesis  (ii,  10 — 14)  are  not  real  rivers,  for  you
never  see  rivers  branching  into  four  heads.  (We  were  told
in  a  later  lecture  that  the  ''  Manifestation  "  is  the  big  river
and  the  four  branches  are  the  four  sons  of  Beha.)  There
are  three  Adams — the  race,  our  ancestor,  and  we  shall  know
the  other  (Beha)  when  we  get  to  the  "pith."  Adam  spoke
the  Kurdish  language,  which  has  no  alphabet  and  is  a  short

1  This  apparently  refers  to  the  belief  (finely  set  forth  near  the
beginning  of  the  First  Book  of  the  Mystical Mathnatvi)  that  men's  souls
escape  from  their  bodies  during  sleep,  but  are  attached  to  them  by  an
immaterial  thread  which  compels  them  to  re-enter  their  respective  bodies
when  the  nieht  is  over.


134     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

spoken  language  only.  Silence  will  prove  this.  Adam  does
not  mean  "red  earth";  it  means  the  "skin"  or  "surface."
Eve  means  life^  God  gave  Adam  and  Eve  "  coats  of  skin,"
to  wit  the  body.  He  made  but  two  coats  of  skin.  The
meaning  of  "coats  of  skin"  is  His  "image."  Adam  and
Eve  obeyed  the  law  of  multiplication  and  gave  tents  to
other  souls.  They  had  two  children,  Cain  and  Abel.  These
are  not  material  children.  Cain  means  the  material  and
Abel  means  the  spiritual,  and  these  are  always  at  war.
There  are  three  bibles :  the  Hebrew,  the  Egyptian,  and  the
Chaldean.  The  Hebrew  borrowed  from  the  Egyptian,  and
the  Egyptian  from  the  Chaldean.  All  have  [the  same]
account  from  Adam  to  Moses.  We  were  in  Eden,  the
Paradise  of  God.  The  serpent,  Wisdom,  suggested  to  us
that  we  should  go  higher  and  be  as  gods.  We  asked  God
for  this  great  privilege,  and  we  were  allowed  to  come  to
earth  where  this  great  privilege  is  to  be  gained.  The
*'  flaming  sword  "  is  the  earth.  Our  will  is  free  at  all  times ;
we  can  choose.  Angels  are  always  controlled  by  God  ;  they
are  lower  than  man  and  never  gain  the  "great  privilege,"  as
they  have  no  desire  to  go  higher.  We  come  to  earth  to
overcome.  To  overcome  means  to  have  the  desire  for  a
knowledge  of  God  above  all  desires.  We  are  not  here  to
love  each  other  or  to  be  kind  to  one  another ;  of  course  we
should  be  [so] ;  but  that  is  not  what  we  are  here  for.  Those
who  overcome  return  to  Eden.  The  tree  of  knowledge  and
tree  of  life  are  God.  When  we  become  adopted  children
we  eat  of  the  tree  of  life.  Cain,  the  material,  is  cast  out.
Cain's  "mark"  is  God's  image,  the  skin  (?).  (It  is  the
thickest  kind  of  fog  right  here.)    Those  having  the  "  mark  "

^  In  Arabic  Hawwd,  from  the  same  root  as  kayy^  "living,"  and
haydt,  "life."


II.      BAHA'f   PROPAGANDA   IN    AMERICA         1 35

never  become  the  adopted  children  of  God;  they  bring
this  upon  themselves ;  it  is  not  a  punishment.  Cain  went
to  the  Land  of  Nod  [Genesis  iv,  16]  which  means  wandering.
Impossible  to  live  with  God  unless  we  have  the  image.  All
go  to  the  Land  of  Nod  who  do  not  conquer.  (The  Prodigal
Son  was  quoted  as  proof  that  Jesus  taught  these  ideas.)
We  learn  to  know  the  good  from  the  evil.

Shepherd  in  the  Bible  means  spiritual  man.

It  is  a  blessing  not  to  remember  our  past.  A  baby
remembers  at  first,  but  after  three  days  the  memory  is
locked.

7//^  Lesson,

Noah's  Ark. — The  ark  is  a  symbol  of  God,  and  means
protection.  The  Temple  of  Solomon  is  the  same.  The
clean  animals  "by  sevens"  (Genesis  vii,  2)  are  the  believers ;
"by  two"  means  the  believers'  parents,  who  are  protected
because  of  the  believers.  70  persons  went  into  the  ark ;  40
first  and  then  30.  The  translation  is  wrong.  "Raven"
means  calamities,  and  "dove"  peace.  (A  curious  story  was
related  in  which  a  dot  caused  by  a  fly  changed  a  character
which  meant  husband  to  mean  mule\)  Jesus  in  speaking
of  the  rich  did  not  use  the  word  which  means  camel ;  he
used  a  word  which  means  thread.  He  meant  those  who
thought  themselves  rich  in  spiritual  things.  It  is  just  as
easy  for  a  rich  man  to  enter  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven  as  it
is  for  others.  The  entrance  to  a  city  is  not  called  "  Eye  of
a  Needle"  in  the  New  Testament,  and  theologians  know  it,
but  will  not  say  so  for  fear  of  the  people's  faith.

"Water"  in  the  Bible  means  teachings,  and  "Mountains"
the  mighty  ones  of  earth.     [Compare  p.  140,  1.  3  infra^

1  I  do  not  recognize  this  story,  but  a  similar  one  about  a  fly  which
changed  b  (with)  into  b  (or)  is  related  in  Ouseley's  Notices  of  the
Persian  Poets  (London,  1846),  pp.   157 — 8.


136     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

%th  and  ^th  Lessons  {given  as  one  lesson).

The  prayer  and  Bible  references  were  given  to  each
person.  The  references  were  to  be  studied,  and  each  student
was  to  come  to  the  loth  lesson  prepared  to  give  his  idea  of
the  meaning.  The  class  were  then  permitted  to  ask  questions.
These  are  a  few  of  the  statements  in  answer  to  questions.
God  never  chooses  a  female  form  through  which  to  manifest :
He  chooses  the  male  as  it  is  the  stronger.  There  is  no  sex
in  spirit.  "  Curse "  means  to  put  in  a  lower  place.  The
serpent.  Wisdom,  was  compelled  to  go  lower.  When  we  do
wrong  it  bites  our  heel  or  where  we  are  walking.  Moses
and  Elias  did  really  return  to  this  earth  and  appeared  on
the  Mount  of  Transfiguration.  The  accounts  of  Creation
in  Genesis  were  given  by  three  different  persons.  The
prophets  themselves  did  not  know  the  meaning  of  their  own
prophecies ;  the  meaning  was  always  concealed  until  the
prophecy  came  to  pass.  God  made  disease;  it  exists  because
of  the  perfection  of  the  law  ;  it  is  the  result  of  the  law.  We
must  all  die.  It  is  possible  to  communicate  with  others
without  physical  contact.  There  are  42  million  "  tablets  "
(alwdh)  in  the  religion  of  the  Beha'is.

loth  Lesson.

The  class  were  asked  to  give  their  ideas  as  to  the  meaning
of  the  biblical  references  in  the  9th  lesson,  but  scarcely  any
one  answered  satisfactorily.  Some  said  Jesus  was  referred
to,  but  this  was  denied  with  great  energy  by  Dr  Kheiralla,
and  Isaiah  ix,  6  was  given  as  proof.  Jesus  was  not  "  the
Almighty  God,  the  Everlasting  Father,  the  Prince  of
Peace  "  ;  he  was  not  a  ruler.  The  answer  which  seemed  to
give  satisfaction  was  that  a  manifestation  of  God  was  fore-
told.    Revelation  i  was  read  as  evidence  that  Jesus  bore


II.      BAHA'I    propaganda   in    AMERICA         1 37

witness  to  the  Manifestation.  Job  xix,  25  ;  Ezekiel  xliii,  4;
Isaiah  Ixiii,  i,  and  Jude  14  are  proofs  of  the  Manifestation.
In  Isaiah  xxiv,  23  the  "moon"  means  Turkey  and  the  "sun"
means  Persia.  (Headquarters  at  Acre  are  called  Jerusalem,
and  some  place  in  the  mountains  is  Zion.)  Isaiah  xlvii  was
read  and  a  very  strong  body  of  religionists  in  America
called  Christian  Scientists  was  condemned  for  saying,  "I  am
and  none  else  beside  me"  (verse  10).  II  Timothy  iv,  [3 — 4,
but  perhaps  I,  iv  is  meant]  was  read  as  referring  to  those
who  are  now  promulgating  certain  ideas  here.  The  meaning
of  "  clouds "  is  ignorance.  Jesus  taught  the  Kingdom  of
God;  226  years  after  Christ  the  Trinity  was  taught.

wth  Lesson.

The  "Pith". — In  1844  the  Bab  appeared  in  Persia.  He
was  19  years  old.  He  came  as  Elijah.  He  used  sometimes
to  set  a  chair,  covered  with  cashmere,  for  the  one  whose
coming  he  foretold,  but  he  did  not  know  when  or  where  the
"  Manifestation"  would  appear.  He  proclaimed  the  Kingdom
of  God  at  hand.  He  said,  "God  is  among  the  human  race;
the  Father  is  come."  In  1844  the  Millerites  also  appeared.
The  Bab  had  wonderful  spiritual  powers  and  was  remarkable
for  his  power  of  logic.  Like  Abraham  he  was  a  wanderer ;
like  Mahomet  he  was  a  merchant ;  like  Moses  he  had  power
of  argument;  and  he  was  like  Christ  because  he  was  crucified.
He  wrote  a  large  book  called  the  Beydn.  The  Bab  had  a
great  following.  He  was  persecuted  by  the  Mohammedans;
was  arrested  by  the  government ;  foretold  his  own  death.
In  1850  the  Bab  and  his  secretary  were  suspended  by  ropes
from  a  wall ;  soldiers  fired  ;  the  secretary  was  killed,  but  the
bullets  cut  the  ropes  by  which  the  Bab  was  suspended  and
he  escaped.  The  soldiers  refused  to  fire  again,  but  other
soldiers  fired  and  the  Bab  was  killed.     Mahomet  prophesied


138      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

the  Bab's  death.  Mahomet  was  a  true  prophet.  A  tradition
1300  years  ago  says  that  Mahomet  said  ships  (railroads)
would  sail  on  land;  railroads  were  introduced  in  1828.  In
1 85 2-1 853  the  Incarnation  of  God  (Beha)  appeared.  He
left  Tihran  as  an  exile  in  1852.  He  was  of  family  of  Kings ^.
Went  to  Baghdad  to  River  Chebar  with  7000  prophets
(Ezekiel  xliii,  3),  Here  he  manifested  himself  for  5  days  as
the  Lord  of  Hosts,  having  been  previously  shaved  by  a
barber  (Isaiah  vii,  20),  after  which  he  veiled  himself  Jesus
Christ  ('Abbas  Efendi)  as  a  boy  was  with  him.  In  1863  the
Sultan  invited  the  "  Manifestation  "  to  visit  Constantinople.
At  this  time  there  were  30,000  believers.  He  appeared
before  the  Sultan,  who  asked  for  proof  of  his  divinity.
Beha  asked  the  Sultan  if  he  believed  in  Mahomet.  The
Sultan  said  that  he  did,  and  Beha  asked  for  a  sign.  The
Sultan  replied  that  the  Koran  was  a  proof.  Beha  then
wrote  a  book  larger  than  the  Koran  in  6  hours  as  a  sign  of
his  own  divinity.  Beha  was  ordered  to  Adrianople.  At  one
time  a  regiment  was  sent  against  him.  Beha  rebuked  it
and  the  regiment  returned,  without  harming  him  (Psalm
Ixxvi).  Beha  declared  himself  God  to  the  world  in  1866.
He  was  exiled  to  Acre  in  1 868-1 869.  He  prophesied  that
the  ship  in  which  he  sailed  would  go  to  pieces,  and  it  sunk
on  its  return  voyage.  Micah  contains  an  account  of  Acre,
the  New  Jerusalem.  In  1 869-1870  Beha  sent  tablets  to
the  different  rulers  calling  upon  them  to  throw  their  kingdoms
at  his  feet  and  worship  him.  He  sent  Napoleon  III  two
tablets,  and  the  Pope  three.  A  tablet  was  sent  to  General
Grant.  The  only  ones  who  replied  were  Queen  Victoria
and  Alexander  II.  The  Queen  said  if  it  was  of  God  it
would  stand,  and  the  Czar  said  that  he  should  investigate  the

^  This,  of  course,   is  quite  incorrect.     He  was  the  son  of  Mfrza
Buzurg  of  Nur.


II.      BAHA'i   PROPAGANDA   IN    AMERICA         1 39

matter.  Napoleon  tore  the  tablet,  and  said  that  if  Beha
was  God,  he  was  also.  Beha  told  Napoleon  his  secrets  and
prophesied  that  he  would  be  punished.  He  also  prophesied
as  to  the  future  of  the  German  Emperor.  There  was  a  con-
ference of  the  Powers  against  Beha.  The  "  Manifestation  "
left  the  earth  in  1892,  leaving  the  Kingdom  to  Jesus  Christ.
The  25  years  following  the  departure  of  the  *'  Manifestation"^
will  be  years  of  calamities.  I'he  Millennium  is  to  come  in
191 7  ;  this  is  the  Resurrection,  when  one  out  of  every  three
will  become  a  follower  of  Beha.  Napoleon  IV  who  is  in
the  guards  of  the  Czarina  will  defeat  Germany  aided  by  the
"  Dragon,"  the  Pope  and  Russia.  He  will  persecute  the
believers.  France  will  be  an  empire.  There  are  now  fifty-
five  million  believers  in  this  religion.

A  message,  said  to  be  from  Jesus  Christ  and  addressed
to  the  students  in  Chicago  where  there  were  about  thirty,
was  read.

\2th  Lesson.

In  1 85  2- 1 85  3  God  Almighty  appeared.  He  was  born
in  Persia  among  the  Mohammedans ;  declared  himself  God
in  1866,  and  departed  in  1892.  He  wrote  forty  million
"tablets,"  no  two  alike.  Numbers  have  letters;  1892  spells
Jehovah  in  Hebrew.  Prof.  Totten  predicted  the  end  of  the
world  in  1892,  but  this  was  really  the  end  of  a  dispensation.
See  Isaiah  xxiv,  23  and  Revelation  xii,  i ;  where  the  woman
clothed  with  the  Sun  (Persia)  and  the  Moon  (Turkey)
under  her  feet,  is  Mahomet,  while  the  "  twelve  stars "
[indicate  the  period]^  from  Mahomet  to  the  Bab.  Rock
(stone)  means  Mohammedanism,  and  is  a  prophecy  of  Beha,
600  years  after  Christ  came  Mahomet  and  the  Pope.
Catholics  fought  Mohammedans  400  years  (Revelation  xii,

^  i.e.  1892-1917.  "  i.e.  the  number  of  centuries.


I40     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

3,  4).  The  "  Dragon  "  is  the  Pope ;  seven  great  powers  under
the  Pope;  "the  third  part"  (the  Christians)  followed  the
Pope.  In  Revelation  xii,  [15 — ]i6  "water"  means  "teach-
ings." In  Revelation  xii,  6  "  a  thousand  two  hundred  and
three  score  days"  mean  1260  years.  (Compare  Ezekiel  iv,  6,
according  to  which  1260  days=  1260  years).

[The  year]  1260  of  the  Mohammedan  era  =  A.D.  1844.

1 260  =  " a  time,  and  times,  and  half  a  time."  (Revelation
xii,  14.)

Time  =  360  ^

Times  =  360  x  2    I  =  1260.

Half  a  time=  180  j

Daniel  xii,  11.     The  "Abomination"  is  Napoleon  III.

Daniel  viii,  13.  The  "transgression  of  desolation"  means
Napoleon  III.  The  Napoleons  are  the  anti-Christs.  483
years  between  "vision"  and  Christ;  2300  days  between  Christ
and  the  "Manifestation."     (Daniel  ix,  25,  and  viii,  13,  14.)

Daniel  xii,  7.     "The  man  clothed  in  linen"  means  Christ.

Daniel  xii,  4.  "  Many  shall  run  to  and  fro"  means  shall
read  page  after  page.  "  The  book  "  is  sealed  because  it  is
a  prophecy ;  it  will  be  opened  when  it  comes  to  pass.
Calamities  will  purify  the  believers.

Daniel  xii,  12.  The  "  thousand  three  hundred  and  five
and  thirty  days"  mean  a.h.  1335  =a.d.  1916-1917.

A.D.  1892  =  1309  Mohammedan  date.

In  the  Millennium  we  shall  live  as  one  family.

John  was  not  regenerated.

Abraham,  Moses,  Jacob,  and  Daniel  are  all  at  Acre.

13//^  Lesson.

The  household  and  departure  of  the  "Manifestation."
Zechariah  iv  is  a  prophecy  of  the  household  of  the  "  Mani-
festation."    The  candlestick  is  the  "  Manifestation,"  God


II.      BAHA'I   propaganda   in    AMERICA         14I

(verse  14).  He  married  two  wives^ ;  they  are  the  "anointed
ones"  or  "olive  trees."  People  object  to  the  "Manifesta-
tion "  because  of  his  being  married.  A  real  man  ought  to
marry ;  a  monk  is  the  invention  of  priests.  God  came  as  a
man,  had  a  father  and  mother,  fulfilled  His  own  law,  and
married.  In  Isaiah  xlv(9 — )n  we  are  rebuked  for  thinking
God  should  do  as  we  think  best.  The  greatest  reason  why
God  should  marry  is  that  the  race  is  grafted  through  His
having  children.  He  is  the  Tree  of  Life  and  we  are  grafted.
See  Genesis  vi  (i — 4)  concerning  marriage  of  the  sons  of
God.  Also  Isaiah  Ixvi,  9.  The  "seven  lamps"  or  "seven
eyes"  are  the  children  of  Beha,  4  males  and  3  females.  One
wife  had  two  daughters,  the  other  had  one.  One  wife  died.
The  four  sons  are  called  Branches^;  the  three  daughters  are
the  Holy  Leaves^.  Every  woman  belongs  to  one  of  the  Holy
Leaves ;  every  man  belongs  to  one  of  the  Holy  Branches.
The  eldest  son  is  Jesus  Christ.  Mary,  the  mother  is  buried
at  Acre.  The  eldest  daughter  is  equal  in  power  with  the
eldest  son.  We  are  the  trees  in  the  Garden  of  Eden,  the  big
river  is  the  "  Manifestation,"  and  the  "  four  rivers  "  are  the
four  sons.

The  body. — The  heart  represents  the  "  Manifestation  "  ;
the  lungs,  the  two  wives ;  the  24  ribs,  the  24  elders.  (I  could
not  remember  other  parts — something  about  the  tribes  of
Israel  and  leaves  of  lungs  being  like  the  daughters,  etc.)

Zechariah  iii,  8 — 9. — Joshua  took  the  place  of  Satan;  the
"stone"  means  God.  The  tabernacle  of  Moses,  Ark  of
Noah,  Temple  of  Solomon,  Pyramids,  and  tabernacle  of

^  One  named  Nawwab,  the  mother  of  'Abbas  Efendi  and  his  sister
Bahiyya ;  the  other  entitled  Mahd-i- '  Ulyd,  the  mother  of  Muhammad  'AH,
Ziya'u'llah,  and  Badl'u'llah,     See  pp.  62 — 3  supra  and  Section  ix  infra.

2  Ghusn^  plural  Aghsdn.

^    Waraqdt.


142      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

Buddha  were  built  on  the  plan  of  the  "Manifestation's"
household.  Zechariah  xii,  ib  et  seqq.  is  a  prophecy  of  the
death  of  Beha.     Also  Zechariah  xiii,  i — 7.

David  is  sometimes  used  to  mean  the  "  Manifestation."
He  is  sometimes  called  "My  servant."  Ezekiel  xxxiv,  23 — 24.
All  prophecy  is  about  the  "  Manifestation,"  and  hence-
forth there  will  be  no  more  prophecy.    At  the  time  of  Beha's
death  there  were  40  million  believers.

■  Dr  E.  G.  Browne  of  Cambridge  was  appointed  by  the
Royal  Asiatic  Society  to  investigate  Babism\

The  account  of  the  visit  to  Acre  in  The  Traveller's
Narrative  was  read,  and  also  the  announcement  of  Beha's
death  sent  to  Dr  Browne  by  the  youngest  Branch^.  The
members  of  the  class  were  told  what  a  great  privilege  it  is
to  have  one's  name  written  in  the  '*  Book  of  the  Believers,"
and  it  was  suggested  that  they  should  write  to  the  Greatest
Branch'"*  to  beg  this  privilege.  The  form  of  the  letter  was
read  and  some  of  the  members  made  copies  of  the  form.
Those  who  write  the  letter  and  are  "  accepted  "  join  the  class
of  believers,  and  the  mysteries  contained  in  the  book  of
Revelation  are  revealed  to  them*.

These  notes  of  Khayru'llah's  propagandist  lectures  in
America,  though  fragmentary,  are  instructive  as  to  the
methods  he  adopted  and  the  modifications  he  introduced
into   Baha'i   doctrine    to  adapt  it   to  American  taste  and

^  This,  of  course,  is  a  pure  fiction,  though  my  first  papers  on  the
subject  were  published  in  1889  in  iho.  Journal  of  that  society.

2  i.e.  Mirza  Badi'u'llah,  entitled  Ghusn-i- Anwar,  "  the  Most
Luminous  Branch."  The  text  and  translation  of  this  communication
will  be  found  in  the  /.R.A.S.  for  1892,  pp.  706 — 9.  It  was  written
on  June  25,  1892.

3  i.e.  'Abbas  Efendi  'Abdu'1-Baha,  entitled  Ghusn-i-A^zam,
*  Here  ends  Miss  A.  A.  H.'s  communication.


II.      BAHAI   PROPAGANDA    IN   AMERICA         143

comprehension.  Particularly  noticeable  is  the  extensive
application  of  Bible  prophecies,  especially  the  very  ingenious
interpretations  of  the  obscure  sayings  and  numbers  in  the
Book  of  Daniel  and  in  the  Apocalypse  of  St  John.  The  full
elaboration  of  Khayru'llah's  teaching  is  contained  in  his
books  Bdb-ed  Din,  the  Door  of  T7'ue  Religion  (Chicago,
1897),  and  Behd^uUldh  {the  Glory  of  God),  2  vols.  (Chicago,
Jan.  I,  1900').  His  statement  that  "at  the  time  of  Beha's
death  there  were  forty  million  believers  "  is,  of  course,  an
absurd  exaggeration  ;  still  more  so  his  assertion  that  "  at  the
present  time  {i.e.  1897  or  1898)  there  are  fifty-five  million
believers."  In  his  pamphlet  The  Three  Questions  (undated)
Khayru'llah  says  (p.  22),  however,  that  though  this  number
was  given  to  him  by  his  teacher  'Abdu'l-Karim  of  Tihran,
resident  in  Cairo,  and  was  confirmed  by  'Abbas  Efendi's
secretary,  Sayyid  Muhammad  Taqi  Minshadi,  "the  number
of  Behaists  is  not  known,  but  cannot  be  more  than  three
millions."

The  interesting  account  of  the  Babis  entitled  TaWikhuH-
Bdbiyya,  mv  Miftdhu  Bdbi^l-Abwdb  ("  History  of  the  Babis,
or  the  Key  to  the  Gate  of  the  Gates"),  composed  in  Arabic
by  Dr  Mirza  Muhammad  Mahdi  Khan  ZaHmu^d-Dawla
(editor  of  the  Persian  paper  Hikmat),  and  published  at
Cairo  by  the  Press  of  A  I- Mandr  in  132 1  (1903-4),  concludes
(pp.  437 — 9)  with  a  rather  malicious  version  of  the  propa-
ganda in  America,  of  which  the  translation  is  as  follows  :

"  A  little  while  after  the  death  of  Baha  there  was  in
Egypt  a  Syrian  Christian  named  Ibrahim  Khayru'llah  who
had  been  a  friend  of  ours  for  twenty  five  years.  He  was
employed  in  translating  and  in  business,  and  subsequently
took  to  farming,  but  ill-luck  accompanied  him  in  all  his

^  As  already  mentioned,  this  book  has  been  republished  in  smaller
form  in  one  volume  this  year  (191 7).


144      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  bAbI  RELIGION

adventures.  Latterly  he  became  acquainted  with  Hajji
'Abdu'l-Karim  of  Tihran,  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  Baha'i-
Babis  in  Egypt,  and  inclined  to  their  belief.  These  two
consulted  frequently  as  to  how  they  could  best  render
service  to  their  doctrine,  and  finally  agreed  that  Ibrahim
[Khayru'llah]  should  go  to  New  York  and  invite  the  people
there  to  embrace  the  Babi  religion,  on  the  understanding
that  Hajji  'Abdu'l-Karim  should  defray  the  expenses  of  the
journey.  So  Hajji  'Abdu'l-Karim,  having  sought  permission
from  'Abbas  Efendi,  bestowed  on  him  the  money  and  pro-
vided him  -with  the  new  teachings.  So  the  man  departed
thither,  and  devoted  himself  to  organizing  the  propaganda ;
for  he  was  eloquent  in  speech  and  resolute  of  heart.  And
there  inclined  to  him  a  certain  rich  old  American  lady,  whom
he  inspired  with  the  desire  of  visiting  the  tomb  of  Baha  and
meeting  'Abbas  Efendi  at  'Akka.  There  her  faith  was  con-
firmed and  she  gave  a  donation  of  ;£.5oo  to  improve  the
tomb  of  Baha^  On  her  return  journey  she  visited  Egypt,
where  she  remained  for  some  while,  and  where  we  made  her
acquaintance.  Thence  she  journeyed  to  her  country,  and
laboured  with  Ibrahim  Khayru'llah  to  spread  the  teachings
of  Baha  amongst  the  Americans,  of  whom  a  few  inclmed  to
her,  for  seldom  does  anyone  advance  any  claim  [there]
without  evoking  an  immediate  response.  And  Ibrahim
Khayru'llah  reckoned  this  acceptance  on  their  part  a  piece
of  good  luck  to  himself,  and  set  to  work  to  seek  subsistence
from  them  and  to  get  money  from  them^  by  every  imaginable
title  and  pretext,  while  they  were  like  wax  in  his  hands  ^.
And  when  he  had  collected  and  stored  up  about  ^£^.3000

1  This  would  seem  to  have  been  in  the  latter  half  of  1898.

2  I  know  of  no  foundation  for  this  ill-natured  assertion.     Cf.  p.  ii8
supra,  11.  7 — 3  from  the  bottom,

3  Lit.  "  Like  the  corpse  between  the  hands  of  the  washer."


II.      BAHA'i    propaganda   in    AMERICA         I45

tidings  of  this  new  and  profitable  traffic  reached  Hajji
'Abdu'l-Karim's  ears,  and  he  demanded  his  share  from
Khayru'llah,  who,  however,  refused  to  divide  the  spoil.  Then
Hajji  'Abdu'l-Karim  succeeded  in  obtaining  from  'Abbas
Efendi  an  order  that  he  should  go  to  America  and  dispute
the  accounts  with  Khayru'llah.  But  when  he  reached  New
York,  Ibrahim  Khayru'llah,  hearing  of  the  dispute  between
'Abbas  Efendi  and  his  brother  [Muhammad  'Ali],  seized  this
fine  opportunity  to  appropriate  the  money,  declaring  himself
an  adherent  of  Mirza  Muhammad  'Ali  and  denouncing
'Abbas  Efendi,  whom  he  accused  of  apostasy  from  the  new
religion  So  he  set  to  work  to  invite  the  people  to  accept
Mirza  Muhammad  'Ali,  and  dissensions  arose  amongst  the
Babis,  and  there  were  sent  from  Mirza  Muhammad  'Ali  to
Ibrahini  Khayru'llah  letters  wherein  he  exposed  the  mis-
deeds of  'Abbas  Efendi.  Thus  was  the  community  divided
into  two  parties,  whereby  the  star  of  Hajji  'Abdu'I-Karim's
good  fortune  shone  forth,  since  a  number  of  the  rich
American  Babis  went  over  to  him,  from  whom  he  received
several  thousand  pounds  wherewith  to  strengthen  'Abbas
Efendi's  position.  Having  obtained  this  he  returned  to
Cairo',  where,  having  settled  down  comfortably,  he  suddenly
manifested  a  distaste  to  the  Babi  religion,  denounced  as
misbelievers  the  Bab,  Baha  and  'Abbas  Efendi,  and  reverted
to  Islam.  Then  he  and  his  son  Muhammad  Hasan  began
to  enumerate  the  vices  of  the  Babis  and  to  declare  their  evil
deeds,  for  he  had  been  one  of  the  leading  Babis,  and  was
well  acquainted  with  all  which  they  revealed  or  concealed.
So  turmoil  arose  amongst  the  Babis,  and  they  were  prodigal

^  The  New  York  Herald  oi.  Sunday,  August  12,  1900,  in  the  course
of  a  long  article  on  the  Baha'i  propaganda  in  America  and  its  success,
states  that  'Abdu'I-Karfm  had  sailed  for  Europe  a  week  previously,  i.e.
about  August  5,  1900.

B.  B.  10


146      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGiaN

of  all  things,  cheap  or  dear,  if  the  man  would  but  desist
from  reciting  their  vices,  or  at  least  be  silent  about  them ;
but  he  only  increased  in  violence.  So,  when  they  despaired
of  him,  they  gave  out  that  he  was  mad.  But  he,  together
with  his  son,  who  is  still  living  in  Egypt,  remained  in  the
faith  of  Islam  for  a  while,  until  he  died  lately,  being  about  a
hundred  years  old.  And  the  apostasy  of  Ibrahim  Khay-
ru'llah  from  'x\bbas  Efendi,  together  with  the  return  to  Islam
of  Hajji  'Abdu'l-Karim,  was  a  heavy  blow  to  the  Baha'is.

"  For  some  time  'Abbas  Efendi  bore  with  these  alarming
circumstances,  until  latterly  he  set  himself  to  stir  up  the
fanaticism  of  a  man  named  Hajji  Mirza  Hasan  of  Khurasan,
one  of  the  leading  Babis  in  Egypt,  and  commissioned  him
to  proceed  to  America  to  repair  this  rupture.  The  latter
obediently  accepted  this  commission,  took  with  him  as  inter-
preter Husayn  Riihi  the  son  of  Hajji  Mulla  'Ali  of  Tabriz,
and  went  to  America,  where  he  remained  some  time\  At
first  he  tried  to  bring  back  Ibrahim  Khayru'llah  to  Abbas
Efendi,  but,  not  succeeding  in  his  efforts,  he  busied  himself
for  a  while  in  declaring  and  proving  to  his  friends  the  sanc-
tity of  'Abbas  Efendi.  But  he  failed  to  achieve  his  object,
and  returned  to  Egypt,"  where  he  was  stricken  with  imbeci-
lity, and  is  at  present  under  treatment  in  Egypt.  Then
'Abbas  Efendi  sent  Mirza  Asadu'llah,  'Ali-quli  Khan,  and
Mirza  Abu'1-Fazl  [of  Gulpayagan]",  author  of  the  two  books
entitled  ad-DuraruU-Bahiyya  ("the  Pearls  of  great  price ")^

^  He  was  there,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  at  the  end  of  1900.

2  This  seems  to  have  been  early  in  1902,  for  the  North  American  of
Sunday,  Feb.  16,  1902,  contains  a  leader  on  the  "astonishing  spread
of  Babism,"  with  pictures  of  'Abbas  Efendi,  Mfrzd  Abu'1-Fazl,  and
Hajji  Niy^z  of  Kirman,  with  whom  I  was  acquainted  in  Cairo  in  the
early  part  of  1903.  This  article  speaks  of  "hundreds  converted  to
'Abbas  Efendi  in  Baltimore."

^  Published  at  Cairo  in  1318/1900:  pp.  279.


II.      BAHAI   PROPAGANDA   IN    AMERICA         I47

and  al-Fard'td  ("  Rarities  ")^  to  Chicago  to  spread  the
Babi  propaganda.  There  they  founded  a  garden  which  they
called  by  a  name  ["  Green  Acre  "]  equivalent  in  meaning  to
^Akkd  al-Khadrd^.  There  they  assemble  at  stated  times  to
chant  the  "  Tablets "  {Alwdh)  of  Baha  and  to  mutter  his
sayings.  No  credence  is  to  be  attached  to  their  pretence
that  they  have  converted  several  hundreds  or  thousands  of
the  Americans,  the  truth  being  that  which  we  have  already
mentioned  in  this  book  of  ours  after  profound  investigations
and  protracted  enquiries.

"  'Abbas  Efendi  desired  to  enhance  his  glory  by  means
of  the  Americans  and  to  fortify  his  religion  by  the  protection
of  their  Government,  and  he  began  to  construct  a  temple  sur-
rounded by  fortifications  at  Hayfa,  which,  as  he  announced,
was  for  the  Americans,  and  which  he  placed  over  the  tomb
which  he  had  constructed  for  the  Bab,  and  in  which  they
suppose  his  bones  to  be,  as  has  been  already  mentioned  in
its  proper  place.  But  his  brother,  Mirza  Muhammad  'Ali,
proceeded  to  inform  His  Majesty  the  Sultan  of  this,  and  an
Imperial  Rescript  was  issued  ordering  that  the  building
should  not  be  completed,  and  that  the  leaders  of  the  Babis
exiled  to  'Akka  should  be  restrained^  so  that  they  should  not
quit  its  fortifications,  whereas  they  had  previously  been  wont
to  wander  about  in  Syria  as  they  pleased."

1  Published  at  Cairo  in  1315/1898:  pp.  25  +  731.

^  Green  Acre  (Eliot,  York  County,  Maine)  seems  to  have  been
founded  by  Miss  Sarah  Jane  Farmer  (who  wrote  me  a  long  letter  about
it  on  May  14,  1901)  in  consequence  of  a  dream  which  she  dreamed  in
June,  1892.

^  This  restraint  of  the  freedom  of  the  Baha'is  at  'Akka  took  place
early  in  1903,  while  I  was  in  Egypt.  They  regained  complete  liberty
after  the  Turkish  Revolution  in  July,  1908.  Miss  E.  Rosenberg,
however,  states  at  p.  11  of  her  Brief  Account  of  the  BahdH  Movement,
published  in  191 1,  that  'Abbas  Efendi's  custody  was  made  much  more
stringent  in  April,  1901.

10 — 2


148      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

As  regards  the  total  number  of  Babis  and  Baha'is,
different  writers  take  the  most  widely  divergent  views,
according  to  their  predispositions.  Lord  Curzon,  writing  in
1892  and  speaking  only  of  Persia,  says  {Persia,  vol.  i,  p.  499)  :
"  The  lowest  estimate  places  the  present  number  of  Babis
in  Persia  at  half  a  million.  I  am  disposed  to  think,  from
conversations  with  persons  well  qualified  to  judge,  that  the
total  is  nearer  one  million...!  hear  that  during  the  past  year
they  are  reported  to  have  made  150  Jewish  converts  in
Tihran,  100  in  Hamadan,  50  in  Kashan,  and  75  per  cent,  of
the  Jews  in  Gulpayagin."  On  the  other  hand  Dr  Mirza
Muhammad  Mahdf  Khan,  whom  we  have  just  been  quoting,
puts  the  total  number  of  Babis  of  all  sects  at  the  absurdly
low  figure  of  7200,  viz.  (i)  Kullu-ShayHs,  or  Old  Babis,  who
do  not  concern  themselves  with  any  developments  subse-
quent to  the  martyrdom  of  the  Bab  in  1850,  200  souls  in
Persia'.  (2)  Azalis  2000  or  a  little  over.  (3)  Bahais  of
both  factions  {i.e.  followers  of  'Abbas  Efendi,  called  by  their
opponents  Mdriqin,  "Rebels"  ot  "Apostates,"  and  fol-
lowers of  Muhammad  'Ali,  called  by  their  opponents  Ndqizin,
or  "Covenant-breakers"),  3000  in  Persia  and  2000  else-
where. As  regards  the  American  Baha'is  (Mr  August  J.
Stenstrand  is  the  only  American  Azali  I  ever  heard  of),  one
of  them,  Mr  A.  P.  Dodge,  who  paid  me  a  visit  at  Cambridge
on  November  6,  1900,  told  me  that  Ibrahim  Khayru'llah,
after  three  years'  propaganda  in  Chicago,  had  made  some
hundred  converts  by  1896,  but  that  latterly  their  numbers
had  greatly  increased,  and  that  at  the  time  he  spoke  (1900)
there  were  at  least  3000,  to  wit,  in  Chicago  about  1000 ;  in
New  York  about  300 ;  in  Kenosha  (Wisconsin)  300  or
400;  in  Cincinnati  50  to  100;  and  a  few  more  in  Boston,

^  According  to  the  statement  of  Sayyid  Muhsin  of  Dahaj,  which
will  be  quoted  later,  their  number  was  very  much  smaller.


II.      BAHA'I   propaganda   in   AMERICA         I49

Philadelphia,  Baltimore,  Washington,  San  Francisco  (20  or
30)  Detroit  (Michigan),  Newark  (New  Jersey)  and  Hoboken
(New  Jersey).  Mr  Stoyan  Krstoff  Vatralsky  of  Boston,
Mass.,  in  a  remarkable  attack  on  the  Baha'i  religion  pub-
lished in  the  Amej-ican  Journal  of  Theology  for  January,
1902  (pp.  57 — 78),  and  entitled  *'  Mohammedan  Gnosticism
in  America  :  the  Origin,  Character,  and  Esoteric  Doctrines
of  the  Truth-Knowers,"  writes  as  follows  (p.  58) :

"Ibrahim  Khayru'llah,  the  propagandist  of  the  sect,
claims  to  have  converted  two  thousand  Americans  in  the
space  of  two  years.  How  far  this  boast  is  true  I  am  unable
in  every  particular  to  verify ;  but  there  is  no  room  to  doubt
that  the  man  has  had  incredible  success.  I  have  personally
seen  large,  well -organized  congregations  of  his  converts
both  in  Kenosha,  Wis.,  and  in  Chicago.  I  have  also  reasons
to  believe  their  claims  that  similarly  growing  assemblies  are
holding  their  secret  meetings  in  every  large  city  of  the
United  States.  This  is  the  more  remarkable  when  we  recall
the  fact  that  never  before  in  the  history  of  the  world  has  a
Mohammedan  sect  taken  root  among  a  Christian  people
without  the  aid  of  the  sword.  I  believe  it  would  not  have
happened  to-day  had  it  come  bearing  its  own  proper  name,
flying  its  own  native  colours.  It  has  succeeded  because,  like
a  counterfeit  coin,  it  has  passed  for  what  it  is  not.  Most  of
the  converts  hardly  realize  what  they  have  embraced,  and
whither  they  are  drifting  I  consider  it  a  duty,  therefore,  to
tell  the  American  people  what  I  know  of  this  secret  and
mysterious  sect,  and  what  are  its  origin,  -character,  and
purposes."

Again  he  says  (p.  69) :

"  It  was  from  there  ['Akka  or  Acre  in  Syria]  that  a
missionary  of  the  sect  was  sent  to  propagate  the  faith  in
this  country,  which  seems  to  have  proven  a  fruitful  field.


I


150     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

According  to  Mulla  Ibrahim  G.  Khayru'llah,  the  Babi-Baha'i
missionary  to  America,  he  converted  no  less  than  2000
Americans  during  his  first  two  years  of  labour.  Of  these
about  700  were  living  in  Chicago;  between  250  and  300  in
Kenosha,  Racine,  and  Milwaukee  ;  about  400  in  New  York  ;
and,  the  rest  in  Boston  and  other  large  cities.  Irately  it  has
been  reported,  I  know  not  how  truly,  that  there  are  now
about  10,000  Babis  in  the  United  States \  But  as  they  are
a  secret  cult,  no  oufsider  can  know  their  exact  number.
The  means  for  the  propaganda  are  furnished,  it  is  said,  by  a
wealthy  New  York  woman,  a  convert."

Amongst  the  literary  curiosities  which  I  possess  are  three
American  newspapers,  containing  accounts  of  the  Baha'i
propaganda  in  the  United  States,  which  were  sent  to  me  by
Dr  Ignaz  Goldziher  of  Buda-Pest.

The  first  is  a  copy  of  the  New  York  Herald  for  Sunday,
August  12,  1900.  The  front  page  is  adorned  with  a  picture
of  the  "  City  of  Acre,"  an  old  and  atrociously  bad  portrait
of  'Abbas  Efendi  'Abdu'l-Baha  ;  2i  facsimile  of  an  autograph
letter  of  the  Bab's  ;  diX\o\\i^x  facsimile  of  part  of  the  instruc-
tions written  on  the  back  of  Baha'u'llah's  Epistle  to  Nasiru'd-
Din  Shah ;  and  some  fantastic  friezes  of  ancient  Persian
soldiers.  The  head-lines  are  as  follows  :  "  These  believe
that  Christ  has  returned  to  Earth." — "Strange  Faith  Has
Attracted  Many  Followers,  a  large  Number  of  Whom  are  in
New  York  City." — "  A  New  Gospel  according  to  'Abbas  of
Acre."  The  accompanying  letter-press  deals  chiefly  with  the
history  and  doctrines  of  the  Babis,  and  begins  as  follows  :

"  Is  Christ  living  in  the  world  to-day  ?  There  are  tens
of  thousands  of  persons  who  believe  that  He  is ;  that  the
Kingdom  of  Heaven  has  been  established  upon  earth,  and

^  The  Advance,  Chicago,  August  30,  1900.


• '-     THE     NORTH__AMERICAiN

I.Si^l      •,  1    ,,  I  "It  -      ^^     ■  ItUKllVi       Hi       l<>H.'         <>»li,.i       '        .

THE  ASTONISHING  SPREAD  OF  BABISN


To  face  p.  151.


II.      BAHA'I   propaganda   in    AMERICA         151

that  the  prophecies  of  the  Book  of  Revelation  and  the  Koran
are  already  in  process  of  fulfilment.  There  are  hundreds
who  claim  to  have  looked  upon  the  face  and  to  have  listened
to  the  voice  of  the  Divinity,  and  there  are  other  hundreds
who  can  exhibit  personal  letters  said  to  have  been  tran-
scribed by  His  own  hand."

The  article  mentions  that  'Abdu'l-Karim  of  Tihran  had
sailed  for  the  East  from  New  York  a  week  previously  "after
a  visit  to  the  Faithful  in  America,"  whose  numbers  are  esti-
mated at  about  two  thousand,  of  whom  those  of  New  York
are  about  a  hundred,  with  their  head-quarters  at  Carnegie
Hall.  "Chicago,"  the  article  concludes,  "where  the  Rev.
Ibrahim  Khayru'llah  has  been  spreading  the  new  faith,  is
another  place  where  they  have  a  number  of  members,
and  there  is  a  considerable  colony  of  Babis  at  Wankegan,
Wis."

The  second  is  a  copy  of  The  North  American  (Phil-
adelphia) of  Sunday,  February  16,  1902.  The  front  page  is
headed  "  The  Astonishing  Spread  of  Babism,"  and  contains
fairly  good  portraits  of  'Abbas  Efendi  as  a  young  man  (head
and  shoulders  only),  and  full-length  tinted  portraits  of  Mi'rza
Abu'1-Fazl  of  Gulpayagan  and  Hajji  Niyaz  of  Kirman  ;  also
a  picture  of  'Akka  from  the  sea,  and  a  vignette  of  Colonel
Nat  Ward  Fitzgerald,  of  Washington,  who  is  described  as
"  at  present,  perhaps,  the  leading  native  male  expounder  of
the  new  faith  in  this  country."  The  accompanying  letter-
press is  headed  "  Hundreds  converted  to  'Abbas  Efendi  in
Baltimore,"  and  "They  hold  that  the  Redeemer  prophesied
is  now  alive,"  and  begins  with  the  statement  of  Mirza  Abu'l-
Fazl  of  Gulpayagan :  "  If  we  make  the  same  percentage  of
converts  throughout  the  country  as  we  have  made  in  Balti-
more and  Washington,  within  a  year's  time  the  Babi  faith
will  have   two   million   adherents   in   the   United  States,"


152      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

"Thus  far,"  it  observes  further  on,  "but  30,000  followers
of  'Abbas  Efendi  are  claimed  in  America.  But  then  no
organized  effort  has  been  made  until  now  to  extend  the
faith."  Mention  is  also  made  of  "Mrs  Loua  M.  Getsinger,
of  Washington,  who  has  devoted  much  time  to  the  study  of
comprehensive  [?  comparative]  religions.  For  one  year  she
took  up  her  residence  in  the  Acre  domicile  of  the  man  who
claims  to  be  the  second  Christ,  and  daily  had  communion
with  him.  When  she  left  him,  'Abbas  Efendi  gave  to  her
the  name  '  Maid  Servant  of  the  Lord.'  "

The  third  is  a  copy  of  the  New  York  Times  of  Sunday,
December  18,  1904,  of  which  p.  5,  headed  "Babist  Propa-
ganda making  headway  here,"  contains  an  interesting  account
of  "  A  Sunday  morning  gathering  of  New  York  believers  in
this  New  Oriental  Cult. — Impressive  Spirit  of  Earnestness
in  Evidence. — History  of  the  Religion  and  its  present  High
Priest."  The  illustrations  include  a  portrait  of  'Abbas
Efendi,  "  the  Master  at  Acre :  last  photograph  taken  30
years  ago";  a  picture  of  the  "Tomb  of  the  'Bab,'  near
Acre";  and  sketches  of  the  meeting  described  and  types  of
its  American  supporters.  Thus  we  have  "Mr  Hoar  opening
with  a  prayer  "  :  "  Reading  a  Tablet  from  the  Master  "  :  "A
Broadway  Merchant "  :  "A  family  Group  "  :  and  an  elderly
lady  in  spectacles  labelled  "  Curiosity  attracted  her."  The
article  accompanying  these  illustrations  contains  a  full  account
of  a  Baha'i  meeting  at  226,  West  Fifty-eighth  Street,  at  "a
demure  brown-stone  building... which  is  down  on  the  city
map  as  Genealogical  Hall."  The  New  Religion  is  described
as  having  "within  forty  years  illumined  for  9,000,000  human
beings  the  path  which  leads  to  Acre  and  to  Him  Who  Lives
There."  The  congregation,  consisting  of  nearly  two  hundred
men  and  women,  is  thus  described.  "  Oriental  silken  gar-
ments swished  sibilantly  as  a  group  of  handsomely  gowned


^


II.      BAHA'I    propaganda   in    AMERICA         1 53

women  entered  the  Tabernacle.  Men  of  iron  gray  hair  and
steel  gray  eyes— thinkers  and  doers  rather  than  dreamers
— accompanied  them  with  such  other  variations  as  merit
another  paragraph.  Somewhat  as  follows  was  the  tout
ensemble."  After  a  florid  description  of  the  room  in  which
the  meeting  was  held,  the  congregation  is  described  as
follows.  "  Who  were  the  audience  ?  Among  them  were  a
score  of  men  who  have  business  in  the  Wall  Street  district
and  on  both  Broadway  and  Fifth  Avenue.  They  were  solid
men  of  affairs  whose  names  figure  frequently  in  the  public
prints,  and  whose  fortunes  run  into  many  figures.  As  pillars
of  the  Babist  cause  in  this  city  they  have  plenty  of  financial
sinew  to  support  the  movement  and  Him  Who  Lives  at
Acre."

The  chair  having  been  taken  by  Mr  William  H.  Hoar,
of  Fanwood,  New  Jersey,  a  hymn  was  sung,  followed  by  an
interval  of  silent  meditation,  which  was  brought  to  an  end
by  an  address  from  Miss  Isabella  Brittingham,  recently
returned  from  'Akka,  of  which  a  pretty  full  report  is  given.
At  its  conclusion  the  whole  audience  simultaneously  ejacu-
lated '-''AUdhu  Abhd,^^  "■  another  hymn  was  intoned,  and  then
everybody  began  talking."  In  conclusion  the  information
is  vouchsafed  that  a  few  days  previously  nine  American
pilgrims,  including  Mr  Howard  MacNutt,  and  shepherded
by  Mirza  Abu'1-Fazl  of  Gulpayagan,  had  "started  for  Acre
to  acquaint  the  One  Who  Lives  There  with  the  amazing
progress  the  cause  is  making  in  America.  Up  at  226  West
Fifty-eighth  Street  it  was  vouchsafed  that  the  soul  of  the
late  Colonel  IngersoU  went  to  Acre."

I  have  not  been  able  to  fix  exactly  the  date  when  Ibrahim
Khayru'llah  definitively  broke  with  'A  bbas  Efendi  and  adhered
to  the  faction  of  Muhammad  'Ali,  but  it  was  probably  soon
after  his  return  from  'Akka,  for  which  he  set  out  from  America


154      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

in  June  1898,  and  certainly  before  November,  1900,  when
he  was  reproached  and  threatened  for  his  apostasy  by  Hajji
Mirza  Hasan  of  Khurasan,  as  described  in  the  following
remarkable  statement,  which  is  initialled  by  Ibrahim  Khayru
'llah,  and  was  forwarded  to  me  by  him,  together  with  other
documents,  in  a  letter  written  from  Chicago  on  February  26,
1901.

"  Statement  of  the  words  of  Mirzd  Hasan  Khurdsdni
to  me  on  November  ^pth,  1900.

*' '  I  came  here  especially  to  bring  you  back  to  your
allegiance  to  'Abbas  Efendi,  and  am  prepared  to  stay  ten
years  if  necessary.  If  you  return  to  'Abbas  Efendi,  I  will
cause  the  American  believers  to  follow  you  as  head  in  every-
thing even  better  than  heretofore.  If  you  will  not  listen  to
me  and  become  a  follower  of  'Abbas,  your  abode  will  be  in
the  bowels  of  the  earth.  I  come  here  because  of  pity  for
you,  and  to  save  you.  If  you  will  not  listen,  your  life  will
be  short.  If  'Abbas  Efendi  should  give  me  the  word  to  cut
you  to  pieces,  or  to  tear  your  eyes  out,  or  to  kill  you,  I  will
do  so  at  once.  I  fear  not  the  consequences  to  myself  You
know  that  I  am  from  Khurasan,  and  that  the  sword  of
Khurasan  is  so  powerful  that  if  a  blow  is  struck  with  it,  it
will  cut  from  above  the  stars  to  the  depth  of  the  earth,  and
will  cut  even  the  fishes  of  the  sea.'

"He  then  repeated  to  me  the  fate  of  Mirza  Yahya  of
Jedda,  and  offered  me  a  copy  of  the  pamphlet  published  by
himself  entitled  '  the  Great  Miracle  of  'Abbas  Efendi.'  The
above  is  the  substance  of  what  he  said  to  me  on  Friday,
November  30,  1900.

"On  Saturday,  December  ist,  1900,  Mirza  Hasan-i-
Khurasani  again  called  in  the  company  of  Mirza  Asadu'lUh,
and  their  interpreter  Mirza  Husayn  [Riihi].    We  all  discussed


II.      BAHA'i    propaganda   in    AMERICA         1 55

the  difference  of  faith  for  about  eight  hours  in  the  presence
of  my  son-in-law  Amir  Hani  Shihab  and  his  wife  Mrs  Shihab
(my  daughter),  also  my  daughter  Labiba,  and  my  son  George
Khayru'llah  M.D.  During  this  discussion  Mirza  Hasan-i-
Khurasani  mentioned  to  those  present  that  the  day  before,
while  talking  to  me  alone,  he  had  plainly  told  me  the  con-
sequences of  not  acceding  to  their  wishes.  Upon  this  I
repeated  to  all  present  the  threatening  words  he  had  uttered
the  day  before,  and  he  acknowledged  before  all  that  he  had
said  the  words  above  reported  by  me.

"  I.  J.  K."

Enclosed  with  this  were  translations  of  two  letters  and
the  original  Arabic  of  a  third  written  from  'Akka  by  one
Mahmiid,  a  partisan  of  Muhammad  'AH,  to  Ibrahim
Khayru'llah.  The  first  two  both  seem  to  have  been  written
at  'Akka  on  October  20,  1900,  and  received  a  month  later
by  Khayru'llah  at  Chicago.     The  shorter  one  is  as  follows  :

"  Lately,  in  this  present  week,  three  American  ladies  and
a  gentleman  arrived  by  the  regular  steamer  via  Beyrout,  and
are  stopping  at  the  Kraft,  a  German  hotel  at  Haifa.  Up
to  the  present  time  they  have  not  spoken  to  any  of  the
Unitarians \  because  they  are  prevented  in  the  ways  you
know."

The  longer  letter,  of  which  I  have  somewhat  emended
the  style  (which  is  clumsy  and  loaded  with  parentheses)  runs
as  follows  :

"he  is  al-bahiyyu'l-aj3Ha,  great  is  his  splendour!

[Here  follow  the  usual  compliments,  etc.]

"  I  have  already  informed  you  that  some  of  the  followers

^  This  is  the  name  by  which  the  followers  of  Muhammad  'All  call
themselves  {Muwahhidin),  while  their  opponents  call  them  "Covenant-
breakers"  [Ndqizin).


156     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  bAbI  RELIGION

of  'Abbas  Efendi,  our  opponents,  have  left  here  for  America.
One  of  them  is  Mirza  Asadu'llah  of  Isfahan,  of  whose  cunning
and  shrewdness  of  intrigue  you  cannot  fail  to  be  aware,  and
who  is  the  brother-in-law  and  secretary  of  'Abbas  Efendi,  and
in  all  matters  his  most  trusted  and  confidential  agent.  To  no
one  else  does  'Abbas  reveal  his  hidden  secrets,  and  these
people  are  of  the  most  unscrupulous,  and  will  hesitate  at
nothing  and  fear  no  consequences,  being  resolved  to  accom-
plish their  purpose  and  spread  abroad  their  vicious  principles,
even  by  the  shedding  of  blood  and  the  destruction  of  lives  by
hidden  methods  and  secret  intrigues.  This  obliges  me  to
explain  to  you  a  certain  cruel  deed  which  they  accomplished
not  long  since.  It  is  one  of  their  many  deeds  which  inspire
detestation  and  break  the  heart  with  horror.

*'  Now  therefore  I  say  that  there  was  in  the  port  of  Jedda
a  certain  man  of  the  Unitarians  named  Mirza  Yahya,  who
was  the  son-in-law  of  one  Hajji  Mirza  Husayn  of  Lar,  the
Persian  Vice-Consul  at  Jedda,  and  a  merchant  noted  for  his
wealth.  As  is  well  known  to  you,  these  people  take  great
and  exquisite  pains  to  attract  to  themselves  persons  of  wealth
and  influence.  When,  therefore,  they  discovered  that  Mirza
Yahya  openly  confessed  his  faith,  and  that  he  was  of  the
party  of  the  true  Unitarians,  and  was  wont  to  discuss  with
his  father-in-law  the  questions  at  issue  and  the  differences
between  the  two  parties,  they  were  afraid  that  in  the  future
the  words  of  ihe  son-in-law  would  influence  the  father-in-
law,  to  wit  the  Hajji  above  mentioned,  and  eventually  be
the  cause  of  depriving  them  of  his  money  and  wealth.
They  were,  moreover,  convinced  of  the  impossibility  of
bringing  Mirza  Yahya  over  to  their  faction.

"One  of  the  followers  of  'Abbas  Efendi  named  Mirza
Mansiir,  who  is  now  in  India,  was  therefore  commanded  by
his  master  to  proceed  at  once  to  Jedda  and  there  conspire


II.      BAHAI   PROPAGANDA   IN   AMERICA         1 57

with  the  Hajji  above  mentioned  for  the  destruction  of  Mirza
Yahya.  At  that  time  the  said  Hajji  was  also  at  'Akka,  but
whether  the  plot  was.  concocted  there  or  at  Jedda  I  am
unable  to  say.  To  be  brief,  one  night  Miiza  Mansur  suc-
ceeded in  administering  to  Mirza  Yahya  a  poison  which
killed  him  at  once.  The  subtlety  of  this  plot  lay  in  the
perpetration  of  this  horrid  deed  in  such  a  city  as  Jedda^

"  Before  the  conspiracy  had  accomplished  its  purpose,
'Abbas  Efendi  had  written  from  'Akka  to  one  of  his  friends
informing  him  that  some  such  calamity  would  befall  Mirza
Yahya,  and  that  he  would  be  punished.  Hajji  Mirza  Hasan
of  Khurasan  published  in  Cairo  a  pamphlet  concerning  this
event  and  the  '  Great  miracle '  wrought  herein  by  'Abbas
Efendi.  It  is  unnecessary  to  send  you  this  lengthy  pamphlet,
our  object  being  merely  to  make  known  to  you  the  character
of  these  peoples'  intrigues.  You  must  employ  every  needful
precaution,  for,  should  they  be  unsuccessful  or  disappointed
in  inducing  you  to  return  to  their  party,  they  will  endeavour
by  every  means  and  without  scruple  to  injure  you.  Con-
cerning what  befel  Mirza  Yahya  we  have  heard  from  certain
persons  who  were  at  Jedda  at  the  time  that  as  he  had  no  heirs,
and  as  his  father-in-law,  the  said  Hajji,  was  of  'Abbas  Efendi's
party,  and  was  also  Persian  Vice-Consul  at  Jedda,  no  one
appeared  to  demand  an  enquiry  into  the  causes  of  his  death.
"  I  therefore  entreat  you  carefully  to  avoid  taking  from
the  hands  of  these  people  any  food,  drink,  or  other  thing,
although  we  know  that  the  Lord  (Glory  be  to  Him)  is  the
Protector  and  Sustainer,  and  will  without  doubt  protect  His
friends  and  shelter  those  who  love  Plim,  especially  him  who
has  displayed  the  greatest  energy,  and  has  fought  so  faith-
fully in  preaching  to  the  people  the  Manifestation  of  His
Most  Great  Name  al-Abhd.

^  Where  the  crime  would  easily  pass  unnoticed,  as,  in  fact,  was  the  case.


158     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

"  Mirza  Abu'1-Fazl  [of  Gulpayagan]  and  Hajji  Mirza
Hasan  [of  Khurasan]  and  the  others,  while  they  were  here
recently,  did  not  visit  any  of  the  Unitarians,  neither  the
Blessed  Branches  {Aghsd?iY  nor  the  others.  They  neither
wrote  nor  spoke  to  them  concerning  the  differences  of  faith,
and  some  of  them  used  even  to  avert  their  faces  from  them
if  they  happened  to  pass  each  other  in  the  street."

The  translation  of  the  last  of  Mahmiid's  letters,  of  which
the  Arabic  text  was  communicated  to  me,  is  as  follows :

"  I  inform  you  also  of  an  event  which  happened  in  these
days,  which  is  that  Husayn  the  Confectioner  (Shakarji),  who
has  a  shop  opposite  to  the  Government  House  at  Hayfa,  as
you  will  remember,  died  of  poison  on  the  eve  of  Saturday  the
28th  of  Ramazan^  in  the  house  of  His  Holiness  the  Most
Mighty  Branch  ^  He  was  seen  by  the  municipal  doctor,
who  reported  that  he  died  of  poison.  This  is  as  much  as  we
have  heard  hitherto,  but  should  we  obtain  more  detailed
information,  we  will,  please  God,  communicate  it  to  you.

"  He  who  prays  for  you,  Mahmud. — January  30th,  1901."

It  is  my  good  fortune  to  possess  a  copy  of  Hajji  Mirza
Hasan-i-Khurasani's  pamphlet  above  mentioned,  which  was
sent  to  me  on  March  12,  1901,  by  Ibrahim  Khayru'llah.
It  contains  only  27  pages  measuring  5  J  by  3 J  inches,  is
entitled  Risdla-i-Bushrd  wa  Aya-i-Kubrd  ("  the  Tract  of
Good  Tidings  and  the  Most  Great  Sign  "),  was  printed  at
the  Hindiyya  Press  in  Egypt,  and  was  completed  on  Rajab  9,
1 31 6  (November  23,  1898).  My  copy  is  signed  and  sealed
on  the  last  page  by  the  author,  so  that  there  is  no  doubt

1  i.e.  'Abbas  Efendi's  three  younger  half-brothers,  Muhammad  'All,
Badi'u'llah,  and  Ziya'u'llah.

■^  The  year  of  the  hijra  is  not  mentioned,  but  Jan.  19,  1901,  appears
to  be  the  date  indicated.

3  Al-GhusnuH-A'zam,  i.e.  'Abb^s  Efendi  'Abdu'l-Baha.


II.      BAHA'I    propaganda   in   AMERICA         1 59

about  its  authenticity.  It  opens  with  a  brief  doxology,  in
which  'Abbas  Efendi  is  spoken  of  as  "the  Lord  of  the
World  and  Goal  of  the  Peoples,  the  Most  Noble  Mystery  of
God^,  the  Most  Mighty  Branch  of  God  and  His  Enduring
Proof  in  the  World,"  designated  to  succeed  himself  by
Baha'u'llah  since  "God,  great  is  His  glory,  arrived  in  the
luminous  city  of  'Akka."  Texts  from  the  Kitdb-i-Aqdas  and
from  Baha's  Testament  are  cited  in  proof  of  this  assertion,
and  the  action  of  those  who  "  broke  the  Covenant "  {i.e.  who
sided  with  'Abbas  Efendi's  half-brother,  Muhammad  'Ali)  is
deplored  and  denounced.  "  Our  object  at  present,"  con-
tinues the  author,  "is  not,  however,  to  discuss  these  matters,
which  are  not  hidden  or  concealed  from  any  one,  but  to
gladden  the  Friends  of  God  with  good  tidings  of  a  wonderful
event  which  happened  in  the  city  of  Jedda,  and  of  a  clear
sign  and  evident  miracle  from  the  writings  of  the  holy  pen
of  His  Holiness  'Abdu'l-Baha,..(may  the  Life  of  the  Worlds
be  a  sacrifice  to  the  dust  of  his  footsteps !)."  After  this
brief  introduction,  the  author  proceeds  to  describe  as  follows
the  life  and  death  of  Mirza  Yahya  of  Isfahan,  and  the  words
of  'Abbas  Efendi  wherein  that  death  was  foreshadowed.

This  Mirza  Yahya  was  originally  an  Azali,  but  in  the  year
of  Baha'u'llah's  "Ascension"  {i.e.  death),  1892,  he  came  to
'Akka,  met  'Abbas  Efendi,  by  whom  he  was  very  well
received,  and  wrote  a  refutation  of  Subh-i-Azal.  After  a
while  he  departed  to  Jedda  (the  port  of  Mecca  on  the  Red
Sea),  where  he  became  intimate  with  a  well-known  Baha'i
named  Hajji  Mirza  Husayn  of  Lar,  whose  daughter  he
presently  asked  and  received  in  marriage.  When  the  dispute
between  'Abbas  Efendi  and  his  half-brother  Muhammad  'Ali
became  acute,  and  the  Baha'i  community  was  rent  asunder
by  this  schism,  Mirza  Yahya  became  the  trusted  agent  and
1  Sirru' lldh,  one  of  the  titles  often  given  to  'Abbas  Efendi.


l6o     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

fervent  supporter  of  Muhammad  'Ali,  in  whose  favour  he
carried  on  an  active  propaganda.  "  It  is  a  curious  fact,"
observes  the  author,  "that  the  'Covenant-breakers' (iV^^/s//^)
become  the  devoted  admirers  and  faithful  friends  of  every
atheist,  Azali  and  Sophist,  and  of  such  as  deny  God's  Holy
Law  and  disobey  His  command,  and  are  the  kind  friends
and  congenial  intimates  of  every  party  except  the  true  be-
lievers . . . ,  so  that  the  truth  of  the  tradition,  '  Infidelity  con-
stitutes a  single  church ' '  might  become  apparent  and  mani-
fest." So  Yahya  grew  ever  bolder  in  his  opposition  to  'Abbas
Efendi,  "  the  Great  Mystery  of  God,  and  the  Branch  derived
from  the  Ancient  Stock,"  until  God's  patience  was  exhausted
and  His  Anger  moved  to  destroy  the  offender,  and  a  "Tablet"
{Lawh)  was  sent  by  'Abbas  Efendi  to  Hajji  MuUa  Husayn
of  Lar,  of  which  a  copy  was  forwarded  to  the  author  enclosed
in  a  letter  dated  the  2nd  of  Jumada  i,  131 6  (=  Septem-
ber 18,  1898).  This  "Tablet,"  which  Hajji  Mirza  Hasan
read  aloud  at  the  time  of  its  arrival  to  a  circle  of  fellow-
believers  in  Cairo,  is  of  considerable  length  and  partly  in
Arabic.  The  prophetic  threats  are  contained  in  the  later
Persian  portion,  of  which  a  translation  is  here  appended.

"  The  glance  of  [Divine]  Favour  embraceth  that  friend,
and  all  good  is  predestined  in  respect  to  him,  but  a  great
barrier  hath  intervened  [between  us  and  him],  and  a  for-
midable obstacle  hath  appeared ;  and  God  controlleth
[men's]  secret  thoughts.  Praise  be  to  God,  during  the  Day
of  the  Theophany  that  friend  attained  to  the  honour  of
meeting  and  secured  the  distinction  of  listening  to  the
address.  You  will  ultimately  appreciate  the  worth  of  this
Pearl  of  Great  Price  of  the  Divine  Covenant.  For
unique  Pearl  was  nourished  in  the  embrace  of  the  shell  of

^  i.e.  all  misbelievers  have  a  natural  sympathy  for  one  another,  and
form;  as  it  were,  a  coherent  community.


II.      BAHA'i   propaganda    in   AMERICA         l6l

the  Most  Glorious  Kingdom  {Malakut-i-Abha)  and  included
in  the  range  of  the  Supreme  Pen,  and  hath  had  no  peer  or
like  since  the  beginning  of  Creation.  But  certain  children,
having  gathered  together,  have  vainly  thought  to  cast  the
Joseph  of  the  Covenant  into  the  Pit  of  Oblivion,  and  so
themselves  to  become  famous  throughout  the  city  and  the
market-place,  and  to  sell  this  Precious  Pearl  for  a  few
dirhams^  and  to  endeavour  to  give  currency  to  their  own
potsherds,  heedless  of  the  fact  that  the  Beloved  {^Azizy  of
the  Divine  Egypt  hath  come  forth  from  the  bottom  of  the
pit  in  despite  of  every  envious  and  obstinate  foe,  and  by  the
Favour  of  the  Most  Splendid  Beauty  {^Jamdl-t-AbhaY  hath
reached  the  zenith  of  the  moon.  Soon  you  will  see  that  by
the  aid  of  the  Most  Glorious  Kingdom  {Malakut-i-Abha)  the
Standard  of  the  Promise  will  wave  above  the  Pole  of  the
Horizons,  while  the  Lamp  of  the  Covenant  will  shine  so
brightly  through  the  glass  of  Contingent  Being  that  the
darknesses  of  the  Violation  of  the  Covenant  will  altogether
disappear,  and  the  cry  of  'By  God,  verily  God  hath  pre-
ferred Him  over  all  mankind '  will  be  heard.  If  a  little
consideration  and  reflection  be  exercised  concerning  past
events,  the  truth  of  the  matter  will  become  plain  and  proved.
Say,  *  O  Shaykh,  this  Covenant  is  the  Light  of  the  Horizons,
and  this  is  the  Promise  of  God,  not  the  plaything  of  children.'
Say,  *  So  shall  ye  behold  yourselves  in  manifest  loss,  while
damage  shall  result  and  be  evident,  and  injury  shall  shortly
overthrow  the  edifice.'  Say,  '  The  first  hurt,  please  God,  will
be  a  warning  to  you,  [making  you  reflect]  what  was  the  cause
of  this  hurt  and  what  the  reason  of  this  loss.'  At  all  events  do
you  observe  with  new  and  sharpened  sight,  so  that  you  may

^  This  is  the  title  commonly  given  to  Joseph  when  he  was  made
governor  of  Egypt.
2  i.e.  of  Baha'u'Uah.

B.  B.  1 1


1 62      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

find  your  way  to  the  aims  of  these  plotters  and  destroyers.
Consider  of  whom  it  is  said  in  the  Qu'ran,  '  They  say
with  their  tongues  what  is  not  in  their  hearts^'  Explain  for
them  [the  verse]  '  And  when  they  see  those  who  believe,  they
say,  "  We  believe"  \  but  when  they  withdraw  privily  to  their
devils,  they  say,  ^^  We  are  only  scoffers'^  T''  Elucidate  the
meaning  of,  ^  But  God  shall  mock  at  them,  and  contifiue
them  in  their  impiety ;  they  shall  wander  in  confusion^. ^  Say
to  him  who  was  alive  and  is  soon  to  die* :  '  Like  the
covenant-breakers^  the  children  of  Israel  wrought  for  them-
selves Samiri^  and  the  [Golden]  Calf.  Was  not  Joshua  the
son  of  Nun  divinely  designated?'  Thou  didst  err  and  make  a
grievous  mistake  when  thou  didst  so  vehemently  belittle  and
contemn  the  divinely  designated  Centre  [of  Authority]'.  If
the  Eternal  Beauty^  should  say  to  thee,  *  How  didst  thou
call  the  Centre  of  my  Covenant,  the  Branch  derived  from  my
Ancient  Stock,  him  who  was  explicitly  designated  in  ^y
Perspicuous  Book,  and  the  Expositor  of  that  Book,   "a

1  Qur'dn,  xlviii,  ii.

2  Ibid,  ii,  13.
■    ^  Ibid,  ii,  14.

^  There  is  a  word  play  on  the  name  Yahyd,  which,  connected  with
the  root  hayy,  means  "  He  liveth."  He  was  Yahy(£{,  but  shall  soon
be  Yamutt,  "doomed  to  die."

^  Ndqizin,  i.e  the  partisans  of  Muhammad  'Alf.

^  The  maker  of  the  Golden  Calf  is  so  named  in  the  Qur'dn.  See
XX,  87,  90,  96.  The  comparison  of  a  false  claimant  of  Divine  or
prophetic  qualities  to  the  Golden  Calf,  and  of  his  aider,  abettor  and
instigator  to  Samiri,  is  common  with  the  Babls.  In  the  Azali  Hasht
Bihisht  Baha'u'llah  and  his  amanuensis,  Mirza  Aqa  Jan  of  Kash^n,  are
made  to  play  these  rdles.  See  Vol.  ii  of  my  Traveller's  Narrative,
p.  355  and  n.  2  ad  calc.

'  Meaning  'Abbds  Efendi,  whom  Mirza  Yahyd  is  accused  of  mocking
and  defying.

8  z>.  Bahd'u'llah.


II.      BAHA'I   propaganda   in   AMERICA         163

[Golden]  Calf?"  what  answer,  O  shameful  Yahya,  wilt  thou
give?  If  thou  would'st  not  render  help,  why  scorn?  If
thou  would'st  not  be  the  salve,  why  be  the  sore  ?  Was  not
the  Kitdb-i-Aqdas  revealed  thirty  years  ago?  Did  I  not
summon  all  to  obey  the  Derived  Branch  ?  Did  I  not  direct
all  to  submission,  calling  him  the  Expositor  of  the  Per-
spicuous Book  ?  Did  I  not  awaken  most  of  the  Friends,  and
did  I  not  dissociate  him  before  all  from  what  is  beneath
him  ?  Did  I  not  engage  his  Covenant  and  Compact  in  the
writings  of  the  Supreme  Pen,  and  did  I  not  in  plain  language
command  all  the  Branches  {Aghsdn)  and  Twigs  {AfndnY
and  Kinsmen  generally  to  have  regard  and  look  to  him?
What  more  could  I  do  ?  How  could  I  further  strengthen
the  matter?  O  shameful  Yahya,  how  could'st  thou  deny
this  clear  Light,  or  how  could'st  thou  sanction  so  cruel  a
slander  against  this  great  Designate  ?  What  hurt  had'st  thou
suffered  at  his  hands  that  thou  did'st  desire  for  him  such
abasement,  or  what  injury  had'st  thou  experienced  from  him
that  thou  did'st  display  such  great  hatred  ? '  What  answer
wilt  thou  give?  At  all  events,  while  it  is  yet  time  express
regret,  and  manifest  repentance  and  remorse,  and  bare-
headed in  the  mountain  and  the  desert  cry  out  that  ye  be
not  touched,  and  pour  forth  from  thine  eyes  like  the  Oxus-
flood  tears  and  blood,  and  become  the  associate  of  lamenta-
tion and  remorse,  that  perchance  the  breeze  of  forgiveness
may  blow,  the  grossness  of  thy  sin  may  decrease,  the  Ocean
of  Mercy  may  be  stirred,  and  the  Cloud  of  Pardon  may  pour
forth  its  rain,  so  that  this  filth  of  Covenant-breaking  may  be
removed.  For  if  not,  then  expect  the  Divine  Vengeance,  and
look  for  blackness  of  face^  in  both  worlds.     As  God  liveth,

^  The  sons  of  Bahd'u'llah  are  called  Aghsdn  (sing.  Ghusn),  and  the
relatives  of  the  Bab  Afndn.
^  i.e.  disgrace.

U — 2


1 64      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

verily  humiliation  shall  flee  from  thee  by  reason  of  its  abun-
dance, and  loss  shall  take  refuge  from  thee  with  the  All-
Merciful,  and  thou  shalt  behold  thyself  in  the  lowest  depths
of  Hell.  For  abasement,  remorse  and  disgrace  shall  be  the
portion  of  those  who  violate  the  Covenant  of  the  High,  the
Mighty."

{'Abbas  'Abdu'1-Baha)  e  c

The  author,  Hajji  Mirza  IJasan  of  Khurasan,  next  quotes
the  covering  letter  (or  "  Tablet ")  addressed  to  himself  by
'Abbas  Efendi,  and  dated  ("contrary  to  what  is  customary")
the  2nd  of  Jumada  ii,  1316  (Sept.  18,  1898).  The  latter
portion  of  this  runs  as  follows  :

"  O  Friend,  you  wrote  about  Yahya,  who  supposed  that
'Abdu'1-Baha  was  heedless  of  his  evil  intentions  and  intrigues.
Therefore  a  little  while  ago  a  letter  was  written  to  Jedda,  of
which  a  copy  is  enclosed.  Read  it,  that  thou  may'st  be
assured  that  the  clemency  of  'Abdu'1-Baha  is  great  and  his
patience  strong,  but  that,  when  the  Command  comes,  he
speaks  and  writes  and  cries,  '  This  is  the  Truth,  and  after
the  Truth  is  naught  save  error.  O  Friend,  so  proclaim  the
Covenant  that  the  deaf  ears  of  the  [Covenant-] breakers  may
hear,  and  so  shine  in  the  Assembly  of  Constancy  that  the
bhnd  eyes  of  the  perjured  ones  may  see.  And  the  Glory
[BaM]  be  upon  every  one  who  is  steadfast  in  the  Covenant
of  thy  Lord  the  Mighty."      c  c

Not  long  after  the  receipt  of  this  letter,  which  was  read
aloud  to  the  faithful  in  Egypt,  a  letter  dated  the  27th  of
Jumada  i,  13 16  (=  October  13,  1898)  was  received  from
Hajji  MuUa  Husayn  of  Lar  from  Jedda  by  Hajji  Mirza
Hasan  of  Khurasan  declaring  that  "  God,  mighty  is  His
glory,  had  removed  Yahya,  that  incorrigible  Covenant-
breaker,  and  had  opened  before  his  face  the  Door  of  the
fierce  threats  of  the  All-Glorious  Lord,  which  are  explicitly


II.      BAHA'I   propaganda   in    AMERICA         165

mentioned  in  the  Two  Holy  Tablets.  The  simoom  of
Divine  Wrath  blew,  and  the  gale  of  Celestial  Anger  breathed,
and  his  (Yahya's)  darkened  spirit,  fulfilled  with  envy  and
hatred,  descended  to  the  abyss  of  Hell."  Here  follows  Hajji
Mulla  Husayn  of  Lar's  narrative  of  what  took  place,  as
communicated  by  him  in  a  letter  to  Hajji  Mirza  Hasan  of
Khurasan  :

"Touching  the  Tablet  which  was  vouchsafed  from  the
Land  of  Heart's  Desire^,  in  truth  if  anyone  should  possess
the  eye  of  discernment,  these  same  Blessed  Words  which
were  thus  fulfilled  are  a  very  great  miracle.  But  what
profits  it,  since  the  discerning  eye  is  lacking  ?

"  I  read  the  Tablet  to  Mirza  Yahya,  and  he  listened.  I
said  :  '  Assuredly  thou  sayest  in  thy  heart,  "  I  do  not  believe
in  the  words  thereof." '  He  answered,  '  It  is  even  so ;  I
have  no  sort  of  belief  either  in  him  or  his  father^'  1  said,
*  If  that  which  hath  issued  from  the  Blessed  Pen  does  not
speedily  overtake  you,  it  were  well  that  they  should  shave  off
my  beard^'  Then  he  rose  up  and  departed  to  his  own
house.

"  A  few  nights  later  towards  the  dawn  one  knocked  at
the  door  of  my  house.  '  Who  is  it  ? '  I  cried.  Then,  seeing
that  it  was  a  maid-servant,  I  added,  '  What  wilt  thou  ? '  She
replied,  '  Mirza  Yahya  is  done  for.'  I  at  once  ran  thither.
Hajji  Muhammad  Baqir  also  was  present.  I  saw  that  blood
was  flowing  from  his  (Mirza  Yahya's)  throat,  and  that  he
was  unable  to  move.  By  this  time  it  was  morning.  I  at
once  brought  thither  an  Indian  doctor.  He  examined  him
and  said,  '  A  blood-vessel  in  his  lung  is  ruptured.  He  must
lie  still  for  three  days  and  not  move,   and  then  he  will

^  Arz-i-Maqsiid,  i.e.  'Akka.

2  i^g^  c,  g-jj^gj.  jj^  .Abbas  Efendi  or  Baha'u'llah."

'^  i.e.  subject  me  to  any  disgrace.


1 66     MATERIALvS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

recover.'  He  then  gave  him  some  medicine.  The  haemor-
rhage stopped  for  two  days,  and  his  condition  improved.
In  spite  of  this  he  was  not  admonished  to  return  to  the
Truth.  After  two  days  there  was  a  second  flow  of  blood
from  his  throat,  and  he  was  nearly  finished.  The  doctor
came  again  and  gave  him  medicine,  but  ultimately  it  profited
him  nothing.  Twice  again  he  vomited  undiluted  blood,  and
then  surrendered  his  spirit  to  the  Angel  of  Torment.

'*  This  event  was  in  truth  a  warning  to  all  beholders,  that
is  to  say  to  such  as  see  and  read  this  Tablet.  Please  God
you  have  read  it  in  its  entirety  and  found  your  way  to  the
meaning  thereof.  One  individual  hath  He  thus  swiftly
removed.  Assuredly  hereafter  the  Lord  will  accomplish
every  promise  which  He  hath  uttered.  I  take  refuge  with
God  from  the  wrath  of  God  !  I  seek  from  the  Truth  that  He
will  aid  us  to  stand  firm  in-  His  Covenant  and  Compact  !
In  a  little  while  the  Covenant-breakers  will  be  overtaken  by
calamities  such  that  they  shall  flee  bare-headed  to  the  moun-
tains and  deserts,  but  shall  find  there  no  way  of  escape."

The  author,  Hajji  Mirza  Hasan  of  Khurasan,  here
observes  that  never  in  any  previous  dispensation  was  so
clear  a  threat  followed  by  so  swift  and  condign  a  punish-
ment, or  so  explicit  a  prophecy  so  speedily  accomplished.
For,  says  he,  though  God's  patience  is  almost  inexhaustible,
there  comes  an  end  to  it,  especially  in  the  case  of  such
apostates,  who  sin  against  the  Light,  and  who  do  far  more
harm  to  the  cause  than  the  theologians,  jurisconsults  and
rulers  who  ignorantly  oppose  and  oppress  it.  He  then  quotes
another  Tablet  which  was  sent  to  him  by  'Abbas  Efendi
after  the  death  of  Mirza  Yahya,  and  which  runs  thus  :

"Write  to  MuUa  Husayn  of  Lar  that  these  were  the
circumstances  connected  with  Yahya  the  shameless,  to  wit
that  he  wrote  a  letter  to  the  leading  Covenant-breakers,  and


II.      BAHA'I   propaganda   in   AMERICA         167

made  use  of  a  very  vile  expression  concerning  the  Centre  of
the  Covenant^  such  as  none,  not  even  the  lowest,  would
utter;  to  wit,  an  expression  which  was  to  the  leading
Covenant-breakers  as  a  floral  festival,  a  joy,  and  the  cause  of
boundless  delight  [causing  them  to  say]  '  Praise  be  to  God
because  such  souls  have  appeared  who  dare  to  belittle  so
ignominiously  the  Pole-star  of  the  Covenant ! '  Therefore  was
the  threat  of  vengeance  and  the  imminence  of  the  thunder-
bolt of  destruction  thus  explicitly  given  ;  for  assuredly  the
Framer  of  the  Covenant  and  the  Protector  of  the  Compact
will  vindicate  the  Centre  of  the  Covenant.  These  are
isolated  events ;  with  these  same  outward  eyes  it  will  be  seen
in  what  abasement  and  disgrace,  and  in  what  calamities,
afflictions  and  chastisements  the  'quakers^'  shall  be  over-
whelmed. Say,  '  Wait  until  God  shall  accompHsh  His  pur-
pose, O  Company  of  Shame,  O  Faction  of  Rebellion,  and
ye  shall  see  yourselves  in  the  lowest  of  Hell-fires  ! '  Upon
thee  be  the  Splendour^ ! "

Hajji  Mirza  Hasan  of  Khurasan  concludes  his  pamphlet
by  promising  further  details  concerning  the  schism,  the
obstinacy  of  'Abbas  Efendi's  half-brothers,  the  "boldness
and  discourtesy"  of  Mirza  Aqa  Jan,  and  other  kindred
matters,  and,  as  already  noted,  dates  the  completion  of  his
work  the  9th  of  Rajab,  13 16  (November  23,  1898).

One  fact  which  is  very  clearly  brought  out  by  this
pamphlet  is  that  the  detestation  in  which  the  followers  of
'Abbas  Efendi  hold  the  rival  faction  of  his  half-brother
Muhammad  'Ali  equals,  if  it  does  not  exceed,  that  in  which

^  i.e.  'Abbas  Efendi  'Abdu'1-Baha.

2  This  is  the  literal  meaning  of  MulazahiUn,  a  term  here  used  as
equivalent  to  Ndqizin,  "  Covenant-breakers."

5*  'AlaykaU-Bahd,  the  Baha'f  equivalent  of  the  Muslim  'alayka's-
saldm  !


1 68     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

the  Baha'is  generally  hold  the  Azalis,  and  far  surpasses  the
dislike  entertained  by  any  of  these  three  parties  for  the
adherents  of  other  creeds  which  stand  entirely  outside  the
Babi-Baha'i  circle.  This  phenomenon,  however,  is  not
peculiar  to  Babiism.  At  all  events  this  second  schism
amongst  the  Babf  community,  which  began  almost  imme-
diately after  Baha'u'llah's  death  in  1892  and  culminated  (as
will  be  subsequently  explained  in  fuller  detail)  in  1895,
was  singularly  fierce  and  bitter,  and  in  due  course  naturally
extended  to  the  American  Baha'is.  Ibrahim  Khayru'llah's
secession  from  'Abbas  Efendi  seems  to  have  begun  soon  after
his  return  from  *Akka  (about  the  end  of  1898),  and,  as  we
have  seen,  at  the  end  of  November,  1900,  the  fanatical
Hajji  Mirza  Hasan  (the  author  of  the  pamphlet  just  analysed)
was  threatening  him  in  Chicago  for  his  apostasy.  The  great
majority  of  the  American  Baha'is  adhered  to  the  party  of
'Abbas  Efendi,  who  had  established  there  as  elsewhere  a
great  personal  ascendancy  which  his  half-brother  Muhammad
*Ali  completely  failed  to  rival,  though  one  at  least  of  his
adherents,  Mirza  Ghulamu'Uah,  the  son  of  Mirza  Muhammad
Jawad  of  Qazwin,  author  of  the  life  of  Baha'u'llah  translated
in  the  first  section  of  this  volume^  visited  America  to  promote
his  Master's  interests  and  press  his  claims  ^  In  1901  we
find  Ibrahim  Khayru'Uah  defending  his  position  against  the
American  followers  of  'Abbas  Efendi  in  two  tracts  entitled
respectively  Facts  for  BahaHsts  (Chicago,  1901),  and  The
Three  Questions  (undated,  but  published  subsequently  to
April,  1 901).  The  former  is  prefaced  by  the  following
"  Statement  of  the  House  of  Justice  of  the  Society  of
Baha'ists  to  all  the  followers  of  Baha'u'llah  " :

"  The  time  has  come  to  publish  some  of  the  numerous

^  He  was  in  New  York  in    March  1901,  and  in   Chicago  in  the
following  month,  and  visited  me  in  Cambridge  on  his  way  to  America.


II.      BAHA'I    propaganda   in    AMERICA         1 69

facts  which  have  been  obtained  through  a  very  careful  and
strict  investigation  concerning  the  differences  existing
between  the  eldest  son  of  Baha'u'llah  [i.e.  'Abbas  Efendi
*Abdu'l-Baha]  and  his  younger  brothers.

"For  the  sake  of  Truth  and  Justice  we  urge  every
believer  to  read  carefully  the  contents  of  this  pamphlet,  and
judge  for  himself  which  of  the  two  parties  is  following  the
teachings  of  the  Father  and  obeying  His  Commandments.

"  It  is  intended  gradually  to  publish  the  many  facts  in  our
possession,  and  they  are  open  at  any  time  to  those  who  wish
to  investigate  them."

"The  Three  Questions"  answered  by  Khayru'llah  in  his
second  pamphlet  are  as  follows  :

(i)  "  Why  have  some  followers  of  Baha'u'llah  and  your-
self rejected  'Abbas  Efendi,  the  Greatest  Branch,  and  his
teachings  ?

(2)  "  Did  you  receive  the  instructions  you  gave  in
America  from  Baha'u'llah  in  person,  or  from  'Abdu'l-Karim
of  Cairo,  Egypt?

(3)  "  Why  did  you  not  denounce  'Abbas  Efendi  upon
your  return  from  'Akka  ? ''

From  the  answer  to  the  second  question  it  appears  (p.  23)
that  'Abdu'l-Karim  of  Tihran,  by  whom  Khayru'llah  was
first  converted  to  the  Baha'i  faith,  and  who,  as  we  have  seen,
visited  America  in  the  summer  of  1900,  told  Khayru'llah,  in
the  presence  of  some  believers,  that  if  he  returned  to
'Abbas  Ffendi  he  was  right  and  all  he  taught  was  right ;  but
that  if  not  he  was  wrong,  and  all  he  taught  was  wrong.
"  Besides  this,"  says  Khayru'llah,  "  he  promised  me  plenty
of  money,  and  when  I  refused  he  renounced  me  and  all  that
I  taught,  and  prohibited  the  believers  from  reading  or
buying  my  work  BeM'u7/d/i.''


I70     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

From  the  answer  to  the  third  question  we  learn  that  it
was  not  until  nearly  seven  months  after  Khayru'llah's  return
to  America  that  he  definitely  repudiated  'Abbas  Efendi  and
espoused  the  cause  of  Muhammad  'Ali  and  the  younger
brothers.  This  event  must  have  taken  place  in  the  year
1899.

'Abbas  Efendi,  as  soon  as  Khayru'llah's  defection  was
known,  seems  to  have  taken  vigorous  steps  to  destroy  his
supremacy  and  influence  in  America.  'Abdu'l-Karim  was
sent  to  America  for  this  purpose  in  1900.  At  the  end
of  the  same  year,  as  we  have  seen,  another  ardent  partisan
of  'Abbas  Efendi,  to  wit  Hajji  Mirza  Hasan  of  Khurasan,
was  in  America,  not  only  remonstrating  with  but  threatening
Khayru'llah.  A  little  later  Mirza  Asadu'llah,  a  vehement
partisan  of  '^ Abbas  Efendi,  founded  the  "  House  of  Spiritu-
ality" in  Chicago.  About  the  end  of  1901  or  beginning  of
1902  his  son,  Mirza  Farid  Amin,  a  lad  of  about  twenty,  who
had  graduated  with  honours  in  English,  succeeded  and  aided
his  father  as  the  recognized  translator  into  English  of  the
Baha'i  writings  in  Arabic  and  Persian.

Early  in  1902  we  find  two  more  prominent  Baha'is,  both
adherents  of  Abbas  Efendi,  to  wit  the  learned  and  inde-
fatigable Mirza  Abu'1-Fazl  of  Gulpayagan  (whose  propa-
gandist activities  w^ere  also  displayed  at  'Ishqabad,  or
Askabad,  in  Russian  Turkistan  and  in  Egypt)  and  the
amiable  old  Hajji  Niyaz  of  Kirman  (with  whom  I  was
acquainted  in  Cairo  in  the  early  part  of  1903)  carrying  on
an  active  propaganda  in  America.  The  former,  unless  he
paid  two  visits  to  America,  must  have  remained  there  nearly
three  years,  for  he  sailed  thence  for '  Akka  with  nine  American
pilgrims,  including  Mr  Howard  MacNutt  (formerly  asso-
ciated with  Khayru'llah  in  the  publication  of  his  book
Behd!uUldh)  in  December,  1904.


II.      BAHA'I   propaganda   in   AMERICA         171

The  last  news  I  had  of  Ibrahim  Khayru'llah  was  in  a
letter  from  Cbicago  dated  April  4,  191 7,  in  which  he  wrote :

"  The  Baha'i  movement  in  America  became  slow  and  dull
since  the  sad  dissension  reached  the  West  nineteen  years
ago  [i.e.  in  1898].  I  thought  then  that  to  call  the  people  to
this  Great  Truth  was  equivalent  to  inviting  them  into  a
quarrel.  But  the  visit  of  'Abbas  Efendi  'Abdu'1-Baha  to
this  country,  his  false  teachings,  his  misrepresentations  of
Baha'ism,  his  dissimulation,  and  the  knowledge  that  his  end
is  nigh,  aroused  me  to  rise  up  for  helping  the  work  of  God,
declaring  the  Truth,  and  refuting  the  false  attacks  of  theo-
logians and  missionaries.  Now  I  am  struggling  hard  to
vivify  the  Cause  of  God  after  its  having  received  by  the  visit
of  'Abbas  Efendi  a  death-blow."


Ill


FURTHER  NOTES   ON   BABI,  AZALI   AND

BAHA'i    LITERATURE,    ORIENTAL    AND

OCCIDENTAL,  PRINTED,  LITHOGRAPHED

AND  MANUSCRIPT


The  following  notes  make  no  claim  to  completeness,  and
are  confined,  so  far  as  printed  and  lithographed  works  are
concerned,  to  books  in  my  own  possession  not  already
mentioned  in  the  Bibliography  contained  in  Vol.  ii  of  my
Travellers  Narrative^  pp.  173 — 211,  which  comes  down
only  to  1889.  Only  in  the  case  of  manuscripts  I  shall
supplement  the  Catalogue  and  Description  0/2']  BdM  Manu-
scripts which  I  published  in  \\\^  Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic
Society  for  1892  (pp.  433 — 499  and  637 — 710)  not  only  by  a
description  of  manuscripts  which  I  have  obtained  since  that
date,  but  of  some  of  those  acquired  by  the  British  Museum
(mostly  from  Rizwan  'Ali  the  son  of  Subh-i-Azal)  and  still
uncatalogued.  Rather  more  than  50  of  these  (whose  class-
marks  range  from  Or.  5080  to  Or.  6887)  were  examined  by
my  friend  and  former  colleague  Dr  Ahmad  Khan,  on  whose
notes,  which  he  kindly  made  over  to  me,  I  shall  base  my
observations.


I.     Printed  Works  in  European  Languages.

(i)  Andreas,  Dr  F.  C.  :  Die  Babis  in  Persien  (Leipzig,
1896;  p.  68).  A  slight  and  popular  work,  containing  few
references  to  the  authorities  used,  and  adding  little  if  any
thing  to  our  knowledge.    It  begins  with  a  Preface  by  Pastor


176     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BAEI  RELIGION

W.  Faber  and  ends  with  a  short  account  by  the  same  of  the
celebrated  Sayyid  (or  Shaykh)  Jamalu'd-Din  al- Afghani

(2)  Atrpet  (Sargis  Mubagajian,  an  Armenian  of  Alex-
andropol)  is  the  author  of  several  works  on  Persia  in  Russian
and  Armenian.  The  former  include  one  on  Muhammad
^Ali  Shah  (MaMeji,'b-AjiH  Illaxi));  The  A^ational  Movement
in  the  Land  of  the  Lion  and  the  Sun  (Hapoji;Hoe  jiiBHJKeHie
Bi.  CTpaH-fe  Jiesa  h  cojiHii,a),  Shirak  Press,  Alexandropol,
1909:  pp.  129;  one  on  Rahi7?i  Khan  (PaxHMh  Xani*),
which  I  do  not  possess;  and  one  entitled  Lmdmat :  the
Country  of  the  Worshippers  of  the  Lmdms  {Persian  clergy)
(HMaMaxT):  CTpana  hokjiohhhkob'b  HMaMOB^  (nepcHji,cKoe
jiyxoBeHCTBo),  Alexandropol,  1909:  pp.  208,  of  which  the
second  part,  entitled  Ba6HTH  h  BexanxH  {Bdbis  and
BahdHs)  occupies  pp.  87 — 208.  The  latter  include  works
on  the  lmdmat ;  Chastisements  in  the  Life  of  Persia  (a
novel);  Khildfat  ("the  Caliphate");  Turkish  historical
investigations;   and  other  books.

The  treatise  on  Bdbis  and  BahdHs^  with  which  alone  we
are  here  concerned,  is  illustrated  with  some  remarkable
portraits  and  pictures  (I  know  not  how  far  authentic),  in-
cluding three  of  the  Bab  (one  suspended  for  execution) ;  one
of  Muhammad  Shah's  Prime  Minister,  Hajji  Mirza  Aghasi ;
one  of  Muhammad  Shah  ;  two  of  the  Babi  heroine  and
warrior  "  Rustam-'Ali "  of  Zanjan,  armed  with  shield,  sword
and  spear ;  one  of  the  public  degradation  at  Shiraz  of  one
of  the  Bab's  disciples  and  propagandists,  who,  with  half  his
beard  and  moustache  shaved  off,  is  mounted  on  an  ass  with
his  face  to  the  tail ;  one  of  Hajji  Sulayman  Khan,  almost
naked  and  with  lighted  candles  inserted  in  numerous  wounds
in  his  body,  being  led  to  the  place  of  execution;  two  of

^  A  full  account  of  this  remarkable  man  is  given  in  Chapter  I  of  my
Persian  Revolution.


J»i^


'T~D\/


,1.^^.


^;^

:7^


BAHAI  NEWS


Vol.  1


Chicago.  (Au^.  1,  1910)   Isma


No.  8


WORDS   OP  ABDUL-BAHA

From,  notes  taken  at  Haifa,  Syria,  by  Mirza
Moneer  Zain,  during  the  recent  visit  of  Mr.  Charles
Mason  Remey  and  Mr.  Howard  C.  Struven.


PHOTOGRAPH    OF  BELIEVERS    ASSEMBLED  AT  THE  TOMB    OF  THE    BAB.
MOUNT   CARMEL.  SVRIA.  MAY    15.  1910.

In  the  c«n:re  of  the  group,  marked  with   an  X.  is  the  aged  Afnan.  who

supervised   the   building  of  the   Mashrak-elAzkar   in   Ishkabad,

Russia.     As  soon  as  it  was  finished  he  was  called  to  Acca

by  Abdul-Baha  to  remain  the  balance  of  his  days.

The  following  letter  from  Mr.  Remey  to  the
Bahai  News  makes  a  fitting  introduction  to  the
notes  which  follow:

To  the  Editor-s  of  the  Bahai  News:

Mirza  Moneer  Zain  lias  sent  me  notes  taken  In
Persian  and  then  translated,  from  four  of  Abdul-Eaha's
talks   given   while   Mr.    Struven   and   I   were   in   Haifa.


To/ace  p.  177.


III.      FURTHER   NOTES  ON   BABI   LITERATURE      177

Qurratu'l-'Ayn,  one  expounding  the  Scriptures  and  one  just
before  her  execution  ;  one  of  Baha'u'llah ;  and  one  of  a
Babi  being  blown  from  the  mouth  of  a  cannon.  My  ignor-
ance of  Russian  prevents  me  from  forming  an  estimate  of
the  value  of  the  letter-press.

(3)  BahdH  News^  a  periodical  publication,  appearing
every  nineteen  days,  partly  in  English,  partly  in  Persian
(the  latter  part  lithographed),  produced  at  Chicago.  The
Persian  part  is  entitled  Paydmbar-i-Bdkhtar  (jXd^\.j  j^l*j),
"the  Prophet  of  the  West."  The  earliest  issue  which  I
possess  is  that  of  August  i,  1910,  which  is  described  as
Vol.  I,  No.  8.  This  number  contains  in  all  25  pages,  of
which  18  are  in  English,  and  measures  only  15  x  7-5  centi-
metres. In  the  following  year  the  title  of  the  paper  was
changed  to  Najm-i- Bdkhtar  (jX6>.\j  ^c^)?  "  the  Star  of  the
West."  See  No.  37  (p.  185),  in/ra,  and  also  my  Press  and
Poetry  of  Modern  /(?rj/^  (Cambridge,  19 14),  pp.  59  and  147
(articles  96  and  349).

(4)  Balteau,  M.  J.  :  Le  Babysme :  Lecture  faite  par
M.  J.  B — a  la  Seance  du  22  Mai^  1896.  Academic
Nationale  de  Reims,  Reims,  1897  :  pp.  28.

This  is  also  a  slight  and  popular  resume  of  familiar  facts,
and  was  written  at  the  time  of  the  assassination  of  Nasiru'd-
Din  Shah,  which  was  at  first  believed  to  be  the  work  of  a
Babi:  a  belief  which  the  author  (p.  15)  appears  to  share.
For  the  rest,  the  author  "  admits  without  much  shame  that
there  are  important  points  on  which  he  is  very  badly
informed."

(5)  Barney,  Laura  Clifford  (now  Madame  H.  Dreyfus)  :

plyJt  Jut  OLs^Ia^  ^  t^jt^*^'  }^^
This    book  contains   the   original    Persian   text  of  the
"Table  Talks"  of  'Abbas  Efendi  'Abdu'1-Baha  collected  by

B.  B.  12


178     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

Miss  Laura  Clifford  Barney.  It  comprises  236  pp ,  and
was  printed  by  Messrs  Brill  of  Leyden  and  published  by
Messrs  Kegan  Paul,  London,  in  1908.

(6)  The  same  publishers  produced  simultaneously  an
English  version  entitled  Some  answered  questions,  collected
and  translated  from  the  Persian  by  Laura  Clifford  Barney
(pp.  xiv  +  344).

(7)  A  French  version  entitled  ^Abd-oul-Beha :  Les
Lefons  de  St  Jean  d^Acre,  recueillies  par  Laura  Clifford
Barney  :  traduit  du  persan  par  Hippolyte  Dreyfus,  was  pub-
lished in  the  same  year  (1908)  by  Ernest  Leroux  of  Paris.
This  comprises  pp.  416.

(8)  Barney,  Laura  Clifford :  God''s  Heroes :  a  Babi
drama,  with  Qurratu'l-'Ayn  for  the  heroine,  sumptuously
printed  and  illuminated  in  the  margins.  Published  by
Kegan  Paul,  London,  and  Lippincott,  Philadelphia,  in
1910  :  pp.  108  +  xii.

(9)  Brittingham,  Isabella  D. :  The  Revelation  of  Bahd^u
'lldh,  in  a  sequence  of  four  lessons,  compiled  by  I.  D.  B.
Chicago,  1902  :  pp.  32.

(10)  Dawud,  Johanna:  Mysterious  Forces  of  Civiliza-
tion, written  in  Persian  by  an  eminent  Bahd'i  philosopher,
and  now  first  put  into  Etiglish  by  J.  D.  Published  by  Cope
and  Fenwick,  London,  in  1910  :  pp.  242.

(The  original  Persian  entitled

d^jL^J)  w>lw^)  <au^aJt  ^Sy*)\  w^U^d

was  lithographed  at  Bombay  in  1310/1892-3,  and  contains
^54  PP-)

(11)  Dodge,  Arthur  Pilsbury : '  Whence ?  Why  ?  Whither  ?
Man  I  Things  I  Other  Things  I  Published  by  the  Ariel
Press,  Westwood,  Massachusetts,  in  1907  :  pp.  269.


III.      FURTHER    NOTES   ON    BABI   LITERATURE      I79

(12)  Dreyfus,  Hippoly te :  Le  Livre  de  la  Certitude  {Kitab-
el-Ikan),  un  des  Livres  Sucre's  du  Bahdisme^  traduit  du  persan
par  Hippo lyte  Dreyfus  et  Mirza  Habibullah  Chirazi.  Pub-
lished by  Leroux  of  Paris  in  the  Bibliotheque  Orientate
Elzevirietme  in  1904  :  pp.  vii  +  213.

Concerning  the  Iqdn  ("  Certitude  "),  one  of  the  best-
known  Babi  controversial  works  composed  in  1274/1858-9
in  Baghdad  by  Baha'u'llah  before  he  publicly  put  forward  his
claim  to  be  "  He  whom  God  shall  manifest,"  see  my  Cata-
logue and  Description  0/2']  Bdbi  Manuscripts,  J.  R.  A.  S.
for  1892,  pp.  435 — 8,  and  the  references  there  given.

(13)  Dreyfus,  Hippoly  te :  The  Universal  Religion:
Bahd^ism,  its  Rise  and  Import.  Cope  and  Fen  wick,  London,
1909:  pp.  175.

(14)  Dreyfus,  Hippoly  te  :  Essai  sur  le  Behaisme  :  son
histoire,  sa  portee  sociale.  Ernest  Leroux,  Paris,  1909  :
pp.  138.

(15)  Dreyfus,  Hippoly  te  :  D  Epttre  au  Fits  du  Loup  par
Bahdoulldh,  traduction  fran^aise.     Champion,  Paris,  1913  :

pp.  185.

This  is  a  translation  of  a  letter,  or  rather  an  admonition,
addressed  by  Baha'u'llah  towards  the  end  of  his  life  (between
1889  and  1892)  to  the  notorious  Mujtahid  of  Isfahan,  Aqa-
yi-Najafi,  the  son  of  Shaykh  Baqir  of  Isfahan,  an  implacable
persecutor  of  the  Babis.  Incidentally  it  deals  at  some
length  with  the  Azali  controversy.

(16)  Hammond,  Eric:  The  Splendour  of  God,  being
extracts  from  the  Sacred  Writings  of  the  Bahd^is,  with  Intro-
duction  by  E.  H.  Published  in  the  Wisdom  of  the  East
Series  by  Murray,  London,  in  1909:  pp.  124.  (A  very
slight  work.)

(17)  Holbach,  Maude  M. :   Ihe  Bahd'i Movement,  with

12 — 2


l8o     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

some  recollections  of  meetings  with  ^Abdu'l-Bahd.  (From  the
Nineteenth  Century  and  After  for  February,  19 15,  pp.  452  —
466.)  Mrs  Holbach  seems  to  have  met  'Abbas  Efendi  in
America  in  the  autumn  of  191 2  and  again  in  Paris  on
May  23,  19 1 4.  Other  dates  of  his  journeys  in  Europe  given
are  London  and  Paris  in  the  autumn  of  191 1;  Budapest
(where  he  met  Vambery)  in  April,  191 3;  Stuttgart,  Vienna
and  Budapest  in  the  summer  of  1914.  "In  Germany,"
writes  Mrs  Holbach,  "the  Baha'i  literature  is  being  trans-
lated, and  there  are  Baha'is  at  Munich  and  Leipzig  as  well
as  at  Stuttgart  and  Esslingen,  but  the  movement  is  compara-
tively new,  and  the  number  of  its  adherents  proportionately
small,  though  drawn  from  the  most  thoughtful  classes  of  the
community."

(18)  Khayru'llah,  Ibrahim  George :  Bdb-ed-Din^  the
Door  of  true  Religion:  (i)  Za-ti-et  Allah:  (2)  El-Fida.
Revelation  from  the  East :  rational  argument  by  I.  G.
KhayruUldh.  Chas.  H.  Kerr  and  Co.,  Chicago,  1897  :  pp.  84.
Portrait  of  the  author  as  frontispiece.

(19)  Khayru'llah,  Ibrahim  George,  assisted  by  Howard
MacNutt :  Behd'uUlah  ("  the  Glory  of  God  ").  The  work
comprises  two  volumes  with  continuous  pagination,  pp.  xiv  +
545,  Vol.  ii  beginning  with  p.  307,  and  several  portraits  and
illustrations,  including  'Abbas  Efendi  'Abdu'1-Baha  and  his
three  half-brothers.  Published  at  Chicago  on  January  i,
1900^

(20)  Khayru'llah,  Ibrahim  George  :  Facts  for  Behaists^
translated  and  edited  by  I.  G.  Kh.     Chicago,  1901  :  pp.  64.

(21)  Khayru'llah,  Ibrahim  George:  The  Three  Ques-
tions.    Pp.  26+  15  of  Arabic  quotations.     No  date  or  place

^  A  second  smaller  edition  of  this  work  in  one  volume  has  been
published  recently  (Chicago,  1917).


III.      FURTHER   NOTES   ON    BABI   LITERATURE      l8l

of  publication  is  mentioned,  but  the  tract  was  evidently
written  later  than  April,  1901.  It  and  the  previously  men-
tioned tract  have  been  already  noticed  (p.  1 68  supra).

(22)  Khayru'llah,  Ibrahim  George:  O  Christians  I  Why
do  ye  believe  not  in  Christ?  U.S.A.  (?  Chicago),  1917:  pp.  192.
The  purpose  of  this  book,  the  most  recent  product  of  the
author's  fertile  pen,  is,  as  he  states,  "  to  prove  to  the  whole
world  the  infallibility  of  Baha'u'llah,  and  that  the  attacks
of  S.  G.  Wilson,  D.D.  (see  No.  48,  p.  188  infra),  and  those
of  H.  H.  Jessup,  D.D.,  and  Robert  P.  Richardson  against
Him  and  His  teachings  are  not  true."  It  is  dedicated  to
Muhammad  'Ali,  the  half-brother  and  rival  for  supremacy  of
'Abbas  Efendi  'Abdu'1-Baha,  and  comprises  twelve  chapters,
the  last  (pp.  165-192)  being  an  autobiography  of  the  author
I.  G.  Khayru'llah.  This  is  the  most  interesting  part  of  the
work;  but  the  outspoken  defence  of  polygamy  (pp.  77-86)
and  of  the  assassination  of  Azalis  by  Baha'is  (pp.  58-62),
which  is  described  as  "proving  the  veracity  of  Baha'ism  and
Christianity,"  merit  careful  attention,  even  though  they  be
little  calculated  to  further  the  author's  aims.

(23)  MaMOHTOB'L,  H.  II. :  O'lepKii  coBpeMeHHoft  Ilepcin
("Sketches  of  Modern  Persia").  This  book  deals  chiefly
with  the  Persian  Revolution  and  Constitution,  and  contains
a  good  many  interesting  illustrations  and  portraits.  St
Petersburg,  1909:  pp.  206.

(24)  Nicolas,  A.-L.-M. :  Le  Livre  des  Sept  Freuves,
traduction  de  M.  A.-L.-M.-N.  Paris,  Maisonneuve,  1902  :
pp.  68.  A  French  translation  of  the  Bab's  DaldHl-i-Sab'-a
{gjUfJ  J>5^)3).  See  my  Cat.  and  Descr.  0/2']  Bdbi  MSS.
{J.R.A.  S.  for  1892,  p.  447).  There  is  another  ms.  of  the
original  (Or.  5109)  in  the  British  Museum.

(25)  Nicolas,  A.-L.-M.  :  Seyyld  Ali  Mohammed  dit  le


1 82     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  bAbI  RELIGION

Bab.  Paris,  Dujarric,  1905  :  pp.  458.  This  valuable  and
scholarly  book,  which  contains  a  great  deal  of  new  material
critically  treated,  comprises  a  lengthy  Introduction  {Avant-
propos)^  pp.  I — 71  ;  three  chapters  on  Persian  or  Shi'ite
Islam,  pp.  75 — 188;  and  twelve  chapters  on  the  history  of
the  Bab,  of  whom  a  traditional  portrait  {d^apres  un  portrait
a  r aquarelle)  forms  the  frontispiece  of  the  volume,  pp.  189 —
452.  The  historical  narrative  is  extended  beyond  the  Bab's
execution  in  1850  to  the  great  persecution  of  the  Babis  and
the  martyrdom  of  Qurratu'l-'Ayn  in  1852.

(26)  Nicolas,  A.-L.-M. :  Le  Bey  an  Arabe,  le  Livre
Sacre  du  Bdbysme  de  Seyyed  Ali  Mohammed  dit  le  Bab,
iraduit  de  P Arabe,  E.  Leroux^  Bibliotheque  Orientate
Elzevirienne,  Paris,  1905  :  pp.  235.

(27)  Nicolas,  A.-L.-M.  :  Essai  sur  le  Cheikhisme.  I.
Cheikh  Ahmed  Lah{ahi.  Paul  Geuthner,  Paris,  1910 :  pp.  72.
Shaykh  Ahmad  al-Ahsa'i,  the  founder  of  the  Shaykhi  School
which  gave  birth  to  the  Babis,  was  born  in  1166/ 17 53  and
died  on  June  28,  1826.  This  pamphlet  gives  an  account  of
his  life  and  doctrines,  and  concludes  with  a  list  of  96  of  his
works.

(28)  The  Orient-Occident  Unity  (Jj-w  isLjjl  ^.^.a^l
w^  3).  See  next  entry,  under  Persian- American  Educa-
tional Society.

(29)  Persian- American  Educational  Society,  Bulletifi  of

the  (^j-et  3  oIh'  Ls'^t^O^  O-o-^^Oj  ^<^  ^^  succeeded  by  the
Orient- Occident  Unity  Bulleti?i.  Vol.  i.  No.  i  of  the  Bulletin,
dated  October,  191 1,  contains  a  statement  of  the  principles
of  the  Society,  an  account  of  its  history  and  progress,  and  a
portrait  of  the  Secretary,  Joseph  S.  Hannen.  The  inception
of  the  idea  of  the  Society  took  place  at  a  meeting  held  at
Washington,  D.C.,  on  October  30,  1909,  and  it  was  formally


III.      FURTHER   NOTES   ON    bAbI   LITERATURE      1 83

inaugurated  on  January  8,  19 10,  when  Mr  Charles  Russell,
then  just  appointed  United  States  Minister  to  Persia,  was
present.  Amongst  the  Persian  workers  were  Mirza  Ahmad
Suhrab  and  Qudsiyya  ("Ghodsia")  Khanim,  "the  first
young  woman  of  Persia  to  come  to  the  United  States  for  the
purpose  of  completing  her  education."  Mr  Sydney  Sprague,
an  active  and  well-known  American  Baha'i,  who  founded  the
Tarbiyat  School  at  Tihran,  seems  to  have  been  one  of  the
chief  promoters  of  this  interesting  and  philanthropic  move-
ment. The  only  other  number  of  the  Bulletin  which  I
possess  (Vol.  i,  No.  5)  is  dated  February  [191 2],  and  con-
tains a  portrait  of  Mirza  Ahmad  Suhrab,  here  described  as
the  "  Founder  and  Treasurer  of  the  Persian- American
Educational  Society."  It  also  contains  an  account  of  the
arrival  from  Persia  of  Mr  W.  Morgan  Shuster  and  of  the
mass-meeting  which  he  addressed  in  Carnegie  Hall  after
his  return  from  Persia  on  March  r,  19 12,  as  well  as  an
announcement  that  'Abbas  Efendi  'Abdu'1-Baha  would
address  theP.-A.  E.  S.  Conference  in  Washington  on  April  r8,
19  and  20,  19 1 2.  I  also  possess  the  Annual  Report  of  the
Conference  of  the  P.-A.  E.  S.  held  at  Washington,  D.C.,  on
June  16-17,  1911.  Of  the  Orient- Occident  Unity  Bulletin
I  possess  only  one  number  (Vol.  i.  No.  8),  dated  May-
June,  191 2.  This  contains  a  portrait  of  'Abdu'1-Baha,  and
an  account  of  the  addresses  delivered  by  him  at  the  Con-
ference at  Washington  on  April  20,  191 2,  and  on  other
subsequent  occasions.

(30)  Phelps,  Myron  H. :  Life  and  Teachings  of  ^ Abbas
Efendi :  a  Study  of  the  Religion  of  the  Bdbis  or  Bahd^is,
founded  by  the  Persian  Bab  and  by  his  Successors,  Bahd^uHldh
and  ^Abbds  Efendi,  with  an  Introduction  by  Edward  G.
Browne.  G.  P.  Putnam's  Sons,  New  York  and  London,
1903:  pp.  xliii-f- 259.


1 84     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

(31)  Remey,  Charles  Mason  :  T/ie  BahdH  Movement
for  Universal  Religion,  Brotherhood  and  Peace :  a  Sketch  of
its  History  and  Teaching,    Washington,  March,  191 2  :  pp.  15.

(32)  Roemer,  Hermann:  Die  Bahl-BehcCi:  eine  Studie
zur  Religionsgeschichte  des  Islam s.  Potsdam,  1911:  pp.  193.
This  book,  the  author's  Inaugural  Dissertation  for  the
Doctorate  in  Higher  Philosophy  in  Tiibingen,  contains  an
excellent,  critical  and  comprehensive  account  of  the  Babi-
Baha'i  movement  from  the  beginning  of  the  Bab's  mission
down  to  the  date  of  composition.  The  accounts  of  the
recent  Baha'i  propaganda  in  the  West  (America,  France,
England,  Germany  and  Hungary)  and  in  the  further  East
(India,  Burma),  and  of  the  attitude  of  the  Baha'is  in  Persia
towards  the  Constitutional  Movement  (pp.  148 — 160)  are
very  interesting,  and  all  sources  of  information  have  been
thoroughly  used.

(33)  Rosen,  Baron  Victor.  The  earlier  notices  of  Babi
Mss.,  published  by  this  scholar  in  the  Collections  Scientifiques
de  rinstitut  des  Langues  Orientates  de  St  Petersbourg  (Vol.  i,
Manuscrits  Arabes^  1877;  Vol.  iii,  Manuscrits  Persans,  1886;
and  Vol.  vi,  pp.  141 — 255,  1890),  are  briefly  noticed  in  the
Notes  appended  to  Vol.  ii  of  my  edition  and  translation  of
the  Traveller's  Narrative,  pp.  208 — 211.  In  1908  Baron
Rosen  published  a  collection  of  Baha'i  Alwdh  (or  "Tablets")
in  the  Historico-Philological  Section  of  the  Imperial
Academy  of  St  Petersburg,  entitled :

IlepBLift  C6opHHK'B  IIocjiaHiil  Ba6Hjiia  Beh^yjiJiaxa,  or: —

Hi  .  t  '^*

jj  3  AJJi   *V:>   ;^^W    f'-t^^    ^J->^;    0-*  Ji*^'    P^-o-a^-oJ'

^LoA.j     ^1    jJ^A.o<^l    j^AAJt     Ju&Jt     4aJ9      J      Ai)^^a>..iguO      vk>^^

'OJ3J  J^3  03J^  ^J
The  volume  contains  pp.  viii  +  186.


III.      FURTHER    NOTES   ON    BABI    LITERATURE      1 85

(34)  Rosenberg,  Miss  EthelJ.:  A  brief  Account  of  the
Bahdi  Movement.     Priory  Press,  London,  191 1  :  pp.  29.

(35)  Scatcherd,  Felicia  F.  ("Felix  Rudolph"):  A
Wise  Man  from  the  East.     Lewis  and  Co.,  London,  n.d.,

reprinted  from  the  International  Psychic  Gazette :  pp.  8.
This  pamphlet  contains  the  authoress's  personal  impressions
of  'Abdu'1-Baha,  whom  she  first  met  in  London  in  the
spring  of  191 1,  and  again  in  Alexandria  in  January,  191 2.

(36)  Skrine,  Francis  Henry:  Bahd'ism,  the  Religion  of
Brotherhood^  and  its  place  in  the  Evolution  of  Creeds.,  with
portrait  of  'Abbas  Efendi  'Abdu'1-Baha.  Longmans,  Green
and  Co.,  London,  ?  1912  :  pp.  72.

(37)  Najm-i~Bdkhtar  {jT^^Kj  j,fi^\  "the  Star  of  the
West"  (see  No.  3,  p.  177,  supra,  s.v.  Bahd'i  News).  Of  this
publication  I  possess  several  numbers  of  the  second  year,
viz.  No.  I  (March  21,  191 1);  No.  2  (April  9,  191 1) ;  No.  3
(April  28,  191 1);  No.  4  (May  17,  191 1);  No.  5  (June  5,
191 1);  Nos  7  and  8  (August  i,  191 1);  No.  14  (Nov.  23,
1911);  No.  15  (Dec.  12,  1911);  and  No.  16  (Dec.  31.,  1911).
In  the  last  three  numbers  the  Persian  part  has  entirely  dis-
appeared. No.  14  contains  an  excellent  portrait  of  'Abdu'l-
Baha  ('Abbas  Efendi)  taken  in  Paris  during  one  of  his
recent  visits  to  that  city.

(38)  Sacy,  Gabriel :  Du  Regne  de  Dieu  et  de  V Agneau
connu  sous  le  nom  de  Babysme :  se  trouve  chez  P Auteur  au
Caire.  Privately  printed  at  Cairo,  and  dated  at  the  end
June  12^  1902.     Comprises  35  pages.

This  curious  little  pamphlet  was  given  to  me  in  Cairo  by
the  author  a  few  days  before  his  death,  which  took  place  very
suddenly  and  unexpectedly  on  the  Persian  Naw-ruz  and
first  day  of  the  Babi  year,  March  21,  1903.  He  was  a
Syrian  Christian  who  had  become  a  fervent  Baha'i   with  a


1 86     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

very  remarkable  faculty  for  interpreting  the  prophecies  of
the  Old  and  New  Testaments,  especially  those  of  the  Books
of  Daniel  and  Revelation,  in  support  of  the  Babi  and
Baha'i  claims.  To  this  topic  the  present  treatise,  which
shows  remarkable  ingenuity,  is  entirely  devoted.  I  remember
his  calling  my  attention  to  the  fact  that  while  in  the  older
Arabic  versions  of  the  New  Testament  the  words  "  the
glory  of  God"  in  Revelation  xxi^  23,  are  rendered  by
Bahd^ijUldh  {aSi\  c^-*),  in  the  later  version  published  at
Beyrout  in  1882  this  expression  had  (purposely,  he  declared,
to  darken  men's  understanding)  been  replaced  by  Majdu'lldh

On  the  day  of  his  death  both  he  and  I  were  entertained
to  lunch  by  a  wealthy  Persian  Baha'i  merchant  of  Cairo,
and  all  the  afternoon  he  argued  vehemently  in  support  of
that  faith.  I  departed  about  seven  o'clock  in  the  evening,
leaving  him  there.  The  next  I  heard  of  him  was  when,  on
returning  to  my  hotel  next  afternoon  about  4  p.m.  I  found
awaiting  me  a  black-edged  card  inviting  me  to  his  funeral,
which  had  already  taken  place  when  I  received  it.  He  left
a  widow  (French  by  nationality)  and  two  little  children.

(39)  Stenstrand,  August  J. :  A  Call  of  Attention  to  the
Bahdists  or  Babists  of  America.  Naperville,  U.S.A.,  Feb.  13,
1907  :  pp.  36.  A  plea  for  Subh-i-Azal's  claim  to  be  regarded
as  the  Supreme  Head  of  the  Babis.

(40)  Stenstrand,  August  J. :  A  Key  to  the  Heaven  of  the
Baydn,  or  a  third  call  of  Attention  to  the  Bahdists  or  Bdbists
of  America.  Chicago,  Jan.  6,  1911  :  pp.  34.  (There  must
evidently  be  a  "  second  Call  of  Attention  "  which  I  do  not
possess,  and  at  the  beginning  of  April,  19 17,  I  received
a  "  fourth  Call  of  Attention,"  a  little  sheet  comprising  four
printed  pages.)


III.      FURTHER   NOTES   ON    BABI   LITERATURE        1 8/

(41)  Stenstrand,  August  J.  :  An  Open  Letter  to  the
Bdbi  World,  or  an  Ansiver  to  a  Letter  of  one  of  my  BahdH
Friends.  (A  single  sheet,  printed  on  both  sides,  at  Chicago,
Jan.  6,  19T1.)

(42)  TyMaHCKifi,  A.  :  IIocTfejiiHee  Cjiobo  Bex^-YjiiH
(l^*H^  wj'^^))  ^i^d  IIocjiaHie  „  Bjraria  B-fecxH  "  (OtjUo  ^-^ ),
from  the  Zapiski  of  the  Russian  Oriental  Society,  Vol.  vii,
pp.  183 — 192  and  193 — 203.  St  Petersburg,  1892  :  pp.  11
=  pp.  193 — 203.  Contains  the  text  and  translation  of
Baha'u'Uah's  Last  Testament,  and  of  his  "  Tablet  of  Good
Tidings."

(43)  TyMaHCKiit,  A. :  KT)  Bonpocy  06^  aeTopax'L  hc-
TopiH  Ba6Hji;oB'b,  nsB-fecTHOw  noji,'i>  HMeneMtTapHxe  MaiiyK'iH
(j-ai».CU  9»JjU)  HJiH  Tapiixe  ^ateji;!!;!;^  (juj^  ^^\j),  from

the  Zapiski  iox  1893,  PP-  Z?> — 45?  St  Petersburg.  An  account,
based  chiefly  on  information  derived  from  Mirza  Abu'1-Fazl
of-Gulpayagan,  of  the  manner  in  which  the  TaVikh-i-Jadid,
or  "  New  History  "  (of  the  Bab)  was  compiled  and  edited  at
the  instance  of  Manakji,  the  Zoroastrian  Agent  in  Tihran.
It  contains  valuable  materials  not  to  be  found  elsewhere.

(44)  TyMancKiB,  A.:  KHTa6e  AEjtecL.  The  Arabic  text
and  Russian  translation  of  the  Kitdb-i-Aqdas,  or  "  Most
Holy  Book,"  of  Baha'u'llah,  published  in  1899  in  the
Memoires  de  P Academie  Imperiale  des  Sciences  de  St  Peters-
bourg,  viii  serie,  Vol.  viii,  No.  6  and  last:  pp.  xlviii+129
+  %\.  The  Introduction  contains  much  valuable  informa-
tion and  many  chronological  data  derived  from  Russian
official  records  and  not  otherwise  available.

(45)  Universal  Principles  of  the  BahdH  Movement,
Social,  Economic,  Governi7iental.    Washington,  191 2  :  pp.  60.

ly^{/\^(i)     Vatralsky,  Stoyan   Krstoff:    Mohammedan   Gnos-
ticism  in   America :    the    Origin,    History,    Character  and


1 88     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

Esoteric  Doctrines  of  the  '  Truth- Seekers.^  Extract  from  the
American  Journal  of  Theology  for  January,  1902,  pp.  57 —
78.  The  author  of  this  paper  is  seriously  alarmed  at  the
startling  success  achieved  by  the  Baha'i  propaganda  in
America,  the  significance  of  which,  he  thinks,  is  generally
underrated.

(47)  Williams,  Basil :  A  Brief  Sketch  of  the  Rise  and
Development  of  Bdbistn,  explanatory  of  a  paper  read  on  this
subject  before  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society  on  Feb.  14,  1899.
Eyre  and  Spottiswoode,  London  :  pp.  14.

(48)  Wilson,  Dr  Samuel  Graham,  D.D.  :  BahdHsm  and
its  Claims :  a  study  of  the  Religion  promulgated  by  BahoHu
Hldh  and  ^Abdu'l-Bahd.  Fleming  H.  Revell  Company,  New
York,  1915  :  pp.  298.  A  hostile  critical  study  of  Baha'i
history  and  doctrine'.

ly  (49)  Wilson,  Dr  Samuel  Graham,  D.D. :  The  Baydn  of
the  Bdb.  Extract  from  the  Princeton  Theological  Review^
pp.  633—654.

II.     Printed  and  Lithographed  Works  in  Persian

AND  Arabic

Itydnu'd-Dalil,  or  "  the  Production  of  the  Proof  for  him
who  would  go  forward  unto  the  Straight  Way."  This  book
was  lithographed  in  Egypt  ( WddVn-Nil)  at  the  beginning
of  Safar,  13 18  (=  May  31,  1900),  and  comprises  112  pages.
It  was  given  to  me  by  Mirza  Ghulamu'llah  of  Qazwin  in
January,  1901,  when  he  passed  through  Cambridge  on  his

^  A  reply  to  this  attack  has  been  published  by  Ibrahfm  G.  Khayru
'llah  under  the  title  of  0  Christians !  Why  do  ye  believe  not  in  Christ?
See  above,  No.  22,  p.  181.


III.      FURTHER   NOTES   ON    BABI    LITERATURE       1 89

way  to  America.  It  deals  with  the  schism  which  arose  at
*Akka  after  Baha'u'llah's  death,  and  warmly  champions  the
cause  of  Muhammad  'Ali  against  his  rival  half-brother
'Abbas  Efendi  'Abdu'1-Baha.

Ill  ^  C  wl

'^ljL«A    ^^Ju   jLooi.,0    l^t    L^U    JIaJt    JU».t    (r)

IhqdquH-Haqq  ("  the  Verification  of  the  Truth "),  an
elaborate  refutation  of  the  Babis  and  Baha'is  by  Aqa
Muhammad  Taqi  of  Hamadan,  the  son  of  Hajji  Muhammad
'All  Niraqi,  formally  approved  by  the  great  Mujtahids  of
Najaf,  Hajji  Muhammad  Kazim  al-Khurasani  and  Hajji
Shaykh  'Abdu'llah  al-Mazandarani,  whose  recommendations,
prefixed  to  the  work,  are  dated  Muharram  4,  a.h.  1326
(=Feb.  7,  1908).  The  book,  lithographed  (without  date  or
place  of  publication)  in  a  large  naskh  hand,  with  "  running
heads,"  marginal  notes  and  insets,  and  a  very  full  table  of
contents  (pp.  3 — 18)  comprises  474  large-sized  pages.  It
reveals  on  the  whole  an  amount  of  knowledge  of  his
opponents'  case  on  the  part  of  the  writer  rarely  to  be  found
in  authors  of  such  polemical  works,  and  numerous  Babi  and
Baha'i  works  are  abundantly  and  correctly  quoted.  Some
30  pages  (pp.  41 — 74)  are  devoted  to  the  history  of  the
sect,  which  is  given  in  a  form  neither  very  accurate  nor  very
fair,  being  based  mainly  on  the  Ndsikhu' t-Tawdrikh  of  the
official  historian  Lisd?iuH-Mulk  down  to  a.d.  1852,  and  for
subsequent  events  on  the  Risdla-i-^Amma  ("Epistle  of  the
Aunt")^  and  information  given  by  an  American  visitor  to
'Akka  who  saw  and  conversed  with  'Abbas  Efendi  'Abdu'l-
Baha.  Some  thirty  heretical  doctrines  of  the  Babis  are
exposed  and  refuted  in  detail,  and  many  others  incidentally,
and  a  large  part  of  the  concluding  portion  of  the  book
(pp.  300 — 427)  is  devoted  to  the  refutation  of  the  views
^  For  description  of  this  woi-k,  see  pp.  227  infra.


I90     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

advanced  by  that  notable  Baha'i  propagandist  Mirza  Abdu'l-
Fazl-i-Gulpayagani  in  his  Kitdbu^l-Fard'id^  pubHshed  in  Cairo
in  1315/1898^  In  spite  of  its  defects,  the  Ihqdqu'l-Haqq  is
on  the  whole  the  best  refutation  of  Babi  and  Baha'i  doctrine
from  the  Muhammadan  point  of  view  which  I  have  met
with.  I  am  indebted  for  one  copy  which  I  possess  to  my
friend  Dr  Sa'id  Khan  of  Hamadan,  and  for  the  other  to  the
author  himself.


A  collection  of  selected  Alwdh  ("Tablets")  of  Baha'u
'llah,  lithographed  in  1308/1890-1  in  excellent  naskh,
and  comprising  360  pages.  The  place  of  production  and
publication  is  not  indicated,  but  this,  and  several  similar
volumes  uniform  with  it,  were,  I  believe,  produced  in  India
at  some  press  officially  recognized  by  the  Baha'i  leaders.
The  volume  was  obtained  in  November,  1896,  in  Hamadan,
Persia,  by  Mr  Basil  Williams,  who  gave  it  to  me  on
February  7,  1897.  There  is  no  title-page,  the  volume  begin-
ning immediately  with  the  Siiratu' l-Haykal.  The  copyist's
name  appears  at  the  end,  but  unfortunately  only  in  the  "New
Writing  "  {Khatt-i-Badi^)  of  the  Baha'is,  which  I  am  unable
to  read.  •*

43:11  X^  ^\^\  (i)

Another  similar  collection  of  Alwdh,  lithographed  (prob-
ably in  India,  as  above)  from  the  writing  of  the  celebrated
Baha'i  calligraphist  Mushkin  Qulam,  whose  colophon  is
dated  the  13th  Rajab,  13 10  (January  31,  1893),  and  con-
taining 329  pages.     Presented  to  me  by  Muhammad  Jawad

^  See  p.  196  infra.


III.      FURTHER   NOTES   ON    bAbI   LITERATURE      I91

of  Qazwin,  one  of  the  most  prominent  adherents  of  'Abbas
Efendi's  rival  and  half-brother  Muhammad  'Ali,  on  the  29th
of  Dhu'l-Qa'da,  13 18  (Feb.  25,  1901).

fiLojCaiJt     ^j»^^j    3    ^jjJi    _,/9t^J     O^     L^'-H^     J>  oi:w..o     |jj^

ml

A  history  of  the  Babis  from  the  beginning  down  to  the
time  of  writing  (Rajab,  1321 —  October,  1903),  entitled
Miftdhu  Bdbi'l-Abwdb  ("  the  Key  to  the.  Gate  of  Gates  "),
by  Dr  Mirza  Muhammad  Mahdi  Khan  ZaHmu'd-Dawla,
owner  and  editor  of  the  Persian  newspaper  Hikmat
("  Wisdom  ").  Printed  at  the  Press  of  Al-Mandr,  Cairo,
1321/1903:  pp.  *-  +  ii-.  The  author,  though  a  deter-
mined antagonist  of  the  Babis,  writes  with  some  appearance
of  moderation.  Though  often  inaccurate,  he  adds  fresh
materials  derived  orally  from  his  father  Muhammad  Taqi,
who  saw  the  Bab  at  Tabriz,  and  from  other  eye-witnesses.
He  also  visited  Baha'u'llah  and  his  sons  and  followers  at
*Akka,  and  Subh-i-Azal  at  Famagusta  in  Cyprus,  and  made
a  collection  of  Babi  and  Baha'i  books,  from  which  he  quotes
lengthy  extracts  in  this  work,  and  which  he  subsequently
deposited  in  the  library  of  the  Mosque  and  University  of
al-Azhar  in  Cairo.

In  the  Introduction  to  this  book  the  author  discusses
the  seven  most  notable  religions  of  the  world,  viz.  (i)
Buddhism;  (2)  Brahminism;  (3)  Fetishism;  (4)  Zoroas-
trianism;  (5)  Judaism,  especially  its  teachings  and  prophecies
concerning  the  Messiah;  (6)  Christianity;  and  (7)  Islam.
He  next  treats  of  the  Sunni  and  Shi'a  traditions  and  beliefs
concerning  the  Mahdi,  and  the  return  of  Jesus  Christ  to
earth  in  the  last  days ;  of  Antichrist  {Dajjdl) ;  of  the  mystical


192      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

signification    of    the    "  detached    letters    of    the    Qur'an "

(ixJaieJI  O!^'  ^5J-^  jfr^)\  of  Siifi  prognostications  con-
cerning the  Mahdi  and  his  Advent ;  and  similar  matters.
Next  follows  the  history  of  the  Bab,  preceded  by  accounts
of  the  following  nine  notable  heresiarchs  who  claimed  to  be
the  Mahdi:  (i)  An-Nafsu^z-Zaktyya;  (2)  '■JJbaydu'lldh  al-
Mahdi  al-Fdtirtii ;  {^  Ibn  Tumart ;  {^)  Al-'' Abbas  al-Fdtimi ;

(5)  Sayyid  Ahmad,  the  antagonist  of  the  Sikhs  in  India;

(6)  Mirzd  ''Ah  Muhammad  the  Bab;  (7)  As-Saniisi,  whose
son  the  author  visited  at  Jaghbdb  in  1295/1878  ;  (8)  Mirzd
Ghuld7n  Ahmad  Qddiydni ;  (9)  Muhammad  Ahmad  the
Mahdi  of  the  Sudan,  of  whom  the  author  gives  a  full  and
favourable  account.  The  book  concludes  with  the  account
of  the  spread  of  Baha'ism  in  America  which  has  been  trans-
lated at  pp.  143-7  supra.

^^   ^^aJt    >waJU    OW     J^^yj    ^^    O^-**^'  .^fr^J    i"^)

Rajmu' sh~Shaytdn fi  RadhdiWl-Baydn  ("the  Stoning  of
Satan :  or  the  infamies  of  the  Bayan  "),  by  Hajji  Shaykh
'Abdu'r-Rahim ;  a  refutation,  in  Persian,  of  an  Apology  for
Babiism  entitled  KitdbuU-Imdn  ji  Iz-hdri  NuqtatV l-Baydn
("the  Book  of  Faith:  making  plain  the  Point  of  the
Bayan ").  The  book,  which  is  lithographed,  comprises
179  pp.,  but  there  is  no  indication  of  place  or  date  of
publication.

A  curious  feature  of  the  book  is  that  the  whole  text  of
the  work  which  it  is  written  to  refute  is  given,  the  author's
refutation  taking  the  form  of  a  running  commentary,  distin-
guished from  his  adversary's  words  by  being  overlined.
Each  clause  of  the  KitdbuH-Imdn  is  introduced  by  the  words
^'-  Qdldr-Rajim^^   ("the  Accursed  One  hath  said'),   while


III.      FURTHER   NOTES   ON    BABI   LITERATURE       1 93

each  clause  of  the  refutation  begins  "  Yaqulu  ^Abdu'r-
Rahim'^  ("says  'Abdu'r-Rahim  ").  The  refutation  is  often
so  feeble  that  I  am  inclined  to  believe  that 'the  book  really
forms  part  of  the  Babi  propaganda,  the  essence  of  it  being
the  original  Kttdbti l-Imdn,  and  the  weak  reply  being  added
merely  to  ensure  its  safe  and  open  circulation  amongst
Musulmans.  Moreover  the  extent  of  the  refuted  work
greatly  exceeds  that  of  the  refutation.  This  view  is  shared
by  the  author  of  the  polemical  anti-Babi  work  Minhdju't-
Tdlibiii  (see  infra),  who  says  (p.  337) :

"  Know  that  the  books  of  the  Babis  are  chiefly  in  manu-
script, beautifully  written  with  the  utmost  care,  agreeably  to
the  command  of  the  Bab,  who  has  so  commanded  in  the
Baydn.  They  have  few  printed  books,  and  what  they  have
are  only  bought  and  sold  amongst  themselves,  not  given  to
strangers,  save  to  such  as  they  hope  to  convert,  if  they  deem
them  fitting  recipients.  The  only  exception  is  the  Rajmu'sh-
Shaytdn^  which  is  printed  and  sold  openly  by  the  book-
sellers.     This    book    purports    to    have    been     written    in

refutation  of  a   Babi   book   entitled   Ki/db-i-Imd?i The

original  author  is  either  an  Azali  or  a  Baha'i,  it  is  uncertain
which ;  and  one  Rahim  by  name  has  written  a  reply  to  him.
We  know  nothing  of  his  identity,  nor  who  he  is,  nor  of  what
place."  The  author  of  the  Minhdj  adds  that  either  the  so-
called  "  refutation  "  was  really  written  by  the  Babis  to  dis-
credit Islam  by  the  weakness  of  the  arguments  adduced ;  or
the  author  of  it  was  a  very  ignorant  Muhammadan ;  or,  if
he  was  not  very  ignorant,  the  Babis  have  tampered  with  what
he  wrote  to  make  it  unconvincing  or  even  ridiculous.

iSj"i^  "ajI  3  \^j^  ''aJUj   (y)
Risdla-i-Bushrd  iva  Aya-i-Kubrd  ("the  Tract  of  Good
Tidings   and   the    Most    Great    Sign ").     A    Persian    tract

B.  B.  13


194     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

triumphantly  chronicling  the  fate  of  Mirza  Yahya,  the  ex-
Azali,  who,  disregarding  the  threats  and  warnings  addressed
to  him  by  'Abbas  Efendi  'Abdu'1-Baha,  died  suddenly  at
Jedda.  See  pp.  158 — 164  supra,  where  an  analysis  of  the
contents  is  given.  Hindiyya  Press,  Cairo,  Rajab  9,  1316
(=  November  30,  1898):  pp.  27  of  13  x  9  centimetres.  Sent
to  me  by  Muhammad  Jawad  from  'Akka,  Feb.  25,  1901.

'aZwI^  J>^j^    ^^j.^*.

A  tract  written  by  Khddim-i-Abhd  (i.e.  Mirza  Aqa  Jan  of
Kashan,  entitled /andb-i-Khddimu'lldh)  in  reply  to  Jahrumi,
in  support  of  the  claims  of  Mirza  Muhammad  'All  and  con-
testing those  of  his  rival  and  half-brother  'Abbas  Efendi
'Abdu'1-Baha.  Lithographed  at  Cairo  ( Wddt^n-Nil),  29
Dhu'l-Hijja,  1319  (-April  8,  1902):  pp.  223.

Ml

A  Persian  treatise  containing  an  account  of  the  life  and
teachings  of  Shaykh  Ahmad  Zaynu'd-Di'n  al-Ahsa'i,  the
founder  of  the  Shaykhi  sect  of  the  Shi 'a,  out  of  which  the
Bab  arose.     Lithographed  at  Bombay,  without  date.

Al-QawluH-Fasl  ft  Ma'-rifati'l-Amr  waH-Asl^  an  Arabic
lithographed  tract  of  32  pp.  containing  a  brief  account  of
the  origin  and  development  of  the  Babi  and  Baha'i  faiths,
and  supporting  the  claims  of  Mirza  Muhammad  'All  against
his  half-brother  'Abbas  Efendi  'Abdu'1-Baha.  It  is  freely
illustrated  by  quotations  from  the  Bible,  and  was  published
at  the  beginning  of  Muharram,  1320  (=  April  10,  1902).


III.      FURTHER   NOTES   ON   BABI   LITERATURE      1 95

Ml  W

2^3jLoJt  w^Lw*;^  du^  j\j^\  w^U^  (\\)

This  is  the  original  of  the  work  translated  by  Yuhanna

Dawiid  into  English  (see  p.  178  supra^  No.  10)  under  the

title  Mysterious  Forces  of  Civilization^  written  in  Persian  by

an  eminent  BahdHi  philosopher.    Lithographed  at  Bombay  in

1310/1892-3:  pp.  154.

The  complete  text  of  the  Kitdb-i-Aqdas,  followed  by  a
selection  of  "  Tablets  "  {Alwdh)  by  Baha'u'Uah,  lithographed
in  an  excellent  naskh  in  1 308/1 890-1.  According  to  the
late  Baron  Victor  Rosen,  from  whom  I  received  it  in
November,  1893,  it  was  lithographed  at  'Akka;  but  I  have
a  pencil  note  (whence  derived  I  forget)  to  say  that  it  and
two  similar  volumes  were  produced  in  Bombay  at  the  Press
of  Dutt  Prashad  (^^/J  O3  ''«**Ja^),  which  belongs  to  the
Afndn  or  kinsmen  of  the  Bab.  The  copyist  was  Hajji
Mirza  Husayn  of  Shiraz,  or,  as  he  calls  himself  in  the
colophon,    "  Husayn    who  was   imprisoned    in    Khartiim  "

(^^jjiJt  ^  O"**-*^  L^J^'  Ot^^)'     It  contains  380  pp.


Ajjju^l    aAXw's)!    w>t^ft.    ^    i-^t    jjjJI    w>l;:£»  (w)

^^^)  l^JL^a  aJ'jJlJCw's)!  AJUJJI  j^  3  a^JISi  a3L»jJI  3  (a^IaJ

Three  treatises  by  Mirza  Abu'1-Fazl  of  Gulpayagan,
printed  at  Cairo  at  the  Mawsu'dt  Press  in  13 18/1900,  at
the  expense  of  Hajji  Mirza  Hasan  of  Khurasan  and  Fara-
ju'llah  Zaki  the  Kurd,  by  whom  all  rights  are  reserved,  and
comprising  279  pages.     Ad-DuraruU-Bahiyya  ("Pearls  of

13—2


196      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

Great  Price")  fills  the  greater  part  of  the  volume,  viz.
pp.  4 — 202.  This  is  followed  by  a  commentary  on  the  verse
of  the  Quran  (Ixxv,  19)  "and  afterwards  it  shall  be  Our
part  to  explain  it"  (pp.  203 — 214).  The  third  and  last
portion  of  the  book  comprises  the  treatise  entitled  Iskan-
dariyya  ("Alexandrian"),  pp.  215 — 278.


JJjJI    ^Lil      d^a-_5      OW-:*     4^5     Jc5Ij.aJI      w>U£9    (\i)

The  KitdbtiH-FardHd,  on  the  different  kinds  of  proof
and  argument,  in  reply  to  criticisms  directed  by  Shaykh
'Abdu's-Salam  against  the  Ahlul-Iqdn,  i.e.  the  Baha'is ;  by
the  above-mentioned  Mi'rza  Abu'l  Fazl  of  Gulpayagan.  This
book  comprises  pp.  25  +  731,  was  completed  at  Cairo  on
the  I  St  of  Shawwal,  1315  (=  February  23,  1898),  and  was
printed  at  the  expense  of  Miiza  'Abdu'l-Karim  of  Tihran.

^C«sM>tAZ^33  w^L)  ''A.f^i  j^   d^  9^^^t^   ^^or^  u>  ^<t3lLe   (to)

A  Bombay  lithographe4  edition,  dated  the  26th  of
Rabi'  II,  1308  (=  December  6,  1890),  of  the  Travellers
Narrative  written  to  illustrate  the  Episode  of  the  Bdb  which
I  published  with  an  English  translation  and  notes  at  the
Cambridge  University  Press  in  189 1.     It  contains  240  pp.

A  refutation  and  exposure  of  Babi  and  Baha'i  doctrine,
entitled  Minhdju' t-Tdlibin  ("  the  Way  of  Seekers  "),  by  Hajji
Husayn-quli  JadiduH-Isldm.  The  author  is  an  Armenian
from  Zarkaran  near  Shirvvan,  whose  original  name,  before  he
was  converted  to  Islam,  was,  as  he  informs  us  on  pp.  59 — 60,


III.      FURTHER    NOTES   ON    BABI   LITERATURE      197

Arakil  the  son  of  Hartian.  This  book  is  discursive,  ill-
arranged,  and  badly  written,  but  contains  a  good  deal  of
valuable  information,  not  only  about  the  Babis,  but  about
other  heterodox  sects  of  Islam.  It  was  lithographed  at
Bombay  in  Sha'ban,  1320  (=  November,  1902),  and  contains
400  pp.

17.     Recantation  of  Mirzd  Badi'-u'lldfL

A  printed  Persian  tract  of  57  pp.  without  title,  date,  or
place  of  publication,  in  which  Mirza  Badi'u'Uah,  the  son
of  Baha'u'llah,  renounces  his  allegiance  to  his  brother
Muhammad  'x\li  and  declares  his  acceptance  of  the  claims
of  his  half-brother  'Abbas  Efendi  'Abdu'1-Baha.  This  hap-
pened in  the  spring  of  1903'  when  I  was  in  Cairo,  but  the
tract  in  question  was  only  communicated  to  me  on  October  9,
1910,  by  M.  Hippolyte  Dreyfus,  who  wrote  concerning  it:
"  J'ai  joint  au  paquet  une  petite  brochure  de  Badi'ou'llah  que
je  ne  sais  si  vous  connaissez,  et  qui  je  crois  vous  interessera,
car  il  y  expose  toute  I'histoire  de  ses  difficultes  avec  Mo-
hammed Ali,  et  son  retour  a  'Abbas  Efendi."

At  the  end  is  the  seal  of  Mirza  Badi'u'llah,  and  a  manu-
script note  in  Persian  stating  that  the  original  document,
written,  signed  and  sealed  by  him,  is  extant  and  available.

'UU   *'a^jU«  ''A-tfjij  j^   ^^i\  j>^\6^  ''aJIjIa  ''djjilj  (^A)

A  lithographed  tract  of  16  pp.,  undated,  entitled  "the
Terrible  Episode  of  the  Servant  of  the  Most  Glorious  in  the
Blessed  and  Supreme  Mausoleum."  It  contains  an  account
of  the  cruel  treatment  to  which  Mirza  Aqa  Jan  of  Kashan
was  exposed  in  the  garden  of  Behje  at  'Akka  in  May,  1897,

^  I  possess  brief  renunciations  in  the  same  sense,  signed  by  Mirza
Badi'u'llah  and  Mirza  Sayyid  'All  Afndn  respectively,  both  dated
February  4,   1903.


198      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

at  the  hands  of  the  partisans  of  'Abbas  Efendi  'Abdu'l-
Baha  on  account  of  his  protest  against  the  claims  advanced
by  the  latter,  and  his  adherence  to  his  half-brother  and  rival
Mirza  Muhammad  'All.  This  protest  was  made  on  May  28,
1897,  on  the  fifth  anniversary  of  Baha'u'llah's  death,  to  a
number  of  prominent  Baha'is  assembled  for  this  purpose,
and  is  fully  reported,  occupying  seven  pages.  In  conse-
quence of  this  protest  Mirza  Aqa  Jan  was  grievously  mal-
treated, beaten,  imprisoned  in  a  stable,  robbed  of  his  books,
threatened  with  strangulation^  and  excommunicated  by  the
followers  of  'Abbas  Efendi.


III.     Manuscript  Literature.

Notwithstanding  the  considerable  number  of  Babi  and
Baha'i  works  which  have  been  printed  and  lithographed  in
recent  years,  the  bulk  of  this  literature  and  the  most
important  part  of  it  exists  only  in  manuscript.  None  of  the
writings  of  the  Bab  or  Subh-i-Azal  have,  so  far  as  I  know,
ever  been  printed  in  their  entirety,  though  a  few  of  the
former  have  been  translated  ;  and  though  the  Kitdb-i-Aqdas
and  other  important  writings  of  Bahau'llah  have  been  printed
or  lithographed,  many  of  these  also  are  only  available  in
manuscript.

Twenty-five  years  ago  I  published  in  the  Journal  of  the
Royal  Asiatic  Society  for  1892  (pp.  433 — 499  and  63  7 — 710)
a  Catalogue  and  Description  0/2']  Bdbi  Manuscripts  which
at  that  time  constituted  my  collection.  Since  then  I  have
acquired  a  certain  number  more  mss.,  some  from  Cyprus,
but  the  most  valuable  and  interesting  portion  from  a  Babi
(Azali)  copyist  in  Tihran  with  whom  I  was  put  in  touch  by
a  learned  Persian  friend  (a  convert  to  Christianity)  in  191 2.
The  British  Museum  also  acquired  about  the  years  1897-


III.      FURTHER   NOTES   ON    bAbI   LITERATURE      I99

1899  some  53  Babi  and  Azali  mss.,  which  have  not  yet  been
described  in  print.  These  all  came  from  Cyprus,  through
the  late  Commissioner  of  Larnaca,  Mr  Claude  Delaval
Cobham,  from  Subh-i-Azal's  son  Rizwan  'All,  who  finally
made  profession  of  the  Christian  religion  and  adopted  the
name  of  "Constantine  the  Persian."  These  mss.,  of  which
the  class-marks  range  from  Or.  5080  to  Or.  6887,  were
examined  by  my  friend  Dr  Ahmad  Khan,  for  some  time
University  teacher  of  Persian  in  Cambridge,  who,  before
leaving  England  about  the  end  of  191 5,  presented  me  with
the  notes  which  he  had  written  on  them.

I  do  not  propose  to  give  here  a  formal  description  of
these  manuscripts,  but  only  to  enumerate  the  chief  works
represented  amongst  them,  sometimes  by  two  or  three
separate  mss.,  utilizing  for  this  purpose  both  my  own  mss.
and  Dr  Ahmad  Khan's  descriptions  of  those  in  the  British
Museum,  supplied  (as  many  of  my  own  were)  by  Rizwan
'All.  Both  these  collections  are  derived  almost  entirely
from  Azali  sources,  but  there  are  also  many  Baha'i  mss.  in
the  British  Museum,  of  which  I  have  no  notes,  and  of
which,  therefore,  I  can  offer  no  description.  I  shall  arrange
the  manuscript  'works  which  I  propose  to  notice  in  the  fol-
lowing classes :

(A)  Works  by  the  Bab.

(B)  Works  by /andd-i-  Quddus  (Hajji  Mulla  Muhammad
'All  of  Barfurdsh),  who  was  killed  at  Barfurilsh  in  Mazan-
daran  after  the  reduction  of  the  Babi  stronghold  at  Shaykh
Tabarsi.

(C)  Works  by  Mirza  Yahya  Subh-i-Azal.

{D)  Works  by  Mulla  Rajab  'All  Qahir  (assassinated  at
Baghdad  or  Karbala  by  Baha'is)  and  other  Azalis,  such  as
Shaykh  Ahmad  Ruhi  of  Kirman  and  Mirza  Aqa  Khan  of


200     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

Kirman  (both  put  to  death  at  Tabriz,  together  with  Mirza
Hasan  Khan  Khabiru'l-Mulk,  by  Muhammad  'Ali  Mirza,  on
July  17,  1896)^

{E)  Baha'i  works,  which  should  be  subdivided  into
those  written  by  himself  or  his  followers  during  his  lifetime,
and  those  written  after  his  death  by  his  rival  sons  'Abbas
Efendi  'Abdu'1-Baha  and  Mirza  Muhammad  'Ali,  and  their
respective  partisans.  As,  however,  I  shall  have  occasion  to
mention  here  but  few  Baha'i  works,  I  shall  ignore  this
logical  division.

{F)     Sundry  historical  monographs  of  Babi  authorship.
(A)     Works  by  the  Bab.

As-Sahlfatu  baynd l-Haramayn.,  "the  Tract  [revealed  or
pubhshed]  between  the  two  Holy  Cities,"  in  answer  to  ques-
tions propounded  by  "  al-Muhit "  and  Sayyid  'All  of  Kirman.
This  is  one  of  the  Bab's  earliest  works,  having  been  com-
posed in  the  spring  of  1261  (=a.d.  1845),  i^^  the  first  year
of  the  Manifestation.  Considerable  use  has  been  made  of
it  by  M.  A.-L.-M.  Nicolas  in  his  excellent  and  erudite  work
Seyyed  Ali  Mohammed  dit  le  Bab  (pp.  42 — 3,  47 — 8,  206,
207,  209,  etc).

Rizwan  'Ali  sent  two  copies  of  this  work  to  England,
one,  now  marked  Or.  5325,  to  the  British  Museum,  and  one
(C.  28*)  to  myself.  The  best  and  oldest  manuscript  which
1  have  seen,  however,  copied  at  Shirazin  1263/1847,  belongs
to  the  Leyden  library,  and  forms  the  ninth  and  last  com-
ponent part  of  MS.  No.  2414.     It  begins  :

1  See  njy  Persian  Revolution,  pp.  93 — 96.


III.      FURTHER    NOTES   ON    bAbI    LITERATURE      20I
^;>aj  iwjLA^I  u^j*^\  \ji^  (sit:)  cJp  j3  w^U^   tjjb  ^\

Hi  0    ^

The  Bab  herein  calls  himself  aSj\  duaj  ("the  Remnant
of  God"),  and  j^>*3t  ^a)I  Ua  ("this  Arabian  youth"),
alluding  to  the  fact  that  he  was  a  Sayyid,  and  therefore
descended  from  the  Prophet  Muhammad.  My  ms.  of  this
work,  comprising  120  pp.,  was  completed  by  Rizwan  'All  on
December  26,  1905,  for  Mr  C.  D.  Cobham,  who  presented
it  to  me  in  May,  1906.  Bound  in  at  the  end  is  a  note  by
Subh-i-Azal  in  Persian  on  the  disposal  of  the  Bab's  body.

Commentaries  on  Suras  of  the  Qur^dn.

The  Bab,  as  is  well  known ',  classified  all  that  he
wrote  under  five  heads  or  categories,  to  wit  (i)  "Verses"
(dydt)  in  the  style  of  the  Qur'dn  :  (2)  Prayers  and  suppli-
cations imundjdt) ;  (3)  Commentaries  {tafdsir) ;  (4)  Scien-
tific treatises  {Shu' tin  i-ilmiyya\  such  as  answers  to  enquirers;
and  (5)  "  Persian  words"  or  treatises.  These  are  known  as
the  "Five  Grades,''  "States,"  or  "Styles"  {Shu' un-i-khamsa),
and,  as  we  shall  see  presently,  specimens  of  all  five  are
sometimes  collected  together  in  one  volume  under  this  title.

Of  commentaries  {tafdsir)  I  am  acquainted  with  five
only,  on  the  first,  second,  twelfth,  one  hundred  and  third,
and  one  hundred  and  eighth  siiras,  as  follows  :

'dU^UJt  Zj^  j.^.>»Jlj  (t)

Commentary  on  the  Siiratu7-J^dtiha,  or  opening  chapter
of  the  Qui^dn.     I  have  a  copy  of  this,  and  Dr  Ahmad  Khan

^  See  my  second  paper  on  the  Babis  in  the  f.  R.  A.  S.  for  1889,
p.  893;  also  my  Catalogue  and  Description  of  2"]  Bdbi  MSS.  in  the
f  R.  A.  S.  for  1892,  pp.  452 — 3  and  462  et  seqq. ;   and  Vol.  ii  of  the
Traveller'' s  Narrative,  pp.  343 — 7.


202     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

has  furnished  me  with  a  note,  on  the  British  Museum  mss.
Or.  5276  and  Or.  5277,  described  by  him  as  containing
commentaries,  on  the  first  two  sui-as  of  the  Qur'dn^  viz.  the
Suratu'l-Fatiha  and  the  SiHratuH-Baqara,  and  copied  in
1897  by  Subh-i-Azal's  son  Rizwan  'Ah'.  According  to  a
statement  made  to  me  by  Subh-i-AzaF,  Janab-i-Quddiis  also
wrote  a  commentary  on  the  Suratu  l-Hamd  {i.e.  the  Suratu'l-
Fdtihd).  Perhaps  the  Bab's  commentary  on  this  s-Ara
should  be  regarded  simply  as  forming  the  initial  portion  of
the  better-known  commentary  to  be  next  mentioned.  In
confirmation  of  this  view  see  my  Catalogue. .  .in  the^.  R.  A.  S.
for  1892,  pp.  498 — 9.

'3j^t  5;^-j  j.j>»A.'t  (r)

Commentary  on  the  second  chapter  of  the  Quf^dn,
entitled  Sitratu* l-Baqara.  Of  this,  as  mentioned  in  the  last
article,  there  is  a  manuscript  in  the  British  Museum,  and  I
have  also  a  manuscript  (BBF.  6)  transmitted  to  me  from
Persia  about  the  end  of  1890  through  Subh-i-Azal.  It  is
fully  described  in  my  Catalogue...  in  they^  R.  A.  S.  for  1892,
pp.  493 — 9,  where  the  passage  referring  to  it  in  the
Ta' rikh-i-Jadid  is  also  cited.

Commentary  on  the  Suratu  Y-dsuf  (Silra  xii  of  the
Qur'dii).  There  are  two  copies  of  this  in  the  British  Museum
(Or.  3539  and  Or.  6681) ;  at  least  one  other  (described  by
the  late  Baron  Victor  Rosen  in  his  Collections  Scientifiques :
Manuscrits  Arabes,  pp.  170 — 191)  at  Petrograd ;  and
another,  copied  for  me  in  Constantinople  in  1 891,  in  my
own  hbrary  (BBC.  4).  Concerning  this  work,  which  is
also     called     Qayyiimu^l-Asmd    and    Ahsanu'l-Qisas,    see

^    Traveller'' s  Narratwe^  ii,  p.  340-


III.      FURTHER    NOTES   ON    BABI    LITERATURE      203

J,  R.  A.  S.  for  1889,  pp.  904 — 909;  ibid.,  1892,  pp.  261  —
268  and  699 — 701  ;  and  the  Traveller's  Narrative^  ii,  p.  3,
n.  3.

This  book  is  a  rhapsody  rather  than  a  commentary,  con-
taining as  many  chapters  or  suras  (tii)  as  there  are  verses
in  the  original  siira  in  the  Qur'd?i,  to  each  of  which  a  special
title  is  assigned.  The  specimens  printed  by  Baron  Rosen
(see  previous  paragraph)  are  amply  sufficient  to  enable  the
student  conversant  with  Arabic  to  form  a  judgment  of  the
work.

Commentary  on  the  Siiraiu^l-^Asr  (Sdra  ciii  of  the
Qur'd?!).  There  is  a  manuscript  of  this  (Or.  51 12)  in  the
British  Museum,  copied  by  Rizwan  'Ali  in  1897,  and  I
possess  another  manuscript  (BBF.  7)  described  in  my  Cata-
logue of  Bdbi  MSS.  {J.  R.  A.  S.  for  1892,  pp.  637 — 642).
In  both  MSS.  this  work  is  followed  by  the  Tasbihi- Fdtima
("  Doxology  of  Fatima  ").

This  commentary  was  composed  by  the  Ba  >  in  Isfahan
about  1846  at  the  request  of  the  Imdm,-Jum''a  of  that  city,
and  is  remarkable  for  the  humility  of  its  tone.  Thus  he
says  in  the  preface :  "  Before  mentioning  one  word  of  the
nature  of  commentary,  I  beg  His  Reverence  (may  God  con-
tinue the  shadow  of  his  clemency !)  to  forgive  me  if  he  should
notice  any  error  of  my  pen,  since  faultiness  is  of  the  nature
of  man  of  every  circumstanced"

'^^5sJI    dj^w  j-j**»a5   (1)

Commentary  on  the  Siiratu^ l-Kawthar  (Siira  cviii  of  the
Qur'dn).  There  is  a  manuscript  of  this  work  (Or.  5080)  in
the    British   Museum,   copied  in    1308/1890-1,   apparently

^  For  the  original,  seeyi  K.  A.  S.  for  1892,  p.  639,  11.  18 — 21.


204     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABf  RELIGION

by  Rizwan  'All,  and  I  also  possess  a  manuscript  (BBF.  8)
described  on  pp.  643 — 8  of  my  Catalogue  of  Bdbi  MSS.
{/.  R.  A.  S.  for  1892).  It  was  composed  by  the  Bab  for
Sayyid  Yahya  of  Darab  (the  leader  of  the  Nayn'z  insurrec-
tion), who  is  addressed  by  name  in  a  passage  near  the
beginning.

'A*^  JS-N)^  (y)

The  ''Seven  Proofs"  {Dald'il-i-Sab'a),  of  which  the
French  translation  by  A.-L.-M.  Nicolas  (Paris,  1902)  has
been  already  mentioned.  There  is  a  ms.  (Or.  5100)  in  the
British  Museum,  on  which  i3r  Ahmad  Khan  has  the  fol-
lowing caustic  remarks :

"  Neither  the  style  nor  the  composition  is  good,  but  the
author  himself  declares  that  Accidence,  Syntax,  and  other
exoteric  sciences  exist  only  for  the  comprehension  of  the
Heavenly  Scriptures  and  Divine  Sciences,  therefore  what
need  of  them  has  one  who  is  himself  the  source  of  the
latter?... If  this  book  is  by  the  Bab,  it  is  a  very  extraordinary
thing  that  he  seeks  to  establish  the  truth  of  his  mission  by
the  words  of  those  who  believe  in  him,  adducing  to  this  end
the  arguments  of  Sayyid  Yahya  of  Darab.

"The  manuscript  is  transcribed  in  the  handwriting  of
Rizwan  'All,  and  in  addition  to  the  badness  of  the  style,
for  which  the  original  is  responsible,  it  also  suffers  from
numerous  clerical  errors.  It  would  appear  that  Rizwan  'Ali
was  so  much  occupied  with  his  religion  and  doctrine,  and
the  transcription  [of  books  connected  therewith]  that  he  had
no  time  to  read  the  Qur'dn,  all  the  verses  cited  from  which
are  erroneously  written."

Another  copy  of  the  "  Seven  Proofs "  forms  the  con-
cluding portion  (ff.  92 — 160)  of  one  of  my  mss.  (BBP.  7).
I  made  a  copy  of  this  and  submitted  it  to  Subh-i-Azal  in


III.      FURTHER   NOTES   ON    bAbI   LITERATURE      205

1889.  He  returned  it  after  a  few  days  with  some  correc-
tions, adding  that  it  was  written  by  the  Bab  for  his  amanu-
ensis Sayyid  Husayn  of  Yazd.

Seey.  R.  A.  S.  for  1889,  pp.  912 — 918  and  looi  — 1002  ;
ibid.,  1892,  pp.  447 — 8;  Traveller's  Narrative,  ii,  pp.  27,
n.  I,  221,  274,  and  352,  n.  i.

'a^U  Ojbj  (a)

The  Ziydrat-ndma,  or  "  Book  of  Visitation,"  which  forms
the  first  part  of  my  MS.  BBP.  7  (ff.  19—45)  is  briefly
noticed  in  the  J.  R.  A.  S.  for  1889,  pp.  896 — 902  and
TOGO,  and  ibid,  for  1892,  p.  445.  I  have  there  endeavoured
to  show  that  it  is  identical  with  a  ms.  described  by  Mirza
Kazem-Beg  in  tha  Journal  A siatique  for  1866  (viii,  pp.  498 —
502),  and  is  also  the  work  referred  to  by  Gobineau
(through  a  misunderstanding  of  the  title)  as  the  "  Journal  of
the  Pilgrimage."  This  was  probably  only  one  of  several
Ziydrat-ndmas  or  Ziydrdt  composed  by  the  Bab,  for  Subh-i-
Azal  mentioned  amongst  22  volumes  which  he  possessed  in
Baghdad,  and  which  were  taken  from  him  by  Baha'u'Uah's
followers,  one  volume  of  Mundjat  (Prayers)  and  Ziydrdt
(Visitations).  See  Traveller's  Narrative,  ii,  pp.  337—8,  339
and  341.

The  Persian  Baydn  is  by  far  the  most  important,  the
most  systematic,  the  most  coherent,  and  the  most  intelligible
of  the  Bab's  works.  Manuscripts  are  not  very  uncommon.
There  are  at  least  two  (Or.  2819^  and  Or.  5760)  in  the
British  Museum ;  one  (Or.  34)  in  the  Cambridge  University
Library;  one  (Suppl.  Persan,  1070,  ff.  1—284)  in  the
Bibliotheque  Nationale  at  Paris  ;  two  or  three  (one  of  which
is  described  by  Baron  Rosen  in  his  Collections  Scientifiques  de

^  This  is  a  very  good  MS.,  copied  by  the  poet  Nabil.


206     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

rinstitut  des  Langiies  Orientaies  de  Saint-P^tersbourg,  Vol.  iii,
Manuscrits  Per  sans,  pp.  i — 32)  in  Russia;  and  two  (BBP.  8
and  BBC.  3)  in  my  own  library.  For  description  of  the
latter,  see  my  Catalogue  (y.  R.  A.  S.  for  1892,  pp.  450 — i
and  698 — 9).  See  alsoy!  P.  A.  S.  for  1889,  pp.  918  ^/  segq.
and  passim ;  also  the  Traveller's  Narrative,  Vol.  ii,  passim.
I  have  also  published  an  analytical  Index  of  the  subject-
matter  in  my  edition  of  Hajji  Mirza  Jani's  NuqtatuU-Kdf^,
pp.  liv — xcv.


(10)     Books  of  '-'■Names''^  or  '■''Names  of  All  Phings.^''

Of  all  the  Bab's  writings  no  category  is  so  unintelligible,
and,  to  the  ordinary  reader,  so  tedious  and  so  unprofitable
as  this.  It  is  represented  in  the  British  Museum  by  the
Mss.  Or.  5278,  Or.  5481,  Or.  5487,  Or.  5488,  Or.  5489,
Or.  5490,  Or.  5869  and  Or.  6255 ;  and  in  my  library  by
BBF.  9  and  BBF.  10  (see/.  R.  A.  S.  for  1892,  pp.  648  —
659),  and  two  other  volumes,  corresponding  to  these,  each
to  each,  copied  in  13 30/191 2  and  sent  to  me  in  June,  191 3,
by  the  Babi  copyist  in  Persia  mentioned  on  p.  198  supra.
The  titles  of  these  volumes  differ  a  little  (^U-^'n)!  w>^^^'

ftl.o-»''^^  j->-»»a2»  1^5^  c^  t^.o-*'^  w^U^s),  and  I  cannot  say  posi-
tively how  far  they  represent  identically  the  same  work,  but
they  are  at  least  very  similar,  and  are  all  intolerably  mono-
tonous. The  six  lines  cited  on  p.  649  of  the  J.  R.  A.  S.  for
1892  are,  mutatis  mutandis  {i.e.  substituting  a  new  "Attri-
bute "  or  "  Name  "  of  God  in  each  section)  a  fair  sample  of
the  whole.  I  doubt  if  anyone,  even  the  most  enthusiastic
believer,  could  read  or  understand  them,  and  I  am  certain
that  no  one  could  translate  them.

^  Vol.  XV  of  the  E.f.   IV.  Gibh  Memorial  Series.


III.      FURTHER    NOTES  ON    bAbI    LITERATURE      20/

(ii)     ShtMn-i-khamsa  (''Five  Grades"  or  "Styles").

Allusion  has  already  been  made  to  the  "Five  Grades"
or  "Styles"  into  which  the  Bab  divided  all  that  he  wrote^
and  amongst  Babi  mss.  we  not  unfrequently  come  across
volumes  bearing  this  title  and  containing  selections  from
each  of  these  "Five  Grades."  One  such  volume  in  my
library  (BBF.  2)  is  described  in  my  Catalogue  {/.  R.  A.  S.
for  1892,  pp.  462 — 470).  Two  apparently  similar  mss.  in
the  British  Museum  (Or.  5612  and  Or.  6680)  are  entitled
respectively  Ol^^  OjJ^   OW  j>  ^"^  t^  OW^   w^U^

Two  of  my  mss.  (BBF.  i  and  BBF.  3)  bear  the  titles
of  "  Works  of  the  Point,"  i.e.  the  Bab,  or  "of  the  Bayan"
(^Athdru  n-Nuqta,  AthdruH- Bayan).  Descriptions  of  them
will  be  found  in  my  Catalogue  {/.  R.  A.  S.  for  1892,
pp.  451 — 462  and  470 — 483).  A  MS.  in  the  British  Museum
(Or.  5629)  bears  the  similar  title  of  Athdr-i-mutafarriqa-i-
Baydn  ("  Divers  Works  of  the  Bayan  ").  These  works  are
similar,  but  not  identical,  each  forming  a  kind  of  chresto-
mathy  of  the  innumerable  Prayers,  Visitations,  Invocations,
etc.  composed  by  the  Bab.  The  contents  of  BBF.  3  include
pieces  of  much  greater  interest  than  anything  to  be  found  in
BBF.  I.  The  British  Museum  ms.  I  have  not  seen,  and
Dr  Ahmad  Khan's  notice  of  it  is  too  brief  to  render  any
judgement  on  it  possible.

VW  -.1^1  (w)

Letters  from  the  Bab  to  various  persons.  The  British
Museum  ms.  Or.  5631  is  thus  entitled,  but  I  have  not  seen

^  See  p.  20X  supra;  J.R.A.S.  for  1892,  p.  453  ;  and  the  Traveller'' s
Narrative,  ii,  pp.  344 — 6.


208     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

it,  and  Dr  Ahmad  Khan  gives  Httle  more  than  the  title.
I  possess  a  ms.  sent  to  me  on  Nov.  4,  1912  by  the  Babi
copyist  already  alluded  to.  It  comprises  232  pp.  of  epistles,
all  in  Arabic,  addressed  to  various  individuals  (mostly
believers)  whose  names  are  generally  specified  in  the  rubric
which  precedes  each.  These  include  Sayyid  Yahya  of
Darab ;  Shaykh  Nasiru'd-Din  Karbala'i;  Miniichihr  Khan
Mu''tamadu  d-Daivlii^  who  was  Governor  of  Isfahan  when
the  Bab  fled  thither  from  Shiraz,  and  who  favoured  and  pro-
tected him  so  long  as  he  lived ;  the  Governor  of  Shushtar ;
Asadu'Uah  of  Qazwin  ;  Mulla  Rajab  'Ali ;  Sayyid  Ahmad
Aqa-zada  ;  Mirza  Muhammad  'Ali ;  Mirza  'Abdu'l-Wahhab-
i-Munshi ;  the  father  of  Sayyid  Husayn  [?  of  Yazd,  the  Bab's
SQCiQt^ry]  ;  Jandb-i-Tdhira  {Qurratu'l-^Ayn) ;  Mirza  Najaf-
quli ;  and  Mulla  Ahmad,  entitled  "he  who  betook  himself
in  flight  to  God  the  One  "  {al-Muhdjir  ildlldhVl-Ahad).  The
last  letter  is  addressed  to  the  '  Ulanid  or  doctors  of  Theology.
Several  of  these  letters  belong  to  the  earliest  period  of  the
Bab's  mission,  while  others  were  written  from  his  prison  at
Makii.  Another  ms.,  received  from  the  same  scribe  in
October,  191 2,  contains  at  the  end  (18  pp.)  a  few  letters
from  the  Bab  to  the  Shah,  Sulayman  Khan,  etc.,  and  also  a
short  tract  (5  pp.)  entitled  SahiJa-i-Rizdwiyya.


(B)     Works  by  Mulla  Muhammad  'ALf  of  Barfurush,

KNOWN   AS  Janab-i-QuddOs.

Of  this  notable  adherent  of  the  Bab,  whom  some  of  his
followers  regarded  as  the  Qdim  or  Imam  Mahdi,  and  who
was  put  to  death  at  Barfurush  in  the  summer  of  1849  ^^^^'"
the  reduction  of  the  Rabi  stronghold  of  Shaykh  Tabarsi  by
the  Royalists,  some  of  the   writings  are  preserved  in  the


in.      FURTHER    NOTES   ON    BABI   LITERATURE      209

British    Museum   ms.   Or.   51 10  and  in  one   of  my  mss.
(BBF.  41).

Of  the  former,  which  I  have  not  seen,  Dr  Ahmad  Khan
writes  as  follows :

^''  AbhdruU-Quddusiyya  by  Janab-i-Quddus.  This  in-
cludes ten  pieces,  eight,  all  in  Arabic,  in  the  form  of  prayers
{Mundjdt),  and  two  others  in  the  form  of  addresses.  In  the
two  latter  there  are  some  matters  of  historical  importance.
Thus,  for  example,  at  the  beginning  of  one  of  them  is  this
sentence :

Ml  JO

^Jk*0t    ^^J^    ^^W^   >V^     C^    J^yi      vJj^      «^^3      Ci^■»*^     jJlXs

mJ\    (^JJt    J^jJ'   ^»^^»^     l5*^    0-«    ^^3J^  ^H    ^^"^"^

*/  wrote  this  on  the  first  day  of  the  month  of  Jumddd^
A.H.  1266^  the  day  when  I  came  forth  from  my  home  by
command  of  that  man  whose  state  God  [a/one]  knoweth,  and
who  is  indeed  in  God's  eyes  of  the  damned.^

"  It  is  not  apparent  to  whom  this  letter  is  written,  but  I
suspect  that  it  must  have  been  addiessed  to  the  SaHdul-
'■Ulamd  of  Barfuriish^  It  appears  that  Mulla  Muhammad
'Ali,  known  as  Quddus,  also  claimed  to  be  a  Sayyid,  though
there  is  no  external  evidence  of  this.

"  In  the  same  letter  the  following  passage  also  occurs  :


J  0


5  JO

^  I  think  the  year  is  erroneously  given,  and  that  it  should  be  "  1265."
As  it  is  not  specified  which  of  the  two  Jumadas  is  meant,  the  corre-
sponding Christian  date  may  be  March  25,  1849,  or  April  24  of  the
same  year.

2  The  Sa^ idu't-^ L/tamd  wa.s  the  principal  theological  antagonist  of
landb'i-  Quddus.

B.  B.  14


2IO     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

^  I  followed  my  forebears  {on  whom  be  the  peace  of  God)\
and  herein  verily  I  had  an  evident  pride.  ^

"  At  the  end  of  this  letter  he  has  added  some  lines  in
Persian.

*'  This  sentence  occurs  at  the  beginning  of  another  letter :

'  The  writings  of  Quddus  {mighty  and  glorious  is  he !)  to
the  learned  divine  of  the  land  Hdjji  Mnlld  Muhammad.^

"This  sentence  also  occurs  in  this  letter :

III

^  And  fear  lest  thou  shouldst  be  held  to  account  before  the
Imam  {may  God  hasten  his  glad  advent  f)  because  thou  art
cofnmissioned  to  oppose  him.  By  thy  Truth,  today  is  not  as  it
was  aforetime,  and  verily  I  have  a  great  message  of  joy :  were
it  permitted  to  ?ne  I  would  inform  thee  of  it ;  but  it  will
become  manifest  in  its  timeJ'

"It  does  not  appear  from  this  prayer  for  the  ^glad
advent^  and  the  promise  of  some  ^  message  of  foy^  which  he
gives  whether  he  wrote  this  letter  before  the  Manifestation
of  the  Bab,  or  whether  he  had  in  view  some  other  'glad
tidings.'

"  It  appears  from  the  words  of  QuddHs  that  he  himself
also  advanced  some  great  claim,  even  as  with  most  of  the
earlier  followers  of  Mirza  *Ali  Muhammad  the  Bab  each
one  regarded  himself  as  the  Manifestation  of  an  Imam  or
Prophet."


Ilf.      FURTHER   NOTES   ON    BABI    LITERATURE      211

The  six  pieces  written  by  Jandb-i-Quddus  which  fill
pp.  I — 20  of  my  manuscript  BBF.  4  seem  to  be  quite
different  from  those  in  the  British  Museum  ms.  The
opening  passage  of  each  will  be  found  on  pp.  484 — 7  of
J.R.A.S.  for  1892.

(C)     Works  by  MfRzA  Yahya  Subh-i-Azal.

Some  twenty-six  works  by  Subh-i-Azal  are  represented
by  the  mss.  in  the  British  Museum  and  in  my  own  library.
All  of  them  are  in  Arabic,  except  three  or  four  which  are  in
Persian.  The  latter  include  a  continuation  of  the  Persian
Bay  an,  a  long  mathnawi  poem  of  some  7000  verses  entitled
Kitdb-i-Tubd,  and  a  collection  of  letters  and  other  pieces  in
Persian  entitled  Athdr-i-Azaliyya.  All  these  mss.  emanate
directly  from  the  Azali  head-quarters  at  Famagusta  in  Cyprus,
and  most  of  them  were  transcribed  by  Subh-i-Azal's  son
Rizwan  'All.  Arranged  in  alphabetical  order  by  titles  they
are  as  follows  :

Several  collections  of  Subh-i-Azal's  Persian  writings  bear
this  general  title  which  is  not  specific,  and  does  not  imply
their  identity.  I  have  one  such  ms.  (BBF.  5 :  seey^  R.  A.  S.
for  1892,  pp  492 — 3)  so  entitled.  This  is  wholly  or  chiefly
in  prose;  but  Or.  5628  of  the  British  Museum  contains
poems  by  him  which  Dr  Ahmad  Khan  describes  as  "  rela-
tively better  than  some  qasidas  of  his  already  mentioned,
but  lacking  poetical  beauties,  and  not  worthy  to  be  included
amongst  the  fine  poetry  of  the  notable  Persian  poets."

Ahkdm-i-Baydn  ("  Laws  of  the  Bayan  ").  The  British
Museum  ms.  Or.  5486  is  so  entitled.      It  is  described  by

14 — 2


212      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

Dr  Ahmad  Khan  as  an  explanation  by  Subh-i-Azal  of  the
laws  and  ordinances  of  the  Bay  an.  It  is  written  in  Arabic
and  arranged  in  the  usual  fashion  in  Wahids  ("  Unities  ")
subdivided  into  chapters.

Epistles  or  "  Tablets  "  {Alwdh)  of  Subh-i-Azal,  addressed
to  various  persons,  mostly  his  followers.  Eight  such  collec-
tions in  the  British  Museum  are  described  by  Dr  Ahmad
Khan.     These  are  as  follows  :

Or.  5108.  This  contains  some  67  pieces,  of  which  five
are  of  the  kind  called  Dti^d-yi-Haykal  {sqq  infra,  pp.  216 — 7,
s.v.  yJ3s\^\  w>U£»),  and  one  a  Persian  qasida  in  praise  of
Queen  Victoria,  containing  the  date  of  her  birth  (a.d.  18 19)
and  coronation  (a.d.  1837).  Dr  Ahmad  Khan,  who  read
most  of  the  contents  of  this  volume,  describes  them  as
"monotonous,"  and  makes  special  mention  of  only  two
pieces,  Nos.  41  and  46.  The  former  contains  a  prohibition
of  marriage  with  unbelievers,  and  a  strong  recommendation
of  the  use  of  the  veil  by  women.  The  latter  contains  the
following  historical  data.  "  The  Manifestation  of  the  'Point'
{Nuqta,  i.e.  the  Bab)  was  according  to  one  reckoning  (?  by
solar  years)  at  the  age  of  24,  while  according  to  the  lunar
reckoning  he  was  just  entering  his  25th  year.  After  de-
claring his  mission  he  fled  to  Mecca,  whence  [he  returned]
to  Shiraz.  His  total  apparent  [i.e.  earthly]  life  was  32  years,
of  which  he  passed  five  in  prison  and  27  in  Shiraz  and  its
environs  and  in  other  lands.  I  [first]  read  the  'Tablets'
revealed  to  him  in  1266/1849-50,  when  I  was  19  years
of  age.  From  this  date  until  now  I  have  rendered  faithful
and  obedient  service.  The  period  of  my  sojourn  in  Tihran
and  entrance  into  this  faith  dated  from  the  middle  of
1263/1847."


III.      FURTHER   NOTES   ON    BABI    LITERATURE      213

Or.  5497.  This  contains  Arabic  prayers  and  medi-
tations {Mundjdt)  "  revealed "  at  P'amagusta  in  Cyprus.
The  MS.  was  copied  in  1898  by  Subh-i-Azal's  son  Rizwan
'Ah'.

Or.  5498.  This  contains  a  dozen  letters,  mostly  ad-
dressed by  Subh-i-Azal  to  his  followers,  and  a  panegyric  on
the  late  Sultan  'Abdu'l-Hamid,  wherein  mention  is  made  of
two  persons  (presumably  Turkish  officials)  named  Hasan
Hamid  and  Hajji  Darwish.

Or.  5499.  More  "  Tablets,"  some  in  Arabic  and  some
in  Persian,  addressed  by  Subh-i-Azal  to  his  followers.

Or.  5632.  A  collection  of  "  Tablets "  similar  to  the
last,  containing  warnings  against  association  with  his  half-
brother  and  rival  Baha'u'llah.

Or.  5698.  Another  similar  collection.  Amongst  those
to  whom  "  Tablets  "  are  addressed  are  Subh-i-Azal's  sister,
and  Mirza  Aqa  Khan  of  Kirman,  who  was  put  to  death  in
Tabriz  together  with  Shaykh  Ahmad  Ruhi  of  Kirman  and
Mirza  Hasan  Khan  Khabiru' l-Mulk  on  July  17,  1896.
The  above-mentioned  Shaykh  Ahmad  and  Mirza  Fazlu'llah,
Subh-i-Azal's  nephew,  are  also  addressed,  besides  several  of
his  own  sons  and  daughters,  his  aged  and  faithful  followers
'Abdu'l-Ahad  of  Zanjan,  and  a  physician  named  Sayyid
Asadu'llah.

Or.  5732.  A  collection  of  "Tablets"  similar  to  the
last.

Or.  6256.  This  contains  writings  in  the  different
"Grades"  or  "Styles"  {Shu'undt),  and  includes  a  minatory
address  to  Mirza  Asadu'llah  of  Khiiy  (originally  entitled
Jandb-i-Dayydn^  but  here  called  '''•  Abu!sh-Shuricr^')  and
answers  to  questions  propounded  by  one  Rajab-'Ali.  These
are  followed  by  dydt^  in  imitation  of  the  siiras  of  the  Qur'dn,
ahkdm  ("commandments"),  etc.


214      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

*  l)J*^^   ?»-.i{-aJ  SjaJ)   dj^  j-j****5  (i)

Like  the  Bab,  Subh-i-Azal  wrote  a  commentary  on
the  second  chapter  of  the  Qur'dn,  the  Suratu'l-Baqara.
This  commentary  is  in  two  volumes,  the  first  (Or.  5695)
entitled yaz£;/-  wcH th-Thamar  (sic)  ft  Tafsiri  SHrati'I-Baqar,
and  the  second  (Or.  5696)  entitled  Huh  wa'l-Qamar  Jl
Tafsiri  SiiratVl-Baqar.  This  commentary  contains  a  very
literal  Persian  rendering  of  the  Arabic  original.

The  Diwdn  of  Azal.  Of  this  I  possess  two  mss.  (B.  40
and  B.  40*),  while  a  third  (Or.  5303)  exists  in  the  British
Museum.  It  is  a  prose  Arabic  work,  and,  as  Dr  Ahmad
Khan  remarks  in  his  notes,  there  is  no  evident  reason  why
it  should  be  called  a  Diwdn.  It  contains  suras  in  imitation
of  the  Qur'dn,  but  full  of  vain  repetitions  and  grammatical
errors.  Dr  Ahmad  Khan  criticizes  it  somewhat  harshly
in  the  following  words.  "Although  his  (Subh-i-Azal's)
brother  Mirza  Husayn  'Ali  (Baha'u  llah)  also  lays  claim  to
Divinity  with  the  utmost  audacity,  yet  he  at  least  has  some
excuse  conformable  to  their  terminology,  since  he  claims
to  be  '  He  whom  God  shall  manifest'  But  it  does  not
appear  why,  or  in  what  sense,  by  what  standard,  or  by  what
title,  one  who  only  claims  the  position  of  a  vicar  or  executor
[to  the  Bab],  should  name  his  absurdities  '  Scriptures
revealed  from  Heaven.' "

Supplement  to  the  Bab's  Persian  Baydn  by  Subh-i-Azal,
beginning  with  Wdkid  ix,  ch.  11  and  ending  with  fVdkidxi,
ch.  19.  I  possess  one  ms.  comprising  122  ff.  (B.  41),
received  from  Cyprus  on  Dec.  4,  1896.


IIL      FURTHER    NOTES   ON    BABI   LITERATURE      21 5

Or.  5494  of  the  British  Museum  contains  a  collection  of
prayers  and  supplications  so  described,  amongst  which  are
some  intended  for  use  in  the  Babi  month  of  Fasting  called
S/iahruU-^Uld.  Compare  Or.  5492  of  the  same  Library,
which  is  entitled  Sahifatu  ^r-Rijd  li-ayydmi  ShahrVP  Uld.

Besides  the  work  last  mentioned  there  are  numerous
tracts  by  Subh-i-Azal  entitled  Sahifa  (plural  Sahd'if),  such
as  the  Sahifa-i-Majdiyya^  SahifatuH-Mirdyd  (Or.  5496  of  the
B.M.),  Sahifa-i-Wajdiyya  wa  Khutba-i-Nikdhiyya  (Or.
5275),  etc.  One  of  my  mss.  (B.  40^)  in  two  parts  (pp.  314
and  292  respectively)  contains,  besides  Mundjdt  (Prayers
or  Supplications),  many  such  SahdHf^  the  first  of  which  is
entitled  SahifatuH-AwsaHyya.

The  Kitdbu'l-Haydt  ("  Book  of  Life")  is  represented  by
Or.  5630  of  the  British  Museum.  According  to  Dr  Ahmad
Khan's  description,  it  was  composed  in  Ramazan,  1285
(-end  of  1868  or  beginning  of  1869),  and  the  MS.  was
copied  thirty  years  later  (in  1899)  by  Rizwan  'All.  It  derives
its  name  merely  from  the  fact  that  it  was  begun  on  the  day
of  the  month  called  by  the  Babis  Haydt.  In  style  it
resembles  the  Lama^dtti'l-Azal  and  KitdbuH-Haydkil^  con-
cerning which  see  below,  pp.  216 — 217.

Kitdb-i-Tubd,  a  long  Persian  mathnawi  poem  containing
stories  and  moral  reflections,  by  Subh-i-Azal  I  possess  a
xMS.  of  this  work  (B.  i)  copied  in  1897  by  his  son  Rizwan
'All,    who    presented   it    to    the   late   Mr  C.    D.   Cobham,


2l6      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

formerly  Commissioner  of  Larnaca,  Cyprus,  who  gave  it
to  me  in  August,  1906.  This  ms.  contains  587  pp.  and
the  poem  consists  of  rather  more  than  7000  verses.  Its
contents  appear  to  be  ethical  rather  than  religious  in
character,  and  to  present  few  if  any  specifically  Babi  features.

Kitdb  i-^llliyyin^  represented  by  Or.  5868,  ff.  27  et  seqq.,
and  Or.  6252  of  the  British  Museum.  It  is  described  by
Dr  Ahmad  Khan  as  one  of  Subh-i-Azal's  chefs  (fceuvre.

jy  w^U^  (nc)

This  is  one  of  the  best  known  of  Subh-i-Azal's  works,  at
any  rate  by  name^,  and  is  represented  by  three  mss.  in  the
British  Museum  (Or.  5326,  Or.  5491  and  Or.  6253),  while
another  ms.  (Or.  6654)  contains  an  Index  of  the  77  stiras
which  compose  it.  It  consists  of  Arabic  dydt  in  imitation
of  the  Qur'dn,  and  thus  belongs  to  the  first  or  highest  of
the  "  Five  Grades  "  {Shu^iin-i-khamsa)  into  which  the  Babi
scriptures  are  divided.  There  are  two  books  of  this  name,
a  larger  and  a  smaller,  both  by  Subh-i-Azal.  See  Vol.  ii  of
my  Traveller's  Narrative,  pp.  340 — i.

Haydkil  (plural  of  Haykal^  "  Temple,"  "  Form  ")  is  the
name  given  by  the  Babis  to  the  inscribed  pentacles  which
served  them  as  talismans.  Similar  circular  figures  for  the
use  of  women  are  termed  Dawd'ir  ("Circles,  plural  of
Daird).  The  Arabic  formulae  contained  in  the  class  of
books  entitled  Kitdbu' I- Haydkil  are   presumably  intended

^  It  is  mentioned  by  Gobineau  {Rel.  et  Phihs.  dans  PAsie  Centrale,
pp.  312 — 313),  and  described  by  M.  CI.  Huart  {Journal  Asiatique  for
1887,  pp.  133—144).


III.      FURTHER   NOTES   ON    bAbI   LITERATURE      21/

for  use  in  this  way.  I  have  one  ms.  of  this  sort  (B.  39)
containing  looi  of  these  Haykals  (ff.  514,  copied  by
Rizwan  'Ah'  in  1310/1892);  and  Or.  5324  of  the  British
Museum  appears  to  represent  the  same  work.  Another
British  Museum  ms.  (Or.  6679)  having  the  same  title,
though  ascribed  to  Subh-i-Azal,  is  in  reality,  according  to
Dr  Ahmad  Khan,  by  Baha'u'llah,  and  is  probably  the  well-
known  manifesto  to  the  kings  properly  entitled  Sura-i-
Haykal.

The  La^dli  wa  Majdli  ("  Pearls  and  Points  of  Efful-
gence ")  is  represented  by  my  ms.  BBF.  4,  described  in
\hQ  /.  R.  A.  S.  for  1892,  pp.  489 — 491,  and  by  the  British
Museum  ms.  Or.  51 13.  It  was  composed  in  response  to
one  Mahdi,  who  had  demanded  of  Subh-i-Azal  a  work
similar  in  style  and  character  to  the  Sententiae  of  'Ali  ibn
Abi  Talib.

The  Lama^dt  (or  "Rays,"  "Splendours")  of  Subh-i-Azal
is  in  Arabic,  in  the  style  of  "  verses  "  {dydt)  of  the  Quran,
and  is  represented  by  my  ms.  (A.  35)  and  by  the  British
Museum  ms.  Or.  5274.  It  is  divided  into  28  chapters,
and  contains  sundry  allusions  to  his  half-brother  Baha'u'llah,
and  to  the  wrongs  he  had  suffered  at  the  hands  of  the
rulers  of  Persia  and  Turkey.

jjLJI  Slj-«  (\i)

The  Mirdtu'l-Baydn  ("  Mirror  of  the  Baydn  ").  Of  this
work  of  Subh-i-Azal's  I  possess  a  ms.  (BBF.  11),  described
in  the  /.  jR.A.S.  for  1892,  pp.  660 — 2,  and  there  is  another
(Or.  5114)  in  the  British  Museum,  as  well  as  an  Index  of
the  same  (Or.  6674).  It  contains  137  chapters,  each  de-
voted to  one  of  the  "  Names  "  of  God.


2l8     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION


e^  d  J


la.A.^.Z>»,<   (\y)

The  Mustayqidh  ("Sleeper  awakened"),  by  Subh-i-Azal.
Of  this  work  the  British  Museum  possesses  five  mss.,  viz.
Or.  5111,  Or.  6251,  Or.  6254,  Or.  6257  and  Or.  6329.
This  book  is  interesting  on  account  of  its  opening  passage
(in  Persian)  wherein  Siibh-i-Azal  relates  his  conversion,  and
also  on  account  of  its  denunciations  of  Mirza  Asadu'llah  of
Khiiy,  known  as  Jandb-i-Dayydii^  a  prominent  follower  of
the  Bab,  who,  after  the  death  of  the  latter,  laid  claim  to  the
supreme  authority  in  the  Babi  community,  and  was  by  some
of  them  drowned  in  the  Tigris  or  Euphrates,  as  aientioned
by  Gobineau^.  That  he  had  a  certain  following  appears
from  references  to  the  "  Asadiyyun  "  by  Subh-i-Azal,  who  not
only  reviles  him  in  the  coarsest  language,  but  expresses
surprise  that  his  adherents  "  sit  silent  in  their  places  and  do
not  transfix  him  with  their  spears,"  or  "  rend  his  bowels  with
their  hands."  The  translation  of  the  opening  passage,  as
copied  by  Dr  Ahmad  Khan,  is  as  follows  :

"  O  brothers  in  the  Faith  !  I  had  been  asleep  all  my
life,  and  was  of  all  in  my  family  the  meanest  and  most
illiterate,  nor  was  there  anyone  to  awaken  me  from  sleep,
until  one  day  I  stirred  in  this  world  of  slumber,  awoke  from
sleep,  and  saw  a  number  of  persons  striving,  struggling  and
contending ;  and  who  had  strife  and  war  amongst  them.  I
asked,  '  O  people,  what  is  the  cause  of  your  strife  ? '  They
replied,  '  Hast  thou  then  not  heard  that  the  Resurrection
has  come,  and  that  the  Two  Lights  are  united  in  one
garment^  ? '     '  No,'  I  answered,  '  I  have  not  heard  it.     And

^  Les  Religions  et  les  Philosophies  dans  VAsie  Centrale,  pp.  277 — 8.
See  also  Vol.  ii  of  my  Traveller's  Narrative,  pp.  331,  357  and  365.

2  Meaning  'Alf  and  Muhammad,  whose  names  and  virtues  were
combined  in  'All  Muhammad  the  Bab.


III.      FURTHER   NOTES   ON    BABI    LITERATURE      219

have  ye,  who  lay  claim  to  this  station,  any  proof?'  They
answered,  '  Infinite  [proofs],'  and  thereon  gave  me  a  book  in
the  beginning  of  which  was  written  Ahsanu^l-Qisas  iva
Qayyumu'l-Asmd^.  I  asked,  '  Have  you  any  further  proof?'
They  replied,  '  Many,'  and  [gave  me]  other  books,  some
corresponding  to  verses  [of  the  Qu?'dn]  and  similar  to  the
Heavenly  Scriptures,  but  better ;  others  corresponding  to
prayers,  tracts  and  homilies^.  When  I  had  read  these  books,
a  great  disquiet  and  trouble  arose  within  me.  Then  I
asked,  '  Have  ye  a  WalP  who  will  be  your  guide  and  pilot
after  your  Master?'  They  replied,  'Yes,  and  he  is  now
alive,  possessing  ample  proofs  and  cogent  signs.'  I  said,
'  Give  me  a  book  that  I  may  understand  the  truth  of  the
matter.'  Then  they  gave  me  the  ''Book  of  Lights  which
comprises  more  than  25,000  verses.  It  was  at  this  juncture
that  I  met  with  a  party  who  called  themselves  Asadiyyiin'^.'^
The  bulk  of  the  book  is  in  Arabic.  It  ends  abruptly  as
follows:  "Says  the  sleeper  awakened :  'Verily when  I  reached
this  place  I  refrained  from  further  comment  on  the  book.' "


)Ua3  ((a)


Apart  from  some  further  collections  of  prayers  and  other
religious  formulae  (Or.  5493,  Or.  5495  of  the  British
Museum)  the  only  other  important  work  by  Subh-i-Azal  of
which  I  have  knowledge  is  the  JVaghamdtu'r-Rtlh  ("Melo-
dies of  the  Spirit").     Of  this  I  have  two  manuscripts  (A.  40

^  That  is  the  Bab's  well-known  Commentary  on  the  Sura-i-  Yusuf.
For  description,  see^.  R.  A.  S.  for  1892,  pp.  261 — 8.

^  i.e.  in  each  of  the  "  Five  Grades"  recognized  by  the  Babis.

^  i.e.  a  Saint  or  Successor  to  a  Prophet.

■*  Asadis,  i.e.  followers  of  the  above-mentioned  Mirza  Asadu'llah,
entitled  Jandb-i-Dayydn,  and  denounced,  by  Subh-i-Azal  as  Abu'sh-
Shuriir,  "the  Father  of  Malice."


220     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

and  B.  35),  both,  unfortunately,  representing  the  second
volume  only.  The  work  is  entirely  in  Arabic,  and  takes  the
form  of  a  commentary  on  a  text  which  is  overlined,  and  to
each  citation  from  which  is  prefixed  the  word  AJ^  ("his
saying  ").  There  is  no  division  of  the  book  into  chapters  or
sections,  and  it  appears  devoid  of  historical  interest.


(D)     Works  by  Mulla  Rajab  'ALf  Qah'ir  and

OTHER    AZALfs.

Amongst  the  followers  of  Subh-i-Azal  who  have  written
books  still  extant  the  earliest  is  probably  Mulla  Rajab  'Ali
Qahir^,  who  was  assassinated  at  Karbala  by  Nasir  the
Arab,  one  of  the  followers  of  Baha'u'llah^  I  possess  one
MS.  of  his  writings  which  was  sent  to  me  from  Persia  in
February,  19 13.  It  consists  of  an  Arabic  preface,  superior
in  point  of  style  and  correctness  to  most  of  the  Babi  writings
in  that  language,  and  four  chapters  written  in  Persian.  The
main  purpose  of  the  book  appears  to  be  to  prove  the
legitimacy  of  Subh-i-Azal's  claim  to  succeed  the  Bab  as
Supreme  Pontiff  of  the  Faith.  It  contains  numerous  quo-
tations from  the  Mathnawi  of  Jalalu'd-Din  Riimi,  and  many
more  from  various  writings  of  the  Bab,  these  latter  being
mostly  in  Arabic.

The  Azali's,  in  spite  of  the  paucity  of  their  numbers,  have
produced  several- remarkable  men,  some  of  whom  have  been

^  Qahir  and  Rajab  'AH  are  numerically  equal,  the  sum  of  the  letters
composing  each  being  315.

^  See  Vol.  ii  of  the  Traveller's  Narrative,  pp.  356,  359,  363,  371.
MulU  Rajab  'All's  sister  was  the  B^b's  second  wife.  She  died  only  a
short  time  ago  (Safar  14,  a.h.  1335  =  Dec.  10,  1916)  at  the  advanced
age  of  84.


III.      FURTHER   NOTES   ON    bAbI   LITERATURE      221

writers,  but  even  these  have  not,  as  a  rule,  written  much  on
religion,  or,  if  they  have  done  so,  their  works  have  remained
hidden  amongst  their  immediate  sympathisers.    It  is  a  remark-
able fact  that  several  very  prominent  supporters  of  the  Persian
Constitutional  Movement  were,  or  had  the  reputation  of
being,  Azali's ;  among  them  two  victims  of  the  coup  d'etat  of
June  23,  1908,  Mirza  Jahangir  Khan  of  Shiraz,  editor  of  the
Stir-i-Jsrd/il,    and    the   Maliku'l-Mutakallimifi,   a    notable
orator  of  the  Nationalist   party,    while    others   cannot    be
named   because   they   are   still  living.     Amongst  the  pro-
tagonists of  the  National  movement  were  three  men,  all  put
to  death  at  Tabriz  on  July  17,  1896,  two  of  whom,  Hajji
Shaykh  Ahmad  I^uhi  and  Mirza  Aqa  Khan,  both  of  Kirman,
were  not  only  Azalis  but  sons-in-law  of  Subh-i-Azal'.     Both
of  these  men  were  scholars  and  writers.     The  former  was
the  translator  into  Persian  of  Morier's  Hdjji  Bdbd,   sub-
sequently published  in  India  by  Colonel  Phillott  and  widely
used  as  a  text-book  for  colloquial  Persian ;    and  he  also
translated  Gil  Bias,  but  this,  I  think,  has  not  been  printed.
Mirza  Aqa  Khan  was  on  the  staff  of  the  Constantinople
Akhtar  ("Star"),  in  its  day  one  of  the  best  Persian  papers
published,  and  was  also  the  author  of  several  poems  such  as
the  Sdldriyya  (of  which  an  expurgated  edition,  omitting  the
vituperation  of  Nasiru'd-Din  Shah^,  was  subsequently  pub-
lished at  the  instance  of  the  Farmdn-farmd) ;  the  Ndma-i-
Bdstdn  ("Book  of  the  Ancients"),  an  imitation  of  the  Shdh-
;«^/«^,  embodying  some  account  of  the  historical  Achaemenian
kings,  of  whom,  of  course,  Firdawsi  knew  nothing ;  an  imi-
tation of  Sa'di's  Gulistdn  entitled  Kitdb-i-Rizwdn ;  a  prose

^  See  my  Persian  Revolution,  pp.  93 — 96.

^  Samples  of  these  vituperative  passages  taken  from  the  History  of
the  Awakening  of  the  Persians,  are  cited  on  pp.  409 — 414  of  my  Persian
Revolution.


222     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

history  entitled  Aina-i-Sikanddyi  ("the  Mirror  of  Alexander  ") ;
two  volumes  of  an  imaginary  correspondence  between  two
fictitious  Princes,  Kamalu'd-Dawla  of  Dihli  and  Jalalu'd-
Dawla  of  Persia ;  and  sundry  other  tracts  existing  only  in
manuscript  and  very  rare  even  in  that  form.  On  Babi
doctrine  and  history,  so  far  as  I  know,  he  wrote  nothing.

The  imaginary  correspondence  between  Prince  Kamalu'd-
Dawla  and  Prince  Jalalu'd-Dawla  is  contained  in  two  separate
volumes,  of  which  manuscript  copies  were  sent  me  as  literary
curiosities  by  a  Babi  copyist  in  Tihran  in  the  year  191 2.
One  of  them,  though  entitled  "  Copy  of  three  letters  written
by  the  noble  Prince  Kamalu'd-Dawla  of  India,"  etc.,  is,  in
fact,  one  unbroken  diatribe  against  the  Arabs,  Islam  and
the  post-Muhammadan  dynasties  of  Persia,  amongst  whom,
curiously  enough,  he  holds  up  the  Safawis  to  special  exe-
cration because  of  the  schism  in  Islam  which  they  fomented,
and  because  of  their  encouragement  of  the  Shi'ite  doctors,
such  as  Mulla  Muhammad  Baqir  and  Mir  Damad,  who,
together  with  the  mystics  and  darwishes,  are  the  objects  of
his  especial  censure.  He  is  filled  with  admiration  for  the
ancient  Persians,  and  has  an  exaggerated  admiration  for  the
Zoroastrian  religion  (of  which  in  fact  he  appears  to  know
very  little),  ascribing  all  the  misfortunes  and  miseries  of
modern  Persia  to  the  "  barbarous  lizard-eating  Arabs."  He
makes  great  display  of  his  knowledge  of  Europe;  talks  of
"when  I  was  in  Paris"  and  "when  I  was  in  London";  fills
his  sentences  with  French  words,  a  score  of  which  he  explains
in  the  Preface,  pretending  that  they  cannot  be  translated  into
Persian ;  and  has  a  passion  for  the  most  extravagant  popular
etymologies.  Not  only  does  he  seek  to  prove  the  close
affinity  of  the  Persian  with  the  French  language  by  comparing
jeune  \f'\X\i  juwd?i ;  mori  with  murda  ;  pere  \^'\\.\\  pidar ;  porte
with  burda\  apporte  with  dwurda\  dent  with  dtnddn;  and  levre


Ilf.      FURTHER   NOTES   ON    BABI    LITERATURE      223

with  lab\  he  identifies  the  last  syllable  of  the  name  of  the  town
of  Ardabil  with  the  French  ville^  and  demands  the  expulsion
from  Persian  of  all  Arabic  words,  which,  according  to  his
view,  have  prevented  his  mother-tongue  from  taking  the
same  position  in  the  East  that  its  "  Western  sister "  has
attained  in  Europe.  He  gives  a  graphic  description  of
certain  unrecorded  horrors  of  the  great  persecution  of  the
Babis  in  1852,  and  expresses  admiration  at  their  revolt
against  Islam,  but  regrets  that  they  also  succumbed  to  the
general  atmosphere  of  mysticism  and  hashish-m.%'^\xQdi  meta-
physics. Of  Baha'u'llah  he  speaks  with  contempt  and
aversion,  while  of  Subh-i-Azal  he  makes  no  mention.  A  very
graphic  picture  of  Persian  misgovernment  and  of  the  methods
of  exaction  practised  by  provincial  Governors  is  given  in  a
dialogue  between  one  Susmdru' d-Dawla  ("the  Lizard  of  the
Empire  ")  and  the  Kaldntar^  or  mayor,  of  his  new  govern-
ment. The  whole  book  is,  in  spite  of  its  grotesque  exag-
gerations, depressing  to  the  last  degree.  It  was  apparently
composed  in  1280/1863-4.

The  second  volume  of  this  imaginary  correspondence  is
entitled  "Copy  of  one  hundred  Letters  written  by  the  noble
Prince  Kamalu'd-Dawla  of  Dihli,  whose  father  [ancestor]
fled  from  Persia  to  the  land  of  India  in  the  time  of  the
Emperor  Timilr,  to  his  valued  friend  Prince  Jalalu'd-Dawla
of  Persia,  describing  the  desolation  thereof"  \i.e.  of  Persia].
As  a  matter  of  fact  the  volume  contains  not  a  hundred  but  only
forty-two  letters,  the  last  of  which  breaks  off  abruptly  in  the
middle  of  a  sentence.  The  burden  of  the  whole  book  is
that  the  Persians  are  the  most  wretched,  miserable,  super-
stitious and  ignoble  of  mankind,  having  in  ancient  and
happier  days  been  one  of  the  most  fortunate,  glorious  and
talented  of  nations ;  and  that  all  this  misery  is  due  to  the
Arab  conquest  and  the  introduction  of  Islam.     The  book  is


224     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

wearisome,  monotonous  and  depressing;  every  class  of
Persians  is  reviled  and  belittled  in  turn,  not  only  the  civil  and
ecclesiastical  authorities,  but  also  the  philosophers,  mystics,
poets,  Shaykhis  and  Babis.  The  only  sects  of  which  he  has
a  good  word  to  say  are  the  followers  of  Mazdak  the  com-
munist, who  was  put  to  death  by  Ndshirwan  the  Sasanian,
and  the  Assassins  of  Alamilt,  whom  he  confounds  with  the
Druzes.  Indeed  in  one  passage  near  the  end  of  the  book
(Letter  41)  he  goes  so  far  as  to  say  that  "the  only  class  of
the  people  of  Persia  who  are  excluded  from  the  circle  of
oppressors  and  are  to  be  accounted  victims  consists  of  those
same  children  in  their  mothers'  wombs  on  whom  fall  all  the
misdeeds  of  their  fathers  and  mothers,  of  the  King  and  his
subjects,  and  of  the  Mullds  and  Rawza-khwdnsJ^

Another  short  treatise  of  24  pages  by  Mirza  Aqa  Khan,
composed  soon  after  Rajab  i,  1310  (=  January  19,  1893)
bears  the  curious  title  of  The  Treatise  of '"'-ysfha.t  God  will"
in  refutation  of  the  Treatise  of  ^^li  God  will,"  composed  by
Sayyid  Burhdnu'd-Din  of  Balkh.  On  the  date  above  men-
tioned, a  festival  observed  by  the  Ottoman  Turks  under  the
Arabic  name  of  Laylatu' r-RaghdHb  and  the  Turkish  name
of  Qandil-geyjesi  ("Lamp-night"),  the  author  attended  a
reception  given  in  Constantinople  by  Yilsuf  Riza  Pasha  at
his  house  at  Beshik-tash.  Amongst  the  other  guests  present
were  the  notorious  Abu'1-Huda  (astrologer  to  the  late
Sultan  'Abdu'l-Hamid);  Ahmad  As'ad  Efendi;  Sayyid
Jamalu'd-Din,  called  "al-Afghan";  ShaykhZafir;  Shaykhu'r-
Ra'is  Abu'l-Ma'ali;  Bahjat  Bey;  and  Sayyid  Burhanu'd-Din
ibn  Shaykh  Sulayman  of  Balkh,  author  of  the  Jdmi^u'l-
Miiwaddat,  as  well  as  of  the  tract  to  which  this  is  a  reply.
The  problem  at  issue  is  of  a  metaphysical  character,  viz.
how  to  reconcile  the  intelligent  use  of  the  formula  "If  God
please"  with  a  belief  in  Predestination.    The  general  purport


III.      FURTHER    NOTES   ON   BABI   LITERATURE      225

of  the  reply  appears  to  be  that  all  this  metaphysical  hair-
splitting is  one  of  the  symptoms  of  that  general  intellectual
and  moral  disorder  which  in  Mirza  Aqa  Khan's  opinion  has
been  the  ruin  of  the  Persians.

This  tract  is  followed  by  a  biography  of  the  above-men-
tioned Mirza  Aqa  Khan  copied  from  the  (lithographed)
Ta}rikh-i-Biddri-yi-Irdniydn  ("History  of  the  Awakening  of
the  Persians")  by  the  Ndzimu'l-Isldm  of  Kirman.  He  was
born  in  Kirman  in  1 270/1853-4,  went  in  1302/ 1884-5  to
Isfahan,  and  thence  to  Tihran  and  Constantinople,  where  he
became  the  disciple  and  fellow-worker  of  Sayyid  Jamalu'd-
Din  "the  Afghan."  He  composed  a  prose  history  of  Persia,
the  AHna-i-Sikandari  and  a  versified  history,  the  Ndma-i-
Bdstdn,  while  imprisoned  at  Trebizonde,  completing  the
latter  on  January  26,  1896.  An  expurgated  and  emended
edition  of  the  Ndma-i-Bdstdn^  edited  by  Mirza  Jahangir
Khan  of  Shiraz,  was  lithographed  by  the  command  and  at
the  cost  of  the  Farmdn-farmd  in  1315/1897-8.  As  already
stated,  Mirza  Aqa  Khan  was  put  to  death  at  Tabriz,  together
with  his  comrades  Shaykh  Ahmad-i-^z^^/  of  Kirman  and
Mirza  Hasan  Khan  Khabiru' l-Mulk^  on  July  17,  1896.

To  Shaykh  Ahmad-i-i'Px^^z  of  Kirman  we  are  indebted,
at  any  rate  so  far  as  the  final  recension  is  concerned  (for  as
to  the  original  authorship  some  doubt  prevails),  for  the  only
attempt  with  which  I  am  acquainted  to  elaborate  a  compre-
hensive philosophy  of  the  Babi  doctrine,  both  theoretical
and  practical.  Of  this  work,  which  comprises  two  volumes,
I  possess  two  manuscripts,  one  of  which  is  described  at  some
length  in  my  Catalogue  of  Bdbl  MSS.  {J.  R.  A.  S.  for  1892,
pp.  680 — 697).  Some  of  the  historical  contents  were  also
utilized  in  the  Appendix  to  Vol.  ii  of  my  Traveller  s  Narrative^
pp.  351 — 373.  The  book  deserves  a  more  detailed  and
systematic  study  than  I  have  yet  been  able  to  give  it,  but

B.  B.  15


226     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

I  am  disposed  to  think  that  the  author  has  imported  into
it  a  system  and  a  number  of  ideas  peculiar  to  himself  and
foreign  to  the  Bab's  thought.

I  possess  in  manuscript  two  other  incomplete  works  of
the  same  author.  One,  entitled  Ta' rikh-i-Muqaddas-i-Hindi
("  Indian  Sacred  History  "),  comprises  only  8  ff.,  appears  to
be  a  translation  from  some  Hindu  book,  and  has  nothing  to
do  with  the  Babis.  The  other,  entitled  Fas  lu' I- K hi  tab  ft
Tarjumati  AhivdlVl-Bab  ("the  Decisive  Statement  as  to
the  Bab's  circumstances  "),  comprises  64  ff.  and  ends  abruptly
in  the  middle  of  Section  iii.  The  book  should  contain  four
sections  and  a  conclusion,  as  follows  :

Section  i  (ff.  2^ — 24^).     Account  of  the  Bab.

Section  ii  (ff.  25** — 55^).  Historical  and  rational  argu-
ments employed  by  the  Babis  against  their  adversaries.

Section  iii  (ff.  56** — 64^  where  the  MS.  ends).  On  the
superiority  of  the  Code  of  the  Baydn  to  all  other  codes  and
systems.

\Section  iv.  On  the  Laws  and  Ordinances  of  the  Baydn,
and  the  mysteries  underlying  them.

Conclusion.  What  results  will  be  seen  in  the  twenty-first
century  of  the  Christian  era  if  the  Bab's  religion  and  laws
should  be  generally  accepted.]

This  book  professes  to  be  a  translation  from  an  Italian
work  by  Luigi  BonelH  of  Naples,  but  of  such  a  work  by  this
Orientalist  (if  it  exist  at  all)  I  have  no  knowledge.  Though
on  a  smaller  scale,  this  book  in  its  general  tone  and  plan
resembles  the  Has/it  Bihisht  already  mentioned.

The  same  Shaykh  Ahmad  of  Kirman  has  also  contributed
the  third  portion  of  a  composite  treatise  highly  esteemed  by
the  Azalis  of  Persia  and  known  as  the  Tanbihy! n-NdHmin
("the  Awakening  of  the  Sleepers").     This  comprises  three


III.      FURTHER    NOTES   ON    BABI   LITERATURE      22/

parts  :    (i)  a  letter  from  'Abbas  Efendi  ('Abdu'1-Baha)  to
his  aunt,  known  as  Khdnim-i-Buzurg  ("  the  Great  Lady  ")
urging  her  to  believe  in  Baha'u'llah  and  to  abjure  her  other
half-brother  Subh-i-Azal,  to  whom  she  inclines;  (2)  a  long
and  caustic  reply  to  this  from  the  aforesaid  Khdnim-i-Buzurg^
containing  a  considerable  amount  of  interesting  historical  and
biographical  matter  about  the  Babi's,  especially  during  the
Baghdad  period,  and  the  schism  between  the  Baha  is  and
Azali's ;  this  portion  of  the  book  being  commonly  called
Risdla-P Amma    ("the    Aunt's    Epistle");    (3)    a    homily
{khutbd)   in    Arabic    followed    by  a   Refutation   {Risdla-i-
Raddiyya)  in  Persian,  both  by  Shaykh  Ahmad  of  Kirman.
Of  these  three  pieces  "the  Aunt's  Epistle"  is  much  the
longest,  occupying  pp.   23 — 214  of  my  manuscript^  while
'Abbas    Efendi's  letter   occupies  pp.    i — 22,    and  Shaykh
Ahmad's  two  tracts,  together  with  a  brief  introductory  notice
of  him,  pp.  215 — 266.     "The  Aunt's  Epistle"  is  remark-
able for  its  vigour,  and  for  the  knowledge  of  Babi  history,
Muhammadan  theology,  and  even  Hindd  beliefs  which  it
displays.     It  scoffs  at  Baha'u'Uah's  pretensions,  quotes  with
derision  some  of  the  poetry  he  apparently  composed,  and
staunchly  supports    Subh-i-Azal's   claims,  but    nevertheless
admits,  while  condoning,  his  responsibility  for  the  death  of
Mirza  Asadu'Uah  of  Khiiy,  known  as  /andb-i-Dayydn,  and
later  branded   as    Abu^sh-Shurur,   "the   Father  of  Evils."
This  Epistle,  which  deserves  publication  or  at  least  trans-
lation, was  apparently  composed  soon  after  a.h.  1300  (a.d.
1883).

Tadhkiratu' l-Ghdfilin  ("the  Reminder  of  the  Heedless"),
an  anonymous  Azali  work,  apparently  composed  by  a  Bdbi

^  I  have  a  second  MS.  of  the  same  work  in  which  the  three  portions
occupy  pp.  I — 16,  17 — 154,  and  154 — 199  respectively.

15-2


228      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

of  Niraq,  endeavouring  to  prove,  by  quotations  from  various
writings  of  the  Bab,  beginning  with  the  Ahsanu'l-Qisas^  or
commentary  on  the  Sura-i-Yusuf^,  that  Mirza  Yahya  was
duly  appointed  by  the  Bab  as  his  successor,  and  that  the  rival
claims  of  his  half-brother  Mirza  Husayn  'All  Baha'u'llah
are  unfounded  and  untenable.  The  manuscript,  written
in  a  clear  naskh^  comprises  228  pages,  is  dated  Safar  8,
A.H.  1 33 1  (-Jan.  17,  1 913)  and  was  sent  to  me  in  the  fol-
lowing month  by  the  Babi  scribe  to  whom  I  am  indebted
for  so  many  interesting  works  and  documents.

JaI    OU^'^lxol  j>    kS^^    J^^    !i>*^    ""^t^^     'djcs-ad

The  Qasida-i-Alifiyya,  or  Qasida  rhyming  throughout
in  alif^  of  Mirza  Aslam  of  Nilr,  comprising  19  "Unities"
( Wdhid)^  explaining  the  terminology  employed  by  the
"  People  of  the  Bayan,"  or  Babis.

Concerning  the  author  I  have  been  unable  to  discover
any  particulars,  but  he  is  evidently  an  Azali,  and,  being
from  Niir  in  Mazandaran,  is  a  fellow-countryman  of  boih
Azal  and  Baha'u'llah.  The  poem  is  incomplete,  breaking
off  after  the  8th  verse  of  the  nth  Wahid  ox  "  Unity."  Each
JVdkid,  in  the  usual  Babi  fashion,  comprises  19  verses.
The  titles  of  the  1 1  extant  "  Unities "  are  in  Arabic  as
follows :

Ut  Ml

cL^'N)!  >^c^3  4-U  J-ijUl   ^\  ^3  (r)
^   J^jOt  j^   tyl£>   ^   c>^   Ch-*-    O'    ^^  (i)

^  See  pp.  202 — 3  supra.


III.      FURTHER   NOTES   ON    BABf   LITERATURE      229

Ui  f  Hi

^^y^i  ^>,.*.s»Jt  J  j^^^aJJ  ^1  3^oJ*^'  b>*-^  o'^  Sj^j^'  djjk

'OW    s^»-l^    4A^AaJt    4.kA3    w<3U«    ^5    (l)

'^'^i^.^^ju  akiut  wjIsw^i  jjUxd  ^  (y)

aDI    Ot^JLd    AJJ^)t    Sj^j    OW'    ;^-«i    4-Xu    j^i  (n-)

Ml

The  poem  begins :

*  b^-j  3J  (^t  JJ3-W  J  Uj-.^  A^  Jl  j^t

(E)     Baha'i  Controversial  Works.

I  pass  over  Baha'u'llah's  Testament  {\^J^  >^\i^)  and
Tablet  of  Good  Tidings  (OtjUo  9-^),  of  both  of  which  I
possess  very  correct  copies  transmitted  to  me  from  'Akka,
because  they  have  been  printed  in  the  original  and  translated
into  Russian  by  Tumanski  (see  p.  187  supra.  No.  42),  and


230     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

also  the  original  Arabic  ms:  of  the  Life  of  Bahd'u'lldh  by
Muhammad  Jawad  of  Qazwin,  the  translation  of  which  forms
the  basis  of  the  present  work.

Another  treatise  in  Persian  by  the  same  writer,  of  which,
unfortunately,   I   possess  only  the  last  half  (^pp.   16 — 31),
deserves,   however,   a   brief  notice.     It  was  concluded  on
Safar  7,  a.h.  13 19  (=May  25,  1901),  and  is  a  denunciation
of  'Abbas  Efendi  'Abdu'1-Baha  and  his  alleged  misdeeds.
The  fragment  begins  in  the  middle  of  an  account  of  his
withdrawal  to  Tabariyya  (Tiberias),  apparently  in  the  fourth
year  after  Baha'u'llah's  death  (May  1895-May  1896),  and
the  motives  which  prompted  it ;  and  this  is  followed  by  an
account  of  the  final  rupture  between  'Abbas  Efendi  and  his
brothers,  leading  to  a  complete  suspension  of  friendly  rela-
tions  between  them.     Under  the  fifth  year   (May   1896-
May  1897)  is  recounted  the  harsh  treatment  meted  out  by
'Abbas  Efendi  and  his  partisans  to  Mirza  Aqa  Jan  of  Kashan,
better  known  as  Jandb-i-KhddimuHldh  ("His  Reverence  the
Servant  of  God")  on  May  28,  1897,  the  fifth  anniversary  of
Baha'u'llah's  death ;  an  event  described  in  great  detail  in
the  lithographed  tract  entitled  "  the  Terrible  Episode  of  the
...Blessed  Mausoleum"  which  has  been  already  mentioned
on  pp.  197 — 8  (No.  18)  supra.     Next  follows  an  account  of
'Abbas  Efendi's  harsh  repulse  of  a  certain  Hajji  Sayyid  'All
Lawasani,  who  wished  to  bring  to  his  notice  a  document
emanating   from    Baha'u'llah,    and   his    command    that   no
"Tablet,"  even  if  in  Baha'u'llah's  own  writing,  should  be
accepted  unless  sealed   and  confirmed   by   himself.     The
events  chronicled  in  1898  include  the  stoppage  by  'Abbas
Efendi  of  his  brothers'  allowances  on  January  9,  and  the
death  and  burial  of  his  brother  Mirza  Ziya'u'llah  on  October
30,  on  which  occasion,  according  to  our  author's  account,
'Abbas  Efendi  showed  an  indifference  and  lack  of  considera-


III.      FURTHER   NOTES  ON    BABf  LITERATURE      23 1

tion  which  astonished  even  the  Christian  and  Muhammadan
inhabitants  of  'Akka.  The  attempted  abduction  of  Ziya'u
'llah's  widow  and  its  frustration  are  next  recorded,  and  the
intrigues  by  which  Hajji  Mirza  Say y id  'All  Afndn  (a  kinsman
of  the  Bab  and  son-in-law  to  Baha'u'llah)  was  prevented
from  selling  an  estate  of  his  at  Hayfa  for  the  benefit  of
'Abbas  Efendi's  younger  brothers.  Actual  charges  of  em
bezzlement  are  formulated  against  'Abbas  Efendi,  who  is
alleged  to  have  spent  for  private  ends  sums  of  money  col-
lected by  the  American  believers  for  the  relief  of  the  poor.
The  death  of  Mirza  Aqa  Jan  {Jandb-i-KhddimuHldh)  on
May  5,  1 90 1,  at  the  age  of  seventy  years,  is  next  recorded,
and  it  is  asserted  that  not  only  did  'Abbas  Efendi  and  his
partisans  refrain  from  attending  the  funeral,  but  that  they
openly  manifested  their  delight.  Here  ends  the  tract,  which,
as  already  noted,  was  written  only  three  weeks  after  the
event  last  mentioned.

Another  small  tract,  apparently  by  the  same  author,
dated  a.h.  1316  (a.d.  1898-9),  and  written  shortly  after
Ziya'u'llah's  death,  is  even  more  bitter  in  tone,  and  ends  as
follows  :  "  In  conclusion,  since  cursing  and  reviling  have
been  forbidden  in  this  Most  Mighty  Manifestation,  therefore
the  writer  recites  and  sets  down  in  writing  the  verse  revealed
in  the  Qurdn  (xi,  21) :  '  Shall  not  the  Curse  of  God  be  upon
the  cruel  people  V'

Written  from  the  same  point  of  view  as  the  above  (that
of  a  follower  of  Baha'u'llah  who,  after  his  death,  adhered  to
Muhammad  'Ali  and  repudiated  'Abbas  Efendi),  but  much
more  extensive  and  important,  is  a  ms.  of  291  +  7  pp.
composed  about  191 3  by  Sayyid  Mahdi  of  Dahaj  (near
Shahi-i-Babak)  in  reply  to  my  Persian  Introduction  to
Hajji  Mirza  Jani's  Nuqtatu'l-Kdf,  published  in  1910  in  the
E.  /.   W.  Gibb  Memorial  Series  (Vol.  xv).


232     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

The  author  was  born  at  Yazd  on  May  19,  1836,  and  was
therefore  eight  years  of  age  at  the  time  of  the  "  Manifestation  "
of  the  Bab,  whose  religion  he  embraced  at  the  early  age  of
thirteen.  The  Bab  himself  he  never  met,  but  he  saw  Sayyid
Yahya  of  Darab  {Jandb-i-  Wahid-i-Awwat)^  one  of  the  most
notable  early  Babis  and  martyrs,  when  he  visited  Yazd.  At
the  age  of  twenty-two  (about  a.d.  1858)  he  went  to  Baghdad,
at  that  time  the  head-quarters  of  the  Babis,  intending  to  see
Subh-i-Azal,  whom  he  found  living  in  great  seclusion  and  as
far  as  possible  avoiding  all  intercourse  with  his  fellows.  By
Baha'u'llah,  on  the  other  hand,  he  was  greatly  impressed,
and,  when  he  claimed  to  be  "He  whom  God  shall  manifest,"
became  his  disciple,  and  remained  "  under  his  shadow  "  for
thirty-five  years,  until  his  death  (in  1892)  twenty-three  lunar
years  before  the  time  of  writing.

As  one  who  had  been  a  believer  almost  from  the  begin-
ning, the  author  was  repeatedly  urged  by  his  friends  and
co-religionists  to  write  a  history  of  the  Babi  movement,  but
he  declined,  considering  himself  unequal  to  the  task.  He
consented,  however,  to  write  his  autobiography,  in  which,
owing  to  his  close  and  life-long  relations  with  the  leading
spirits  of  the  new  religion,  much  information  on  this  subject
would  incidentally  be  given.  On  this  autobiography  he  was
actually  engaged,  and  had  carried  it  down  to  the  17th  year
after  Baha'u'llah's  death  (a.d.  1909),  when  his  son  Mirza
Hasan  brought  him  a  copy  of  my  edition  of  Hajji  Mirza
Jani's  history  of  the  Bab,  composed  in  1853,  only  three
years  after  the  Bab's  martyrdom.  Having  read  my  Intro-
duction to  this  work,  in  which  I  endeavoured  fairly  to  state
the  case  as  between  the  followers  of  Baha'u'llah  and  Subh-i-
Azal,  he  was  moved  to  lay  aside  his  autobiography  in  order
to  criticize  my  arguments  and  conclusions,  and  this  book  is
the  result.     It  is  written  with  a  wide  knowledge  of  the  facts,


III.      FURTHER   NOTES   ON   BABI   LITERATURE      233

and  a  thorough  acquaintance  with  the  earlier  as  well  as  the
later  Babi  writings,  and  is  remarkable  for  its  courteous  and
reasonable  tone.  It  is,  indeed,  by  far  the  best  Baha'i  apology
which  I  have  met  with,  and  is  very  rich  in  information  not
to  be  found  elsewhere.  Unfortunately  it  ends  abruptly  at
the  point  where  the  author  proposed  to  discuss  in  detail  the
Azalis  mentioned  on  p.  43  of  my  Introduction  to  Hajji
Mirza  Jani's  history  as  having  been  assassinated  by  Baha'is.
In  a  note  written  in  red  ink  in  the  margin  the  author  says
that  there  is  a  continuation  of  the  book  which  he  hopes  to  send
subsequently,  but  this,  unfortunately,  has  never  been  received.
In  a  separate  postscript  of  seven  pages  he  offers  some  observa-
tions on  the  much-discussed  proceedings  of  MuUa  Mu-
hammad 'All  of  Barfurilsh  {Ja?idb-i-Quddiis)  and  Qurratu'l-
'Ayn  at  Badasht  on  their  way  from  Khurasan  to  Mazandaran.

It  is  impossible  in  this  brief  note  to  do  justice  to  this
remarkable  book,  which  contains  many  particulars  not  to  be
found  elsewhere.  For  instance,  in  discussing  (on  p.  179)
my  allusion  to  the  "  stationary  "  Babis  called  "  Kulhi-Shayi,^^
the  author  describes  and  names  the  small  group  at  Yazd  of
whom  they  consisted,  their  leader  being  Mirza  Ja'far  the
shoe-maker  {kaffdsh),  whose  chief  followers  were  Sayyid
Isma'il  the  dyer  {sahbdgh)  and  Mirza  Sulayman  the  builder
{bannd).  These  he  had  taken  the  trouble  to  visit,  and
found  them  ignorant  men  and  smokers  of  opium.

This,  perhaps,  is  the  best  place  in  which  to  make  mention
of  a  collection  (now  mounted  in  an  album)  of  some  of  the
letters  written  to  me  at  different  dates  between  July,  1889,
and  October,  1911,  by  Mirza  Yahya  Subh-i-Azal  and  his  sons
and  followers  on  the  one  hand,  and  by  'Abbas  Efendi  'Abdu'l-
Baha  and  his  brothers  and  followers  on  the  other.  These
are  briefly  as  follows  :


\6


234     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

A.     From  AzALfs.

I.  From  Subh-i-AzaL  (i)  July  29,  1889.  (2)  Oct.  i,
1889.  (3)  Dec.  3,  1889.  (4)  Jan.  7,  1890.  (5)  Marcher
April,  1890.  (6  &  7)  Two  undated  letters.  (8)  April  or
May,  1890.  (9)  Nov.  25,  1890.  (10)  Jan.  20,  1891.
(11)  May  26,  1 89 1.  (12)  Aug.  18,  1891.  (13)  Nov.  17,
1891.  (14)  Jan.  25,  1892.  (15)  March  15,  1892.  (16)
May  17,  1896.

IL  From  Subh-i-AzaVs son  ^AbduH-AlL  (i)  May,  1890.
(2)  Jan.  20,  1891.  (3)  May  26,  1891.  (4)  Aug.  18,  1896.
(5)  May  17,  1896.     (6)  June  5,  1896.

III.  From  Subh-i-AzaVs  son  Rizwdn  '•AH.  (i)  May
17,  1896.

IV.  From  Subh-i-AzaVs  nephew  RiUhuUldh.  (i)  May
17,  1896.

V.  From  Subh-i-AzaV s  follower  ^Abdu'l-Ahad  of  Zanjdn
(including  several  poems  composed  by  himself  and  also  a
narrative  of  the  siege  of  Zanjan  in  a.d.  1850,  written  from
his  own  recollections,  of  which  I  published  a  translation  in
the/.  R.  A.  S.  for  1897,  pp.  761—827).  (i)  May,  1890.
(2)  Dec.  8,  1890.  (3)  May  26,  1891.  (4)  Aug.  18,  1891.
(5)  Nov.  17,  1891.     (6)  May  17,  1896.

VI.  From  Subh-i-AzaV s  follower  Mahmud  ibn  Muham-
mad Jafar  of  Kir  man  ^  the  brother  of  Shay  kh  Ahmad  ''^  RuhV
of  Kir  man.     (i)  July  4,  T896.

B.     From  Baha'Is.

I.  From  ''Abbas  Efendi  'AbduH-Bahd^  eldest  son  of
Bahd'u'lldh.     (i)  Aug.  4,  1890.    (2)  April3,  1891.    (3)  April


III.      FURTHER   NOTES   ON   BABI   LITERATURE      235

8,   1 89 1.     (4)    Aug.    19,    1 89 1,   containing  account  of  the

Yazd  persecution.     (5)  March  24,  1893.     (6)  Feb.  i,  1901.

(7)  April  8,   1901.     (8)   March  28,   1903.     (9)    Christmas,  .  / .  r-^

1903.     (10)  June  20,  1904.     (11)  Sept.  7,  191 1.     (12)  Oct.  [      ^'U*'^  ^

191 1.     (13)  Feb.  9,' 1913  (from  Paris).   ^  \i^4AJi^*_J  {  ^^^^^  >
-       -     ,  1)  "  '^^J  )r'

II.  From  Mirzd  Muhammad  ^Ali,  son  of  BahdHu^lldh.         -

(i)  April  3,  1901.

III.  From  Mirzd  Badi'u'lldh^  son  of  BahdUi'lldh.  (i)
June  II,  1890.  (2)  Aug.  20,  1890,  enclosing  a  "Tablet."
(3)  Oct.  2,  1890.  (4)  July  24,  1891.  (5)  August,  1891,  on
the  persecution  at  Yazd.  (6)  Feb.  17,  1892.  (7)  July  25,
1892,  announcing  Bahau'llah's  death.  (8)  Feb.  4,  1903.
Circular  letter  announcing  his  repentance  at  having  sup-
ported his  brother  Muhammad  'AH  against  'Abbas  Efendi
'Abdu'1-Baha.  (9)  March  11,  1903.  Private  letter  of  re-
cantation in  the  same  sense  as  the  preceding  one.  (10)
Sept.  25,  1909.

IV.  Frotn  Mirzd  Ziy£u'lldh^  son  of  Bahd^ulldh,
(i)  April  30,  1890.     (2)  Sept.  3,  1890.

V.  From  Hdjji  Sayyid  ''All  ^''Afndn"  a  kinsman  of  the
Bdb  and  follower  of  Bahd^uUldh^  after  whose  death  he  first

followed  Muhammad  '■Alt,  but  later,  in  February^  i903>
renounced  his  allegiance  to  him  and  transferred  it  to  ''Abbds
Efendi  ^Abdu'l-Bahd.  (i)  Aug.  20,  1890.  (2)  Oct.  13,
1890.  (3)  July  30,  1891.  (4)  July  2,  1902.  (5)  Feb.  4,
1903.     Circular  letter  of  recantation  and  repentance.

VI.  From  Hdjji  Muhammad  ''All  Yazdi,  Persian
merchatit  and  BahdH  agent  resident  in  Egypt,  by  whom  most
of  the  above  letters  were  transmitted.  (i)  May  31,  1890.
(2)  June  21,  1890.  (3)  Aug.  12,  1890.  (4)  Aug.  25,  1890.
(5)  Sept.  9,  1890.  (6)  Oct.  4,  1890.  (7)  Oct.  19,  1890.
(8)  Dec.  2,  1890.     (9)  Dec.  6,  1890.      (10)  April  7,  1891.


236     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

(11)   July  27,  1891.     (12)    Aug.  29,  189T.     (13)  Sept.  8,

1 89 1,  forwarding  account  of  persecution  of  Babis  at  Yazd
in  the  previous  summer.    (14)  Dec.  23,  1891.    (15)  Feb.  22,

1892.  (16)  April  25,  1892.  (17)  May  II,  1892.  (18)  June
28,  1892.  (19)  April  20,  1893.  (20)  Feb.  3,  1901.
(21)  April  18,  1901.

VI L  From  Hdjji  Say y id  Muhammad  Taql  Manshadi^
£aha!i  agent  at  Bay/a.  (i)  March  28,  1903.  (2)  April
4,  1903.

VI IL  From  Ahmad-i-  Yazdt,  B aha' i  agent  at  Fort  Said.
(i)  Dec.  16,  1903.     (2)  Jan.  26,  1904.

IX.  From  Husayn-i-Yazdi^  copy  of  an  account  of  the
persecution  of  Babis  at  Yazd  in  the  early  summer  of  1891.
(i)  May  14,  1891.

X.  Fro?n  Mirzd  Asadu'lldh  of  Isfahan,  BahdH  mission-
ary in  America,  (i)  March  22,  1902.  (2)  April  21,  1902,
enclosing  copy  of  "  Tablet "  {Lawh)  revealed  at  Adrianople.

XI.  From  AminuHldh,  son  of  the  above,  (i)  April  21,
1902.

XI I.  From  Hdjji  Mirzd  Husayn,  known  as  Aqd
Kuchak,  of  Shirdz.  (1)  March  16,  1896,  enclosing  litho-
graphed appeal  on  behalf  of  Baha'is.

XIII.  From  Muhammad /awdd  of  Qazwin,  author  of  the  I
biography  of  Bahd^u^lldh  translated  in  this  volume,  and,  after  \  J^
Bahd^ulldKs  death,  one  of  the  chief  followers  of  Muhammad   [
'•AH.     (i)  April  4,  1 90 1.     (2)  July  28,  1901.     (3)  Sept-  7,  J

1901.  (4)  Oct.  14,  1901.    (5)  April  14,  1902.     (6)  July  5,

1902.  (7)  Oct.  22,  1902.

XIV.  From  Mirzd  Ghuldmu^lldh  of  Qazwin,  son  of  the
above,  BahdH  missiojtary  in  America,     (i)  March  19,  1901,


III.      FURTHER   NOTES  ON   BABI   LITERATURE      237

from  New  York.  (2)  April  10,  1901,  from  New  York.
(3)  April  17,  1902,  from  Cork.  (4)  Aug.  10,  1902,  from
Cork.  (5)  Nov.  II,  1902,  from  London.  (6)  Nov.  22,
1902,  from  London.

XV.  Undated  circular  letter  from  BahruH-^Uluin  of
Kir  man  to  the  Azalis,  sent  to  me  by  the  (Azali)  Bdbi  scribe  of
Isfahan  in  June,  19 13.

XVI.  From  ^Azizulldh,  a  Bahdi  Jeiv  of  Bukhdrd.
(i)  May  24,  1892.     (2)  May  25,  1892.     (3)  June  24,  1892.

A  good  many  other  letters  from  the  correspondents
above  mentioned  are  bound  up  with  manuscripts  which
accompanied  them.  I  have  also  some  photographic  fac-
similes of  letters  of  a  more  general  character  from  'Abbas
Efehdi:  ~~


(F)     BABf  Historical  Works.

I  need  only  allude  to  the  publication  in  extenso  of  Hajji
Mirza  Jani  of  Kashan's  NiiqtatuU-Kdf  in  the  E.  J.  W.  Gibb
Memorial  Series  (Vol.  xv,  19 10),  of  which,  as  the  earliest
extant  account  of  the  Bab  and  his  contemporaries  by  one
of  the  first  believers  and  martyrs,  it  is  impossible  to  over-
estimate the  importance  and  interest.  Of  the  very  mteresting
criticisms  on  my  Introduction  to  this  work  by  another  early
Babi,  Sayyid  Mahdi  of  Dahaj,  who  wrote  only  three  or  four
years  ago  I  have  already  spoken  (pp.  231 — 3  supra)  \  as  well
as  of  Mirza  Muhammad  Jawad  of  Qazwin's  two  treatises,  one
in  Arabic,  translated  in  full  in  this  volume,  and  another  in
Persian,  of  which  unhappily  I  possess  only  the  latter  half
(pp.  230 — I  supra).  The  only  writings  of  this  class  which  it
rem.ains  to  notice  here  in  somewhat  greater  detail  are  three
short  monographs  on  the  Babi  insurrection  in  Mazandaran


238     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

and  the  siege  of  Shaykh  Tabatsi,  sent  to  me  in  October,  191 2,
by  the  Babi  scribe  to  whom  I  have  already  had  occasion  to
allude  repeatedly.

(i)  The  first  of  these  monographs,  entitled  Waqdyi^-t-
Mimiyya,  or  "  Events  [in  the  Land]  of  M."  {i.e.  Mazandaran)
is  by  Sayyid  Muhammad  Husayn  ibn  Muhammad  Hadi  of
Zuwara,  poetically  surnamed  Mahjur.  It  appears  to  have
been  composed  in  the  fifth  year  of  the  Manifestation  of  the
Bab  (a.h.  1265  =  a. d.  1848-9).  This  date  is  followed  by
the  date  a.h.  1278  (=a.d.  1861-2),  which  must  be  the  date
of  transcription  of  the  original  from  which  this  copy,  which
is  quite  modern,  was  made.  The  narrative  was  compiled
at  the  request  of  the  mother  and  sister  of  Mulla  Husayn  of
Bushrawayh,  entitled  Jandb-i-BdbuH-Bdb^  and  is  based,  in
part  at  least,  on  the  account  of  one  of  the  few  survivors
amongst  the  insurgents,  Hajji  'Abdu'l-Majid  ibn  Hajji
Muhammad  of  Nishapiir.  This  part  of  the  ms.  comprises
91  pages.

The  careers  of  Jandb-i-QuddHs  and  Ja7idb-i-BdbuH-Bdb
are  briefly  sketched  from  a.h.  1261  (a.d.  1845),  ^^  y^^^"
after  the  Manifestation,  but  the  detailed  narrative  begins
on  Sha'ban  19,  1264  (July  21,  1848)  with  the  departure  of
the  former  and  his  followers  from  Mashhad  westwards  on
the  journey  which  ended  at  Shaykh  Tabarsi.  The  number
of  Babis  who  entered  Mazandaran  was  318,  of  whom  Isfahan
supplied  40,  Ardistan  7,  Shiraz  8,  Kirman  3,  Mashhad  22,
Bushrawayh  24  (some  say  40),  Qum  12,  Turbat  5,  Herat  14,
Turshiz  10,  Kakhak  4,  Mayami  14,  Qa'in  4,  Tihran  9,
Kashan  6,  Karbala  5,  Qazwin  10,  Hamadan  6,  Tabriz  5,
Zanjan  12,  Kirmanshah  3,  Barfunish  4  (some  say  40,  some
60),  Sang-i-sar  10,  Shah  Mi'rzar  (?)  9,  Amul  2,  Shaykh
Tabarsi  2,  Khiiy  3,  Kand  2,  Yazd  3,  Shahriid  3,  Turkey  in
Asia  (Riim)  3,  India  4.     The  narrative  of  the  siege  of  Shaykh


III.      FURTHER   NOTES   ON    BABf   LITERATURE      239

Tabarsi,  which  lasted  from  about  August,  1848,  to  April,
1849,  is  given  in  great  detail,  and  in  general  outline  agrees
with  the  account  given  by  Hajji  Mirza  Jani  and  in  the  JSew
History  (pp.  45  et  seqq.  of  my  translation).  In  many  cases
the  author  gives  the  authority  {isndd)  for  his  statements,
mentioning  the  name  of  his  informant.

(2)  The  second  monograph  (pp.  92 — no),  written
partly  in  verse,  partly  in  prose,  is  by  the  same  Sayyid  Husayn
"  Mahjiir,"  and  describes  the  death  or  "martyrdom"  of
Mulla  Husayn  of  Bushrawayh,  variously  entitled  Bdbu'l-Bdb,
QaHm-i-Khurdsdni  and  Sultdn  Mansur.     It  is  entitled  :

r"  Ml

Wl  Ml  ^

ml

It  begins  with  23  verses  of  poetry  of  which  the  first  is  :

The  whole  composition  is  in  the  style  used  by  the  rawza-
khwdns  who  celebrate  in  the  month  of  Muharram  the
sufferings  of  the  Imams.  The  pieces  of  poetry  with  which
the  narrative  is  ornamented  are  in  various  metres.  The
colophon  is  dated  Ramazan  21,  1330  (September  3,  191 2).

(3)  The  third  monograph,  comprising  128  pp.,  contains
another  account  of  the  Mazandaran  insurrection  by  Lutf
'All  Mirza,  a  Prince  of  the  Qajar  house.  This,  at  least,  is
the  opinion  of  the  sender  (the  Babi  scribe  already  so  often
mentioned)  as  to  its '^authorship,  of  which  the  manuscript


240     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

itself  gives  no  indication,  though  written  throughout  in  the
first  person  as  the  autobiography  of  one  who  took  part  in
the  events  narrated.     Thus  it  begins  :

^W^  ^     ^J>    ^>i}   U3^  ^  '  ^jUa««;  ^.y^  ^*AJ'3>

Ul  Ml  ^

^^L^    w>lj    Oj^^pfc.   >»tjJI    w>tjj     i_5^3V     ^!>'^    J^^     d^>^

^Lo^  j3^  bA3^  '^'^^•^   ^^^  ^^^'^  v»Jw  ^j.^  <^i^^^  <^^

"On  the  twelfth  of  Ramazan,  a.h.  1264  (=  August  12,
1 848),  when  this  worthless  atom,  after  returning  from  waiting
upon  the  Supreme  Source',  set  out  for  the  Liand  of  Kha
{i.e.  Khurasan),  I  had  the  honour  of  kissing  the  dust  at  the
feet  of  His  Holiness  the  Bab^  (upon  whom  be  the  Peace  of
God)  at  a  station  named  Dih-i-Mulla,  one  of  the  dependencies
of  Damghan,  and  illuminated  my  dimmed  eyes  with  the
light  of  his  comeliness,  and  had  the  honour  of  waiting  on
the  Friends ^"

The  narrative  is  very  detailed,  but  appears  to  be  incom-
plete, ending  about  two  months  before  the  final  tragedy,  i.e.
in  February,  1849.  There  is  no  colophon  or  date  at  the
end,  and  tlie  work  has  no  apparent  title.

1  i.e.  the  Bab  or  Nuqta,  who  was  then  imprisoned  at  Makii.

2  i.e.  MuUa  Husayn  of  Bushrawayh,  to  whom  the  original  Bab
transferred  this  title  when  he  himself  took  the  higher  one  of  "the
Point"  {Nuqta).  Mulla  Husayn  is  also,  with  less  risk  of  confusion,
entitled  (as  in  the  previously  described  narrative)  Bdbu'l-Bdb,  "the
Gate  of  the  Gate."

3  i.e.  the  other  Babis,  the  disciples  aad  fgdlowers  of  MuUa  Husayn.


III.      FURTHER   NOTES   ON    BABI   LITERATURE      241

In  this  connection  I  should  like  to  cite  the  following
note  by  Captain  C.  F.  Mackenzie,  from  an  unpublished
record  of  his  journey  from  Rasht  to  Astarabad  in  1859,
communicated  to  me  on  October  10,  191 3,  by  Mr  H.  L.
Rabino,  H.  B.  M.  Consul  at  Casablanca  in  Morocco,  formerly
at  Rasht  in  Persia.


^''  Bdbl  revolt  in  Mdzanddran.

"  During  this  revolt  the  Babis  took  up  a  fortified  position
10  or  12  miles  from  Barfurilsh,  at  the  shrine  of  Shaykh
Tabarsi,  near  the  river  Talar ;  they  were  few  in  number,  but
determined  and  fanatic,  and  after  putting  several  envoys  of
the  authorities  to  death,  they  prepared  for  a  siege  by  collecting
provisions  from  the  neighbouring  country ;  whenever  the
villagers  hesitated  or  refused  to  give  what  they  required,
their  houses  were  burnt  about  their  ears.

"  Their  numbers  gradually  increased  from  forty  or  fifty
to  between  four  and  five  hundred,  and  their  recruits  were
chiefly  men  from  the  district  of  Sawadkuh.  One  of  these
latter  was  styled  Amir-i-Tabardar,  because  his  favourite
weapon  was  the  tabar,  a  poleaxe,  from  which  the  former
name  of  the  province  Tabaristan  was  derived.

"  Hostilities  commenced  by  an  attack  made  by  Aqa
'Abdu'Uah  Surtej,  with  200  Hazar-Jarib  tufangchis.  His
camp  was  surprised  by  the  Babis  the  day  after  his  arrival,
and  he  and  forty  or  fifty  of  his  men  were  slain.  The  re-
mainder fled  to  Sari,  and  on  receipt  of  orders  from  Tihran,
another  body  of  troops,  about  500  strong,  was  sent  to  ex-
terminate the  Babis.  Their  commander  was  'Abbas-quli
Khan,  who  in  the  first  engagement  shot  Mulla  Husayn,  the
chief  of  the  Babis,  who,  before  dying,  bequeathed  his  authority
to  Hajji  Muhammad  'Ali  Barfurushi,  and  expressed  a  wish

B.  B.  16


242     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

to  be  buried  with  his  arms.  After  his  death  the  Babis  made
a  desperate  sally  and  put  the  besiegers  to  death.

"The  insurrection  had  now  become  formidable,  and
Prince  Mahdi-quli  Mirza  was  appointed  to  suppress  it.  His
troops  were  2000  in  number  and  he  had  both  field-artillery
and  mortars.

"  He  took  up  his  quarters  at  a  place  called  Waskus
about  two  miles  from  Shaykh  Tabarsi,  and  during  the  night
his  camp  was  so  invaded  by  the  Babis  that  he  had  barely
time  to  escape  by  a  window  and  hide  himself  in  the
jungle.

"The  whole  village  was  on  fire;  two  unlucky  Princes,
Dawud  Mirza  and  his  uncle  Sahib-Qiran  Mirza,  perished  in
the  flames,  and  a  great  slaughter  was  made  amongst  the
royal  troops.

"  Mahdi-quli  Mirza,  after  wandering  about  in  fear  of  his
life,  luckily  met  with  one  of  his  own  servants,  who,  although
a  fugitive  like  himself,  had  a  horse  upon  which  the  Prince
mounted  and  thus  reached  'Aliabad.

"  After  collecting  the  scattered  remnants  of  his  army  and
receiving  a  number  of  tufangchis  and  other  riffraff,  he  again
set  about  besieging  the  Babis,  who,  although  pressed  by
hunger  and  ill  furnished  with  ammunition,  held  out  for  two
months  more.

*'  At  the  end  of  this  period,  the  Prince,  seeing  that  he
could  not  take  the  place  and  that  by  driving  the  rebels  to
desperation  he  would  run  the  risk  of  being  defeated  a  second
time,  offered  them  terms.

"  He  informed  them  that  if  they  abandoned  their
position  and  went  away  quietly,  each  man  to  his  own  home,
they  would  not  be  molested.

"The  Babis  consented  to  this  arrangement,  and  came
forth  to  the  number  of  about  200  fighting  men.     They  were


III.      FURTHER    NOTES   ON    BABT    LITERATURE      243

then  deprived  of  their  arms,  and  the  greater  number,  with
the  usual  Asiatic  respect  for  treaties,  were  massacred  on  the
spot.

"Some  victims,  amongst  whom  was  their  leader  Hajji
Muhammad  'Ali,  were  reserved  for  a  more  barbarous
punishment.  They  were  taken  to  Barfurush  and  burnt
alive  on  the  Sabzi  Maydan  (the  green  plain  lying  between
the  town  and  the  Bagh-i-Shah).  Thus  ended  the  Babi
revolt  in  Mazandaran,  after  costing  about  1500  lives."


16 — 2


IV


FIVE     UNPUBLISHED     CONTEMPORARY

DOCUMENTS,    PERSIAN    AND    ENGLISH,

RELATING  TO  THE  bAB'S  EXAMINATION

AT  TABRIZ  IN   1848.


In  February,  19 12,  I  received  from  M.  Hippolyte
Dreyfus,  the  most  eminent  and  learned  European  adherent
of  the  Baha'i  doctrine,  three  photographs  of  documents
connected  with  the  interrogation  to  which  the  Bab  was  sub-
jected at  Tabriz  in  the  presence  of  Nasiru'd-Din  Mirza
(afterwards  Shah),  at  that  time  Wali-^ahd  or  Crown  Prince,
during  the  latter  days  of  the  reign  of  Muhammad  Shah,
who  died  on  Sept.  4,  1848.  Concerning  these  documents
M.  Dreyfus  wrote  as  follows  in  two  letters  dated  respectively
Feb.  4  and  Feb.  9,  191 2  :

"  Cher  Monsieur  Browne,

"J'ai  grand  plaisir  a  vous  communiquer  les  deux
documents  ci-inclus,  sur  lesquels  je  serais  tres-heureux
d'a voir  votre  opinion.

"  Le  premier  {A)  est  la  photographic  d'une  lettre  de
Nacer-oud-Din  Mirza  (alors  Wali^ahd)  a  son  pere  sur
un  pretendu  interrogatoire  du  Bab  a  Tabriz.  Croyez-vous
que  ce  soit  une  relation  plus  ou  moins  exacte  de  Tinterroga-
toire  rapporte  egalement  dans  le  Nuqfatu'l-Kdf}  Ou  bien
s'agit-il  d'un  autre  interrogatoire  ?

"  Le  deuxieme  {B)  parait  bien  etre  de  I'ecriture  si
caracteristique  du  Bab,  et  etre  adresse  au  meme  Nacer-
oud-Din  Mirza.  II  y  nie  toute  pre'tention  a  une  'Cause'
(^i)  et  implore  la  clemence.


248     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

"^^  est  la  rdponse  des  Mudjtahids.

"Croyez-vous  ce  second  document  authentique?  II
constituerait  une  seconde  amende  honorable,  apres  le
reniement  de  Chiraz  dont  parle  Nicolas  dans  la  traduction
du  Baydn  persan.

*'Je  serais  tres  desireux  d'avoir  votre  opinion  sur  ces
documents,  que  je  m'excuse  de  vous  prier  de  bien  vouloir
me  retourner  quand  vous  les  aurez  lus,  ayant  eu  grand  peine
a  me  les  procurer.  II  va  sans  dire  que  vous  pouvez  les  faire
photographier,  car  j'ai  peur  que  le  photographe  de  Teheran
ne  les  livre  pas  volontiers>

"  Avec  mes  meilleures  sympathies,  croyez  moi  toujours
votre  devoue  H.  Dreyfus.  4.  2.  12."

(^)

"  Cher  Monsieur,

"  Apres  avoir  examine  un  peu  plus  attentivement  la
lettre  du  Bab,  je  ne  crois  pas,  vu  sa  forme,  qu'elle  soit  adressee
a  Nacer-oud-Din  Mirza,  et  je  me  demande  si  ce  n'est  pas  la
lettre  adressee  au  gouverneur  de  Chiraz  dont  parle  Nicolas
dans  la  preface  du  Baydn  persan.  Je  fais  rechercher  les
noms  des  Mudjtahids  de  Chiraz,  ce  qui  pourra  me  fixer.

"  En  tous  cas  je  serais  heureux  d'avoir  votre  opinion.

"Bien  cordialement  a  vous,  H.  Dreyfus.        9.  2.  12."

Here  follow  the  texts  and  translations  of  these  documents.
As  regards  the  first  {A)  it  appears  certain  that  the  writer  of  it
was  Amir  Asian  Khan  {in  ghuldm,  "  this  servant,"  as  he  calls
himself),  who,  as  Mirza  Jani  informs  us,  was  present  at
this  interrogatory ^  and  was  maternal  uncle  to  Nasiru'd-Din
Mirza,  who  nominally  presided  at  it.  It  would  appear,  from
certain  expressions  used,  to  be  addressed  to  the  then  reigning

^  See  my  New  History  of... the  Bab,  p.  287,  n.  2  ad  calc.


^fX-''~f^-4/.^


'J'  »—  'V^y.J  *'— ^  . /  »«'— -  .^-*~^,v>^,  w^-  w'C''>C<'!  -'•'  *


"C~-  L^*V ,  iJJ  i^  ^  •  •


V  -


''i/^-'


..^


'■'C^


■y^


■'.  ^-f.^.


'-V     '  .  ■  .        ^  ■■   .-    .    '  •    .    '7'   '    '  '■    '   .     .•'•■'


ry:^


z


tc^.-


'  -^t  >-^t/".


Fac-simile  of  document  A.


To  face  p.  249.


IV.      FIVE   ORIGINAL   DOCUMENTS  249

King,  Muhammad  Shah.  That  it  refers  to  the  interrogatory
of  the  Bab  at  Tabriz  is  clear  from  its  agreement,  as  regards
the  questions  asked  and  the  repUes  given,  with  the  accounts
of  the  same  transaction  given  both  by  the  Babi  and  the
Muhammadan  historians  \

A.

jJoa^^  jJ^Ua  ^.ffioiJi  wA-»».  'JujUj  ^i^  ^S  b  Oj^
,J>«Jtji  J    O^tjj  J    ^O^b    djL^I    <l£»    CUw^i^    jL(^ai.«    w>UafciJ

w>t^^    j>     jL,,j!!sk^^    V^*^      '  JLU£9     Jk^^^    3     0.aS      ^>;na^     siH>

^^J»Ssf^^  j^   3    i^i«^    jUa».t    ^jf^j^   ^^j^j^   *^L«   3    >Ai»a>.«   ^Lo


*^J^    OA>^  ^^'  J^  J^>    *^  "^^^^  OUJ.^  ^^5-^^*:'  3  >ojW  3

1  These  accounts  I  have  combined  in  Note  M  at  the  end  of  Vol.  ii
of  my  edition  and  translation  of  the  Traveller's  Narrative  (pp.  277 —
290).


250     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

W%wt     C«w>ij    Jut      dJUAW     ^  ^ttCAS      4^>Jt    J    ^^^J^LmA     W>b    3  ^^mmA

ij^afc.»>    w>W^    t^JL».^t     ^J>Jjo    wsikM^*;^    i^    jj    ^^     C^U^t

iJLst^  J>^   ^>^  <^^    ^^^   T^'>^  ^"^o***^  ^^^^3^  ^»^'^^^J>^

'^aw^J  Jt  t^j  ^>J    t^..      '  ^^)^  J'  t^^    ^^    ^^'^.    bj
*a3j-Lo^     OJJiJ     ws*^t4j;Ai      tjcci.      tjlyijt      C^»^3      OW*     Ji>      ^^,5*^
JU*.    ^^  J>    0'>''    ^ts^,<    4>W    3J>    s^^^^t   ^..>.A  j^J^    J-a^

juAkt^A.  3I  j.5C;^  lo-lft  j^  jLH^  c)v^  **^'  >»^  J»^^^  1)3'

a£»    C--wt    wJU£9  ^1j^    J^    wJJ^^    j>j1    jJ^^5Wj.J    '^^.^   jJI>
jtjA    y}^t^  jS\     C^     '  O-l^    JJJb\^   jSj^  ^)U   jtjA    J^ifc.

IJ  ft

'  >^    JJbl3».    wjUaiJi    {j    UtfuJ   Ju   3    j^to^J-w  \j^\i   3    ;^^>^
C-sA>    J^eA.««   '^^   jJ^ri.!    w^U».    ^^,*.»>.«.)    lyijl    O-^JjW   Oj>^


IV.      FIVE  ORIGINAL   DOCUMENTS  25 1


e-  M  w  ui  wi

^jOjfi'     ^lairJ'^-tfi    J-i**'      'jul^Oi.    J^X<      'jL/^J*^^     dlXJl     y2jtj)TW.J

LoxJ)    (>l».    (^JJt    ^    kXc^Ji — :^j^  u<^j^  3    >/^    J^^aJij
Asis  J\  jj^  j^JL5L«^  ^\  j\  juu  'wnAKj    v'^*^'  *^>oJ  J^l5


252     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

J^JLo    3     ^3^*9^^     O'l^b     *^^^     tjixXt     j>jjt     J.NJ>     a£»     d>J^

{Translation.^

''''He  is  God,  exalted  is  His  State,

"  May  I  be  the  sacrifice  of  the  dust  of  Thy  blessed  feet !

"  As  concerning  the  Bab,  the  Command  whose  course  is
as  that  of  Fate  had  been  issued  that  the  learned  on  both
sides  should  be  convened  and  dispute  with  him.  There-
fore, in  accordance  with  the  Imperial  Command,  I  sent  an
officer  to  bring  him  in  chains  from  Urumiyya  \i,e.  the  Castle
of  Chihriq]  and  hand  him  over  to  Kazim  Khan;  and  I
wrote  a  note  to  His  Holiness  the  [Chief]  Mujtahid  that  he
should  come  and  hold  discussion  with  him  with  the  argu-
ments, proofs  and  laws  of  the  Perspicuous  Religion  [of  Islam].
His  Holiness  the  Mujtahid,  however,  wrote  in  reply,  '  From
the  declarations  of  numerous  trustworthy  persons  and  the
perusal  of  documents,  [it  appears  that]  this  person  \i.e.  the
Bab]  is  devoid  of  religion,  and  that  his  infidelity  is  clearer
than  the  sun  and  more  obvious  than  yesterday.  After  such
evidence  of  witnesses  there  is  no  obligation  on  your  humble
servant  to  renew  the  discussion.'


IV.      FIVE   ORIGINAL  DOCUMENTS  253

"I  therefore  summoned  Akhilnd-i-Mulla  Muhammad^
and  Mulla  Murtaza-quli^  while  of  [Your  Majesty's]  servants
this  slave  Asian  Khan,  Mirza  Yahya  and  Kazim  Khan  were
also  present  in  the  assembly.

"First  Hajji  Mulla  Mahmiid^  asked,  saying:  'It  hath
been  heard  that  thou  sayest,  "  I  am  the  Imam's  vicegerent
and  the  Bab " ;  nay,  that  thou  hast  uttered  certain  words
implying  that  thou  art  actually  the  Imam  or  a  Prophet.'
The  Bab  answered,  'Yes  my  friend,  my  Qibla,  I  am  the
Imam's  Vice-gerent  and  the  Bab,  and  what  I  have  said  and
you  have  heard  is  true.  It  is  incumbent  on  you  to  obey
me,  by  virtue  of  [the  saying]  "Enter  the  Door  [Bad]  with
adoration."  But  I  did  not  utter  these  words :  He  uttered
them  who  uttered  them.'  They  asked,  '  Who,  then,  is  the
speaker  ? '  He  answered,  '  He  who  shone  forth  on  Mount
Sinai :

"[If  to  say]  'I  am  the  Truth'  be  seemly  in  a  Tree^,
Why  should  it  not  be  seemly  on  the  part  of  some
favoured  man^?"
There  is  no  I-ness  in  the  case :  God  hath  said  these
things,  while  I  am  but  as  the  Tree  [or  Burning  Bush]  on
Sinai  At  that  time  [the  Divine  Word]  was  created  in  it,
and  now  in  me.  And  I  swear  by  God  that  I  am  that  person
whom  you  have  been  expecting  from  the  beginning  of
Islam  until  now ;  I  am  he  whom  forty  thousand  doctors  will
deny.'

^  Called  Mdmqd^ti,  a  notable  Shaykhi  d ivine  entitled  Hujjatu'l-Jsldm.

2  Of  Marand,  entitled  ^Alamu'l-Hudd.

^  The  tutor  of  the  Crown-Prince,  entitled  Mulld-bdshi,  and
Nizdmu'l- '  Ulamd.

*  Alluding  to  the  Burning  Bush.

^  Alluding  to  the  celebrated  Sufi  mystic  Husayn  ibn  Mansur-i-
Hallaj,  who  was  put  to  death  in  a.d.  921  for  heresy  and  blasphemy,
and  chiefly  for  his  saying  Ana^l-Haqq,  "  I  am  the  Truth."


254     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

"  They  enquired,  '  In  what  book  is  this  tradition  that
forty  thousand  doctors  will  deny?'  He  replied,  'If  it  be
not  forty  thousand,  it  is  at  any  rate  four  thousand.'  Mulla
Murtaza-quli  said,  '  Very  well ;  then  according  to  this  state-
ment, thou  art  the  Author  of  a  [new]  Dispensation.  But  it  is
in  the  Traditions  and  a  necessary  part  of  our  Faith  that  the
[Promised]  One  shall  appear  from  Mecca,  and  that  the
leaders  of  men  and  Jinn^  together  with  forty-five  thousand
Jinnis  will  believe  in  him,  and  that  he  will  have  with  him
the  heir-looms  of  the  Prophets,  such  as  David's  coat-of-mail,
the  rod  of  Moses,  Solomon's  ring,  and  the  White  Hand\
Where,  now,  are  the  rod  of  Moses  and  the  White  Hand  ? '
The  Bab  answered,  '  I  am  not  permitted  to  bring  them.'
Akhiind-i-Mulla  Muhammad  said,  '  Thou  didst  err  in  coming
without  permission.'  Then  they  asked  him,  'What  hast
thou  of  signs  and  miracles  ? '  He  replied,  '  My  miracle  is
this,  that  I  can  cause  verses  to  be  revealed  for  my  staff,'
whereupon  he  began  to  recite  the  following  words :

" '  /^  the  Name  of  God  the  Merciful  the  Forgiving.  Glory
he  to  God  the  Holy  the  Glorified,  Who  created  the  Heavens
and  the  Earth  as  He  created  this  staffs  as  one  of  His  Signs. ^
But  according  to  the  rules  of  [Arabic]  grammar  he  wrongly
vocalized  the  word  Samdwdt  (Heavens)  as  Samdwdta.  They
said,  '  Make  its  [final]  vowel  /.'  Then  he  recited  the  word
al-Ard  (the  Earth)  also  with  a  [final]  /.  Amir  Asian  Khan
observed  that  if  such  words  were  of  the  nature  of  '  Signs,'  he
likewise  could  produce  such,  and  proceeded  to  recite :
''Praise  be  to  God  who  created  the  staff  as  He  created  the
morning  and  the  evening ' :  whereat  the  Bab  was  greatly
ashamed.

"Afterwards    Hajji   Mulla   Mahmild   enquired   saying:

1  i.e.  the  Hand  of  Moses,  which  he  drew  forth  from  under  his  cloak
"as  white  as  snow."


IV.      FIVE   ORIGINAL   DOCUMENTS  255

*  It  hath  come  down  in  Tradition  that  Ma'miin  asked  of
His  Holiness  the  Imam  'Ali  Riza,  "What  is  the  proof  of
the  [right  to  the]  Caliphate  of  your  grandfather?"  His
Holiness  answered,  '*  The  sign  of  ourselves."  Ma'miln  said,
"  Were  it  not  for  our  women."  His  Holiness  said,  *'  Were
it  not  for  our  sons."  Elucidate  this  dialogue  and  explain  the
point^'    The  Bab  reflected  for  a  while,  but  answered  nothing.

"After  that  they  asked  some  questions  on  Jurispru-
dence and  other  sciences,  which  he  was  unable  to  answer,
not  even  the  plainest  juridical  questions,  such  as  those  con-
cerning doubt  and  error  [arising  during  the  performance  of
prayer^],  but  hung  his  head  and  again  began  to  utter  such
meaningless  words  as,  '  I  am  that  very  Light  which  shone
forth  on  Sinai,  for  it  hath  come  down  in  tradition  that  that
Light  was  the  Light  of  one  of  the  Shi'is^'  Thereupon  this
servant  remarked,  '  Wherefore  shouldst  thou  be  that  Shi'i  ?
Perhaps  it  was  the  Light  of  Mulla  Murtaza-quli.'  Thereat
he  was  more  ashamed  than  before,  and  hung  his  head.

"When  the  discussion  was  concluded,  His  Reverence
the  Shaykhu'l-Islam  was  summoned,  who  had  the  Bab
beaten  and  inflicted  on  him  an  exemplary  chastisement,  so
that  he  apologized,  recanted,  and  repented  of  and  asked
pardon  for  his  errors,  giving  a  sealed  undertaking  that
henceforth  he  would  not  commit  such  faults.  Now  he  is  in
prison  and  bonds  awaiting  the  decision  of  His  Most  Sacred,
Royal  and  Imperial  Majesty,  may  the  souls  of  the  worlds  be
his  sacrifice ! "

1  The  point  is  no  clearer  to  me  than  it  was  25  years  ago  when  I
published  my  translation  of  the  Traveller's  Narrative^  q.v.  (Vol.  ii,
pp.  282 — 4  and  n.  i  on  p.  283  adcalc).  My  friend  Muhammad  Shafi'
suggests  that  the  allusion  is  to  Qut^dn,  iii,  54.

2  See  ibid.  pp.  285 — 6  and  footnotes.

3  i.e.  of  the  followers  of  'All  ibn  Abi  Talib,  the  First  Im^m.


256     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

B.

The  second  document,  unsigned  and  undated,  is  appar-
ently  in  the  Bab's  handwriting  and  consists  of  a  complete
recantation  and  renunciation  of  any  superhuman  claim  which
he  may  have  advanced  or  have  appeared  to  advance.  There
is  nothing  to  show  to  whom  it  is  addressed,  or  whether  it  is
the  recantation  referred  to  in  the  last  paragraph  of  the
preceding  document  or  another.  The  handwriting,  though
graceful,  is  not  easily  legible,  and  the  text  appears  to  run  as
follows :

^\    J^    a£=>    Ij^)^   ^    4301     J^<^a^     dJ^bj^     J^^     >3^

j^^  C^t  «J»j-o  ^i  >e->>»"j  «JU^;j  **»:;^^  ^W  ^'    ^^^J'^^
03^  3   dj-^3    J-«fc.   ju^t^Xtt-   ^»->^   0^3**  v«^   0>^

wi

^jb   tj^t    Cm)*^)  J4^'  ^^^-^^  aDI  jl;^  o-«  JP   ^  J^  J^
j^UJL^  J>\    3  j>\6l^\^    I^J».    j^U»j    ^'^    Uik«  3


Fac-simile  of  document  B.


To  face  p.  256.


I


IV.      FIVE   ORIGINAL   DOCUMENTS  2^J

^j  aiiS  jAsu^S  jt^b  ^U^b  )o^  a£9  C^.»>.j3  ^«^Jl£  JUik^

Wl  Ml  iij

tj>»*N)LJI  <lJU  4!l[lt  Aa».A.  O^^rfc.  ^<l^l».  wotJ  ic^J^  3  ^r-111^-'
^-^J^     ^^>^     O^^     b^*^    Chj'    3    J-^su^     C^^i<    eXigfc  -0

(Trans/a^wn.)

"  May  my  life  be  thy  sacrifice  !  Praise  be  to  God  such
as  He  deserves  and  merits,  in  that  He  hath  caused  [those
who  are]  the  Manifestations  of  His  Grace  and  Mercy  under
all  circumstances  to  comprehend  all  of  His  servants.  Praise
be  to  God,  and  again  praise,  that  He  hath  deigned  to  make
one  like  your  Excellency^  the  source  of  His  Clemency  and
Mercy,  by  the  manifestation  of  whose  kindness  He  hath
pardoned  His  servants,  cast  a  veil  over  [the  faults  of]  sinners,
and  shown  mercy  to  the  transgressors.  I  take  God  to
witness  on  His  part  that  this  weak  servant  never  intended
aught  contrary  to  the  good  pleasure  of  the  Lord  of  the
World  and  the  Company  of  Saints.  Although  my  very
existence  is  in  itself  utterly  faulty,  yet  since  my  heart  firmly
believes  in  the  unity  of  God  (glorious  in  His  mention),  and
the  Prophethood  of  His  Apostle,  and  the  Saintship  of  the
Community  of  Saints,  and  since  my  tongue  acknowledgeth  all

^  The  title  might  equally  be  rendered  "Highness,"  "Holiness,"
"  Reverence,"  etc.,  according  to  the  station  of  the  person  addressed.
B.  B.  17


258     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

that  hath  been  revealed  on  the  part  of  God,  I  hope  for  His
Mercy.  Never  have  I  desired  aught  contrary  to  the  Will  of
God,  and,  if  words  contrary  to  His  good  pleasure  have
flowed  from  my  pen,  my  object  was  not  disobedience,  and
in  any  case  I  repent  and  ask  forgiveness  of  Him.  This
servant  has  absolutely  no  knowledge  connected  with  any
[superhuman]  claim ^.  I  ask  forgiveness  of  God  my  Lord
and  I  repent  unto  Him  of  [the  idea]  that  there  should  be
ascribed  to  me  any  [Divine]  Mission.  As  for  certain  prayers
and  words  which  have  flowed  from  my  tongue,  these  do  not
imply  any  such  Mission  (amr),  and  any  [apparent]  claim  to
any  special  vicegerency  for  His  Holiness  the  Proof  of  God^
(on  whom  be  Peace !)  is  a  purely  baseless  claim,  such  as
this  servant  has  never  put  forward,  nay,  nor  any  claim  like
unto  it.  Therefore  it  is  thus  hoped  from  the  clemency  of
His  Imperial  Majesty  and  of  Your  Excellency,  that  they  will
exalt  the  head  of  him  who  continually  prays  for  them  by
the  favours  and  graces  of  their  clement  and  compassionate
court.     Farewell."

B\

The  third  document,  likewise  undated,  is  addressed  to
Sayyid  'Ali  Muhammad  the  Bab,  and  contains  the  fatwd,
or  ecclesiastical  sentence,  of  the  ^ulamd^  by  two  of  whom,
Abu'l-Qasim  al-Hasani  al-Husayni  and  'Ali  Asghar  al-Hasani
al-Husayni,  it  is  formally  sealed.  The  latter  is  probably  the
Shay khu' I- Islam,  who  caused  the  Bab  to  be  beaten  after  the
Tabriz  interrogatory^;  the  former  I  have  not  yet  been  able
to  identify.

^  Such  as  that  he  was  the  "Gate  of  Knowledge"  {Bdbu'l-^Ilm),  or

the  like.  ' --

^  i.e.  the  Twelfth  Imam  or  Im^m  Mahdf.

^  See  Traveller' s  Narrative,  ii,  pp.  ^o— 21  and  278.


A^/^l^.^


''-^j^^^^j''/U/^jJ.^:^/l,^J^^^J^J^


y  f  .    '


y


y


'V'-'     ;-i*s


/


^,y//^/(<^u  ^^\>/c^'^'^^/^'^


To  face  f.  259


Fac-simile  of  document  B^


IV.      FIVE   ORIGINAL  DOCUMENTS  259

Ml  ml

Wl  ll>l

d3*x-^   3    aDI    d*xjl    Ji^j    ^J    cJ^i    j^    j^3    "Nltj    OjJrfl
j^jj*.  3  »^*»n>^    J>-*^   L5^**^   ^5j-«    *<V>^    '  J"*^    ^t-^^-^**   ^

6l>«^       iat}^       ^V^      w>MwldjL^     V^nW     ^JJ3    jm^U     v_-q-^r»     A^

{Translation.)

"  Sayyid  'All  Muhammad-i-Shirazi :

"In  the  Imperial  Banquet-hall  and  August  Assembly  of
His  Highness  the  Crown  Prince  of  the  undeclining  Empire
[of  Persia],  (may  God  aid,  support  and  strengthen  him !)
and  of  a  number  of  learned  doctors,  thou  didst  admit  certain
matters  each  one  of  which  separately  implied  thy  apostasy
and  justified  thy  death.  The  repentance  of  an  incorrigible
apostate  is  not  accepted,  and  the  only  thing  which  has  caused
the  postponement  of  thy  execution  is  a  doubt  as  to  thy  sanity
of  mind.  Should  this  doubt  be  removed,  the  sentence  of  an
incorrigible  apostate  would  without  hesitation  be  executed
upon  thee."

rAbu'l-Qasim  al-Hasani  al-Husayniv
VaH  Asghar  al-Hasani  al-Husayni  J

17 — 2


26o     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

The  last  two  documents,  which  are  in  English,  were
kindly  communicated  to  me  by  Mr  W.  A.  Shedd,  who  wrote
concerning  them  as  follows  in  a  letter  dated  March  i,  191 1  :

"  Dear  Professor  Browne,

"  In  going  over  papers  of  my  father,  I  found  some-
thing which  I  think  may  be  of  value  from  a  historical  point
of  view.  I  have  no  books  here,  nor  are  any  accessible  here,
to  be  certain  whether  this  bit  of  testimony  (or  rather  these
two  bits)  have  been  used  or  not.  I  think  probably  not,  and
I  am  sure  that  I  can  do  nothing  better  than  send  them  to
you,  with  the  wish  that  you  may  use  them  as  you  think  best.
Of  the  authenticity  of  the  papers  there  can  be  no  doubt.
"  Yours  very  truly,  W.  A.  Shedd."

The  first  of  these  two  documents  is  very  valuable  as
giving  the  personal  impression  produced  by  the  Bab,  during
the  period  of  his  imprisonment  and  suffering,  on  a  cultivated
and  impartial  Western  mind.  Very  few  Western  Christians
can  have  had  the  opportunity  of  seeing,  still  less  of  con-
versing with,  the  Bab,  and  I  do  not  know  of  any  other  who
has  recorded  his  impressions.  The  second  document,
belonging  to  a  later  period,  describes  the  circumstances
attending  the  presentation  to  Nasiru'd-Din  Shah  of  the
letter  addressed  to  him  by  Baha'u'llah  and  transmitted  by
the  hand  of  Mirza  Badi'  in  July,  1869^

I.

Dr  Cormick's  accounts  of  his  personal  impressions  of
MIrza  'ALf  Muhammad  the  BAb,  extracted  from
letters  written  by  him  to  the  Rev.  Benjamin
Labaree,  D.D.

"  You  ask  me  for  some  particulars  of  my  interview  with
the  founder  of  the  sect  known  as  Babis.     Nothing  of  any
^  See  Traveller's  Narrative^  ii,  p.  393.


IV.      FIVE   ORIGINAL   DOCUMENTS  261

importance  transpired  in  this  interview,  as  the  Bab  was
aware  of  my  having  been  sent  with  two  other  Persian  doctors
to  see  whether  he  was  of  sane  mind  or  merely  a  madman,
to  decide  the  question  whether  to  put  him  to  death  or  not.
With  this  knowledge  he  was  loth  to  answer  any  questions
put  to  him.  To  all  enquiries  he  merely  regarded  us  with  a
mild  look,  chanting  in  a  low  melodious  voice  some  hymns,
I  suppose.  Two  other  Sayyids^,  his  intimate  friends,  were
also  present,  who  subsequently  were  put  to  death  with  him^,
besides  a  couple  of  government  officials.  He  only  once
deigned  to  answer  me,  on  my  saying  that  I  was  not  a
Musulman  and  was  willing  to  know  something  about  his
religion,  as  I  might  perhaps  be  inclined  to  adopt  it.  He
regarded  me  very  intently  on  my  saying  this,  and  replied
that  he  had  no  doubt  of  all  Europeans  coming  over  to  his
religion.  Our  report  to  the  Shah  at  that  time  was  of  a
nature  to  spare  his  life.  He  was  put  to  death  some  time
after  by  the  order  of  the  Amir-i-Nizdm  Mirza  Taqi  Khan.
On  our  report  he  merely  got  the  bastinado,  in  which  operation
a  farrdsh^  whether  intentionally  or  not,  struck  him  across
the  face  with  the  stick  destined  for  his  feet,  which  produced
a  great  wound  and  swelling  of  the  face.  On  being  asked
whether  a  Persian  surgeon  should  be  brought  to  treat  him,
he  expressed  a  desire  that  I  should  be  sent  for,  and  I
accordingly  treated  him  for  a  few  days,  but  in  the  interviews
consequent  on  this  I  could  never  get  him  to  have  a  con-
fidential chat  with  me,  as  some  Government  people  were
always  present,  he  being  a  prisoner.

^  These  were,  no  doubt,  the  two  brothers  Sayyid  Hasan  and  Sayyid
Husayn  of  Yazd,  of  whom  the  latter  was  especially  his  amanuensis.

^  This  is  an  error.  Sayyid  Husayn  was  put  to  death  in  the  great
persecution  of  1852,  two  years  after  the  B^b.


262      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

"He  was  very  thankful  for  my  attentions  to  him.  He
was  a  very  mild  and  delicate-looking  man,  rather  small  in
stature  and  very  fair  for  a  Persian,  with  a  melodious  soft
voice,  which  struck  me  much.  Being  a  Sayyid,  he  was
dressed  in  the  habits  of  that  sect,  as  were  also  his  two
companions.  In  fact  his  whole  look  and  deportment  went
far  to  dispose  one  in  his  favour.  Of  his  doctrine  I  heard
nothing  from  his  own  lips,  although  the  idea  was  that  there
existed  in  his  religion  a  certain  approach  to  Christianity.
He  was  seen  by  some  Armenian  carpenters,  who  were  sent
to  make  some  repairs  in  his  prison,  reading  the  Bible,  and
he  took  no  pains  to  conceal  it,  but  on  the  contrary  told
them  of  it.  Most  assuredly  the  Musulman  fanaticism  does
not  exist  in  his  religion,  as  applied  to  Christians,  nor  is  there
that  restraint  of  females  that  now  exists."

II.

"Attempt  of  the  BAefs  to  secure  toleration.

"  The  story  of  the  Babis  having  reappeared  in  Tihran,
threatening  the  Shah's  life,  etc.,  some  time  back,  was  partly
true.  The  version  of  the  story,  as  related  to  me  by  Sulay-
man  Khan,  who  was  in  Tihran  at  the  time,  and  confirmed
by  others^  is  this.  The  Shah,  when  out  riding  one  day,
perceived  at  some  little  distance  a  man  mounted  and
equipped  watching  him  attentively'.  He  immediately  sent
to  have  him  seized  and  brought  to  him.  The  Shah  said,  on
his  being  brought,  '  1  have  observed  you  for  some  time  past
always  following  me  when  out  riding,  and  as  you  are  not  a

^  The  man  to  whom  reference  is  here  made  was  undoubtedly  Mirzi
Badf,  who  brought  Baha'u'llah's  letter  to  Nasiru'd-Din  Shah  from
'Akka  to  Tihran  in  July,  1869.


IV.      FIVE  ORIGINAI.   DOCUMENTS  263

servant  of  mine,  you  are  most  probably  a  Babi  ? '  To  this
the  man,  nothing  daunted,  replied  that  he  was.  On  further
enquiry  he  added  that  he  was  the  bearer  of  a  letter  to  the
Shah,  and  that  he  was  seeking  a  favourable  opportunity  to
present  it  to  him,  and  that  the  letter  was  sent  by  their  Chief,
who  had  at  this  moment  70,000  Babis  obeying  his  orders.
The  Shah  asked  for  the  document,  which,  being  presented
to  him,  was  found  to  be  a  petition  praying  him  to  allow  his
sect,  viz.  the  Babis,  to  establish  themselves  in  Persia  and
exercise  their  religion  openly  the  same  as  Christians  and
other  sects,  [undertaking]  that  they  would  live  peaceably
under  his  rule  and  infringe  no  laws,  [and]  that  if  any  doubt
existed  in  the  Shah's  mind  as  to  their  religion  being  the  true
one  or  not,  he  prayed  that  a  conference  might  be  granted
between  some  members  of  their  religion  and  some  Musulman
Mujtahids  and  chief  Mullds  of  Tihran  to  discuss  the  points
of  difference  between  them.  If  they  should  succeed  in
proving  that  they  were  in  the  right,  what  further  cause  was
there  for  oppressing  them  ?  If  not,  they  consented  to
undergo  any  oppression  the  Shah  might  subject  them  to,
beginning  by  putting  to  death  the  members  sent  to  discuss
the  points.

"This  petition,  it  appears,  had  no  effect  upon  the  Shah,
for  he  ordered  the  bearer  of  it  to  be  taken  and  tortured  to
find  out  if  he  had  any  accomplices  in  Tihran ;  but  he
divulged  nothing,  saying  that  he  was  alone,  and  adding  that
the  fact  of  his  being  killed  was  of  no  consequence,  as  the
70,000  Babis  under  their  Chief  were  all  like  him,  ready  to
die  for  their  religion,  and  no  doubt  other  messengers  would
be  sent  to  kill  the  Shah  at  last,  unless  he  granted  the  prayer
of  the  petition.  Under  all  the  great  tortures  inflicted  on
him  he  remained  firm,  writing  with  a  piece  of  stick  on  the
ground  till  death  put  an  end  to  his  sufferings.     After  this


264     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  bAbI  RELIGION

some  little  disturbance  took  place  in  Tihran  in  searching  for
Babis,  but  not  with  much  result.  The  Babis  succeeded,
however,  in  setting  fire  to  an  Imdm-zdda  and  burning  it
down.  There  was,  however,  no  sign  of  any  conspiracy
existing.  There  are  some  people  who  think  that  both  the
Shah  and  the  MustawfiyuU-Mamdlik  with  other  great  per-
sonages are  disposed  to  allow  the  Babis  to  exercise  their
religion  openly  in  Persia,  but  the  fear  of  the  Mullds,  and
their  power  to  create  a  revolution  against  them,  prevents
them  doing  so."

{Extract  from  a  letter  to  Mr  Labaree.)

"The  above  was  found  among  papers  belonging  to  the
late  Rev.  J.  H.  Shedd,  D.D.,  of  the  American  Mission  at
Urdmiyya,  Persia,  in  whose  handwriting  it  is.  Dr  Cormick
was  an  English  physician  long  resident  in  Tabriz,  where  he
was  highly  respected.  The  letter  was  certainly  written  and
the  copy  of  the  extracts  made  before  June,  1870.  Mr  Labaree
is  the  Rev.  Benjamin  Labaree,  D.D.,  of  the  same  Mission
as  Dr  Shedd.  The  letter  was  certainly  written  after  1862
and  probably  in  1869  or  1870,  as  Dr  Labaree  spent  some
months  in  Tabriz  in  1869.  An  Ii?idm-zdda  is  the  tomb  of  a
reputed  descendant  of  one  of  the  Imams,  and,  as  such,  a
shrine.     There  are  many  such  in  Persia.

,  "W.  A.  Shedd."


V


AN   AUSTRIAN   OFFICER'S    ACCOUNT

OF  THE   CRUELTIES  PRACTISED  ON

THE  BABIS  WHO  SUFFERED  IN  THE

GREAT  PERSECUTION   OF  1852


Amongst  the  documents  referring  to  the  Babis  in  ray
possession  is  a  manuscript  copy  of  an  article  in  German
published  on  October  17,  1852,  in  No.  291  of  some  German
or  Austrian  newspaper  of  which,  unhappily,  the  name  is  not
noted.  I  think  that  I  received  it  a  good  many  years  ago
from  the  widow  of  the  late  Dr  Polak,  an  Austrian  doctor,
who  was  physician  to  Nasiru'd-Din  Shah  at  the  beginning
of  his  reign,  and  who  is  the  author  of  a  valuable  book  and
several  smaller  treatises  on  Persia  and  matters  connected
therewith.  It  is  chiefly  based  on  a  letter  written  on  August
29,  1852,  by  an  Austrian  officer,  Captain  von  Goumoens,
who  was  in  the  Shah's  service,  but  who  was  so  disgusted
and  horrified  at  the  cruelties  he  was  compelled  to  witness
that  he  sent  in  his  resignation  \  The  translation  of  this
article  is  as  follows.

(Number  291.     October  17th,  1852.)

"Some  days  ago  we  mentioned  the  attempt  made  on
the  life  of  the  Shah  of  Persia  on  the  occasion  of  a  hunting-
party.  The  conspirators,  as  is  well  known,  belonged  to  the
Babis,  a  religious  sect.  Concerning  this  sect  and  the  re-
pressive measures  adopted  against  it,  the  letter  of  the  Austrian
Captain  von  Goumoens  lately  published  in  the  'Soldier's
friend '  {Soldatenfreund)  contains  interesting  disclosures,  and

:     ^  Compare  for  details  of  this  massacre    Traveller'' s  Narrative^  ij,
PP-  323—334-


268      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

elucidates  to  some  extent  the  attempt  in  question.     This
letter  runs  as  follows  :

"'Tihran,  August  29,  1852.

"  '  Dear  Friend,  My  last  letter  of  the  20th  inst.  mentioned
the  attempt  on  the  King.  I  will  now  communicate  to  you
the  result  of  the  interrogation  to  which  the  two  criminals
were  subjected.  In  spite  of  the  terrible  tortures  inflicted,
the  examination  extorted  no  comprehensive  confession  ;  the
lips  of  the  fanatics  remained  closed,  even  when  by  means
of  red-hot  pincers  and  limb-rending  screws  they  sought  to
discover  the  chief  conspirator.  All  that  transpired  was  that
they  belonged  to  the  Babi  sect.  These  Babis  are  heretics ;
though  they  pray  to  the  Prophet  (sic  f),  yet  they  differ  in  many
usages  from  the  orthodox  Musulmans.  This  sect  was  founded
about  fifteen  years  ago^  by  a  certain  Bab,  who  was  shot  by
the  King's  command.  The  most  faithful  of  his  adherents
fled  to  Zanjan,  where,  two  years  ago,  they  were  reduced  by
the  Royal  Troops,  and,  as  was  generally  believed,  were  exter-
minated without  regard  for  age  or  sex.  Like  all  religious
intolerance,  this  unmeasured  persecution  produced  exactly
the  opposite  of  the  effects  intended.  The  Bab's  teaching
gained  more  and  more  ground,  and  is  at  the  present  moment
diff"used  through  the  whole  country.  Since  the  government
obstinately  clung  to  the  system  of  persecution,  the  schis-
matics found  occasion  to  steel  their  resolution,  and  to  develop
qualities  which,  contrasted  with  the  effeminate  luxury  of  the
State  Religion,  compelled  respect.  Very  skilfully  had  the
Prophet  [i.e.  the  Bab]  pointed  out  to  the  disciples  of  his
teaching  that  the  way  to  Paradise  lay  through  the  torture-

^  This  is,  of  course,  an  error,  for  the  Bab's  *'  Manifestation  "  took
place  in  a.d.  1844  (a.h.  1260),  only  eight  years  before  this  letter  was
written.


V.      AUSTRIAN   officer's   NARRATIVE  269

chamber.       If  he  spoke  truly,  then  the  present  Shah  has
deserved  great  merit,  for  he  strenuously  endeavours  to  people
all  the  realms  of  the  Saints  with  Babis  !    His  last  edict  still
further  enjoins  on  the  Royal  servants  the  annihilation  of
the  sect.    If  these  simply  followed  the  Royal  command  and
rendered  harmless  such  of  the  fanatics  as  are  arrested  by
inflicting  on  them  a  swift  and  lawful  death,  one  must  needs,
from  the  Oriental  standpoint,  approve  of  this;  but  the  manner
of  inflicting  the  sentence,  the  circumstances  which  precede
the   end,   the  agonies  which  consume  the  bodies  of  the
victims  until  their  life  is  extinguished  in  the  last  convulsion
are  so  horrible  that  the  blood  curdles  in  my  veins  if  I  now
endeavour  to  depict  the  scene  for  you,  even  in  outline.    In-
numerable blows  with  sticks  which  fall  heavily  on  the  back
and  soles  of  the  feet,  brandings  of  different  parts  of  the  body
with  red-hot  irons,  are  such  usual  inflictions  that  the  victim
who  undergoes  only  such  caresses  is  to  be  accounted  fortu-
nate.    But  follow  me  my  friend,  you  who  lay  claim  to  a
heart  and  European  ethics,  follow  me  to  the  unhappy  ones
who,  with  gouged-out  eyes,  must  eat,  on  the  scene  of  the
deed,  without  any  sauce,  their  own  amputated  ears ;  or  whose
teeth  are  torn  out  with  inhuman  violence  by  the  hand  of  the
executioner;  or  whose  bare  skulls  are  simply  crushed  by  blows
from  a  hammer ;  or  where  the  bazar  is  illuminated  with  un-
happy victims,  because  on  right  and  left  the  people  dig  deep
holes  in  their  breasts  and  shoulders  and  insert  burning  wicks
in  the  wounds ^    I  saw  some  dragged  in  chains  through  the
bazar ^  preceded  by  a  military  band,  in  whom  these  wicks
had  burned  so  deep  that  now  the  fat  flickered  convulsively
in  the  wound  like  a  newly-extinguished  lamp.
.    "  '  Not  seldom  it  happens  that  the  unwearying  ingenuity

^  This  is  the  torture  called  sham^-djm,  which  was  inflicted  on  this
occasion  on  Sulaymdn  Khan.


2/0     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY.  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

of  the  Orientals  leads  to  fresh  tortures.  They  will  skin  the
soles  of  the  Babi's'  feet,  soak  the  wounds  in  boiling  oil,  shoe
the  foot  Hke  the  hoof  of  a  horse,  and  compel  the  victim  to
run.  No  cry  escaped  from  the  victim's  breast ;  the  torment
is  endured  in  dark  silence  by  the  numbed  sensation  of  the
fanatic ;  now  he  must  run ;  the  body  cannot  endure  what
the  soul  has  endured  ;  he  falls.  Give  him  the  coup  de  grace  I
Put  him  out  of  his  pain  !  No  !  The  executioner  swings
the  whip,  and — I  myself  have  had  to  witness  it — the  unhappy
victim  of  hundred-fold  tortures  runs  !  This  is  the  beginning
of  the  end.  As  for  the  end  itself,  they  hang  the  scorched
and  perforated  bodies  by  their  hands  and  feet  to  a  tree  head-
downwards,  and  now  every  Persian  may  try  his  marksman-
ship to  his  heart's  content  from  a  fixed  but  not  too  proximate
distance  on  the  noble  quarry  placed  at  his  disposal.  I  saw
corpses  torn  by  nearly  150  bullets.  The  more  fortunate
suffered  strangulation,  stoning  or  suffocation :  they  were
bound  before  the  muzzle  of  a  mortar,  cut  down  with  swords,
or  killed  with  dagger  thrusts,  or  blows  from  hammers  and
sticks.  Not  only  the  executioner  and  the  common  people
took  part  in  the  massacre  :  sometimes  Justice  would  present
some  of  the  unhappy  Babis  to  various  dignitaries,  and  the
Persian  [recipient]  would  be  well  content,  deeming  it  an
honour  to  imbrue  his  own  hands  in  the  blood  of  the  pinioned
and  defenceless  victim.  Infantry,  cavalry,  artillery,  the
ghuldms  or  guards  of  the  King,  and  the  guilds  of  butchers,
bakers,  etc.,  all  took  their  fair  share  in  these  bloody  deeds.
One  Babi  was  presented  to  the  crack  officers-corps  of  the
garrison ;  the  general  in  command  dealt  the  first  blow,  and
afterwards  each  one  as  his  rank  determined.  The  Persian
troops  are  butchers,  not  soldiers.  One  Babi  fell  to  the  share
of  the  Imam-Jum^a,  who  put  him  to  death.  Islam  knows
nothing  of  charity  !  ....::.


.V.      AUSTRIAN    officer's   NARRATIVE  2/1

" '  When  I  read  over  again  what  I  have  written  I  am  over-
come by  the  thought  that  those  who  are  with  you  in  our
dearly  beloved  Austria  may  doubt  the  full  truth  of  the  picture,
and  accuse  me  of  exaggeration.  Would  to  God  that  I  had
not  lived  to  see  it !  But  by  the  duties  of  my  profession  I
was  unhappily  often,  only  too  often,  a  witness  of  these
abominations.  At  present  I  never  leave  my  house,  in  order
not  to  meet  with  fresh  scenes  of  horror.  After  their  death
the  Babis  are  hacked  in  two  and  either  nailed  to  the  city
gate,  or  cast  out  into  the  plain  as  food  for  the  dogs  and
jackals.  Thus  the  punishment  extends  even  beyond  the
limits  which  bound  this  bitter  world,  for  Musulmans  who
are  not  buried  have  no  right  to  enter  the  Prophet's  Paradise.

"  'Since  my  whole  soul  revolts  against  such  infamy,  against
such  abominations  as  recent  times,  according  to  the  judge-
ment of  all,  present,  I  will  no  longer  maintain  my  connection
with  the  scene  of  such  crimes... \'

" '  English  newspapers  give  accounts  of  the  barbarous
execution  of  Hajji  Su layman  Khan,  who  was  accused  of
having  organized  the  recent  attempt  on  the  life  of  the  Shah.
Holes  were  bored  in  different  parts  of  his  body,  in  which
were  inserted  burning  candle-ends  ;  thus  illuminated  he  was
dragged  through  the  bazar  to  one  of  the  city  gates,  where
he  was  cut  into  four  pieces  "like  a  fat  ram."  Besides  him
"  the  beautiful  Prophetess  of  Qazwin,"  known  as  Qurratu'l-
*Ayn,  and  twelve  other  persons  were  executed.  The  Shah  is
almost  recovered  from  his  slight  shot-wound.' "

^  He  goes  on  to  say  that  he  has  already  asked  for  his  discharge,  but
has  not  yet  received  an  answer.


VI


TWO  UNPUBLISHED  CONTEMPORARY
STATE  PAPERS  BEARING  ON  THE
REMOVAL  OF  THE  bAbIS  FROM
BAGHDAD  TO  TURKEY  IN  EUROPE,
DATED  MAY  lo,  1862


B.  B.  18


The  two  following  documents,  which  are  of  considerable
historical  interest,  were  most  obligingly  communicated  to  me
by  Monsieur  A.-L.-M.  Nicolas,  at  that  time  First  Dragoman
of  the  French  Legation  in  Tihran,  in  March,  1902,  and  were
accompanied  by  the  following  lines,  written  in  Paris,  on  the
T9th  of  that  month.

"  Monsieur,

"  M'occupant  depuis  une  dizaine  d'annees  de  I'etude  de
la  Manifestation  Beyanie,  il  m'a  ete  donne  de  recueillir  beau-
coup  de  documents  inedits  pendant  un  long  sejour  en  Perse.

"Seuls  ceux  qui  regardent  directement  le  Bab  m'in-
teressent  d'une  fagon  immediate  :  sgit  qu'ils  concernent
I'histoire,  soit  qu'ils  se  rapportent  au  dogme.  J'estime  cette
tache  suffisante  pour  le  moment,  et  je  ne  m'occuperai  que
par  la  suite  de  I'lmamat  de  Soubh-i-Ezel  et  de  la  seconde
Manifestation  divine  en  la  personne  de  Beha.

"  L'histoire  que  je  prepare  s'arretera  done  a  la  fuite  a
Baghdad,  ou  plutot  aux  executions  qui  suivirent  I'attentat
contre  S.  M.  le  Chah.

"  Vous  vous  etes.  Monsieur,  magistralement  occupe  de
cette  seconde  partie  de  revolution  Beyanie.  Aussi  crois-je
vous ,  etre  agreable  et  utile  en  vous  communiquant  deux
pieces  se  rapportant  au  sejour  des  exiles  a  Baghdad.  Ces
deux  pieces  sont  de  la  plus  haute  importance :  elles  demon-
trent  d'abord  que  le  Gouvernement  Persan  a  parfaitement
soUicite  du  Gouvernement  Ottoman  I'extradition  des  fugitifs,

18—2


2/6     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

elles  sont  ensuite  muettes  sur  la  personne  de  Souhh-i-Ezel,
ce  qui  vous  etonnera  certainement :  il  semble,  a  la  lecture
de  ces  documents  que,  des  ce  moment  Mirza  Houssein  Ali
fut — sinon  le  chef — du  moins  la  personnalite  la  plus  mar-
quante  du  parti.

"  Les  pieces  originales  sont  de  la  main  meme  de  Mirza
Said  Khan,  ex-Ministre  des  Affaires  Etrangeres.  (Elles  sont
adressees  a  I'Ambassadeur  a  Constantinople.)  Les  photo-
graphies faites  par  moi  sont  suffisantes  pour  reconnaitre
I'ecriture.  Le  cachet  se  trouve  naturellement  au  dos  :  c'est
pourquoi  il  ne  parait  pas  sur  les  epreuves  que  je  vous
envoie.  Elles  se  trouvaient  toutes  deux,  collees  sur  carton
perce  a  I'endroit  du  cachet  au  milieu  d'un  recueil  assez  con-
siderable de  pieces  emanant  de  la  meme  main  Vezirielle  et
relatives  aux  diverses  affaires  soumises  au  Ministere.  Deux
autres  lettres  s'y  trouvaient  encore  relatives  aux  Babis.
L'une  est  un  tres  court  billet  du  Ministre  a  un  correspondant
inconnu  dans  lequel  I'auteur  affirme  avoir  essaye  de  rendre
service  aux  sectaires,  et  s'etonne  que  ses  demarches  aient
ete  denaturees ;  la  seconde  est  une  longue  lettre  du  Grand
Moujtehed  de  Tauris  :  dans  un  passage  de  cette  lettre  le
prelat  se  fait  fort  de  deraciner  ce  qu'il  appelle  I'heresie.

"Je  ne  pause  pas  de  me  trouver,  Monsieur,  un  inter-
mediaire  plus  competent  et  plus  autorise  que  vous  pour  la
publication  de  ces  pieces,  et  je  suis  convaincu  que  Xo,  Journal
de  la  Societe  Royale  Asiatique  s'empressera  d'accueillir,  pre-
sentes  par  vous,  ces  eclaircissements  sur  un  point  si  interessant
de  I'histoire  qui  nous  passionne  tous  deux.

"  Je  tiens  les  cliches  a  votre  disposition  pour  le  cas  ou
vous  en  aurez  besoin.

"  Veuillez  agreer,  Monsieur,  mes  salutations  les  plus
empressees.

''A.  L.  M.  Nicolas."


E


>:^


^^y/^^hi/iy>^-'li/^


y-:-^'>^rc^^y  .rf,y!y^:^


rr


■'e/r,-.'-.


//'a-'MW/^.^Z/Ax  ^^^^^/^^


m


I  y  (  ^  b  OL^  i' y'  *^  /w-V


'>'>^


^''^>
'^^.

">:*'


^

/^^^"C'^


']!/'' tj^,  ':r^,^S^/^^%iL^/0^i)'A^,>


Fac-simile  of  the  document  A.  6.

'J'o  face  /^.  277.


VT.   TWO  STATE  PAPERS  OF  1 862      27/

The  documents  in  question  are  distinguished  by  the
marks  "A.  6"  and  ^'A.j."  I  begin  with  the  former,  which
is  the  shorter.

A.  6.
•a-ojj^    3     AJjjJt     3I0*     «-r''>*^     O^     ^J":*     !jJ'S^^     *^**^^

p-^H-d    l^  j.^1    A^     C-wt    i^j^ioj    JJaa^    J^^l^    O^    **^

w>la>  J^^ji    J^^t    C^^t    ^U^^A.    jujut^.«A^    i?^;^    ^-^^    *^^^'
j^l^tt.  p-'^^.ot  3  j»:ex^  «^jJb   L)  <UaAj  Owtp.*)^  jit  3j.^

wl

u^W^  3  >^^  A^3U».  ai)\  e\^  q\  djSsi  w^Arft  s^jJ\  i^^auLc
j^j.^  Ij  3  dJjjJI  ^U^  jL5  *N)t3  w^ly  ^IxX-wU^  0>J^
tj.jjA^     '^3^  jijJuvdUkJt  (^>3J  3  ^j\l«*jl.^  s^M>t<iXib  J3JU9


\  VYA


^  v^'/a^t    4a».».    ^3     V  V    ^-i


2/8     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

{Translation.)

"  Excellency,

"Although  in  a  separate  and  detailed  letter  mention  has
been  made  of  the  letter  of  the  Right  Honourable  Mirza  Buzurg
Khan  to  Prince  'Imadu'd-Dawla,  and  of  the  said  Prince's
letter  to  [His  Majesty's]  Most  Sacred  and  Royal  Presence,
yet  no  reference  is  made  to  the  sending  of  the  originals  or
copies  of  these  letters,  because  that  detailed  letter  is  so
phrased  that  if  you  deem  it  expedient  you  can  read  it  to
their  Excellencies  Fu'ad  Pasha  and  'Ali  Pasha,  but  had  any
explicit  reference  been  made  to  the  sending  of  the  aforesaid
originals  or  copies,  perhaps  you  would  not  have  considered
it  expedient  to  show  them,  whilst  now  it  entirely  depends
on  your  own  judgement.  The  originals  of  the  aforesaid
letters  are  enclosed  in  this  packet.  After  perusing  them
you  will  consider  the  matter,  and  if  it  appears  expedient
you  will  show  them  exactly  as  they  are  or  with  some  slight
change  and  emendation.  The  object  is  that  as  the  most  em-
phatic Royal  Command  and  Injunction  hath  been  honoured
by  issue  as  to  the  removal  and  repression  of  these  evil  men\
or  their  arrest  and  the  handing  over  of  them  to  the  officers
of  the  illustrious  Prince  'Imadu'd-Dawla,  or  their  removal
from  'Iraq-i-'Arab  to  some  place  which  you  regard  as  ex-
pedient, it  may,  if  God  so  please,  be  duly  and  speedily
fulfilled.

"  Written  on  the  12th  of  Dhu'l-Hijja,  1278  "

(=May  10,  1862).

'^  i.e.  the  Babfs  at  Baghdad.


^'l;c$\-v  -^'  c"^  c\-  ^- \^-  'u


I  %_/    •  w    -      V  ^.  ^-  •

^y*^jy  '  >  y     '     '     ■        ■       ' '    '  •

i ■  y>i. v'/;  -<ji^>,  j^^'^^  yAi'^ o.fj^^^i/^'

Fac-simiie  of  the  document  A.  7.

To  face  p.  279.


y'r^^^


r-  ^~^-^y^y\


yy-^  ^


>  —
-c-


o.


o


-^


Vr.   TWO  STATE  PAPERS  OF  1 862      2/9
A.   7.

lyjl    *A^j    aO    J^).aJt    J^^j  yfiJ^    J4J'j^?>-«    w>^-^'     *^

^v^'   J'    kS>J^    3    L^J^'   jr^    «*^    ^>t»    Ch'    V^»-b    **^   -5

t,/**.*^.  jl  c^*jt  ^^J^  Lf"^  Chj****"  li^tj-*  j'  ^^j^-t^  *^^  V^'

A^    ^JJJji    {^^9\    %^   aJ3».l    w^LaJ    ^J^^-A5   w'^'^'  ^<*-«J^

^U3t  ^3^*^'  **^  y^O  vJ^  •■'^  -5  -^^^  ojk^l**^  3!  *A;i3

«jU^    3    Juj-«    33-t«w«    d«>^.w    lfcJ3j    vl>i^    A-£9   jjj    ^^t    3
jlyjsl   A^  C^.wljJ   ^Jt   Olj^  3  ^3j    d^jij    ?''**^    ■*>*■  >)3*^


28o     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

^  Ki  ^

*  wj^     ^^£>»    jl      ^AmmO     ^ly^>t     ^^».     ^j^     /^J^*"   J-^     wX»d    3

i

Jol^  jlJlch.    ^i«xh.   ^jt    idlato^    b-^>^   3    J^W    ^^t>    d^j-o^
OUJ  ^  f^jj^SsLA  hu*iy^  dJuiJkC-  ^jL^^   ASLj\si*^)Jb\  jj  ^y^

d^MfliaJt    wJ>A^  v»^   lJ^^  J'  vO^    L^''?*'^^    -^^^     **^     J>-d^
^\jJu  ^«£«  Ajj^    cJj>  Jbj^jl£»    ^l».    e^Jj    ijj-j^    aJjOI

ul  vt

Ml

3>J    j^L;'ft.t     j^    3     sZJJ»£'     JU^     J-;3i      <UJ^     CJ33     ^\jJ

^Ju0  j>    Oj'^  /JaJ   OjiiO  4.Jl«Jt  ^«^»>3    cL^^t    ^^t  j\    <x^

.  Ml

L^^'^:!'*    A-^*^!    CJ^3   O':;*^^   w^>.»J    ouliJt    J^    sJUo^^cii-    3
wXe    jj-;l  ^U.L>    C^^..>J    d^bJt    !»-)^    O^Ui    3    i*-**:;    j*:*


VI.   TWO  STATE  PAPERS  OF  1 862      28 1
j^^aiXj  3  j^_5^33  w*j'j-«  U-i^J-*  L^^-iJj'  iS^^^    3    ^-^^

ASlA^AA   J     ?*-iJ>    ^^     <^i3>     O^^     L^^^j'      W     i?>^     ""djIjCAJ^

*^    a£s   JJ6Jk.J    slUjjy^Uo    OJlJLwj    w>Ua»Jt     C^^Uffb    ^jitf^^aa*^
3    ^Jw^^     <X^    ^^^Jaj     Ijw-^AJfluc    dJwI^A.    0^.9^    v^J^^     O^

jijtj^x-j   oW^   ^^-0^   ^3-^3    Uv«^'    tjL>*^   OW^^   Ots^

wl  ft  t^

O-i^    ^J  3   ^>}^  J^   L5*'-5   (i-o*^   J   ^^-^    O'    ^!>^'   Ji  3
■  y^ JU  tj.<^a.    ^li^.^  jt    sIU^t<1^3j.a».^    y^Jl.0-0    ^jjo^    jA^>JJ   3

vt  wl


282      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

CJ^3   C^Ti>  X.AC   ^^b   a£»    ,^>^    ^t   j3    3    J^UJ    bCH*^

^    lJ[>^^    4X>U*.    4J^.MM«    jt     •k.jVa.    Oji^    wsMftdJt^t     ^l^^ioJ

»•  111

0*rftjj^jl    j^    *^J3^    \^j^    OWo-:*    **^3    f^av^    C^-jt    ^*3^

jLJbju  ^tj^  ^^^bt  iJt^  U>b  JUU  w>l.o»^  ^^j^  j^i^  <i£»

W'v>»;>3    ^j^y  3    ^J^-    i<*!*i»^t   jt   J^i>    J*-wlj    AZwb     ^««^
A^   j^U^   ^U-«   ^AJl».b  jt  j.C>    ^5la^    ^tjJu  jt    !;3l


VI.      TWO   STATE   PAPERS   OF    1 862  283

ij>^  ^bj'ji  >5i>AJ   *^J^  3  •^■^W  u^'^-aa"-^  J*^^^  s:Ujj^U
dtj^i  U».jj  15^'  ^^J^'  dlT-LjJ  u^jsu  j\j3  (J^t  jt  U  juw^

(Translation.)

'*  Excellency,

"  After  the  carrying  out  of  those  energetic  measures  on
the  part  of  the  Persian  Government  for  the  extirpation  and
extermination  of  the  misguided  and  detestable  sect  of  the
Babis,  with  the  details  of  which  Your  Excellency  is  fully
acquainted^,  Praise  be  to  God,  by  the  attention  of  the
Imperial  mind  of  His  most  potent  Majesty,  whose  rank  is
as  that  of  Jamshid,  the  refuge  of  the  True  Religion  (may
our  lives  be  his  sacrifice !),  their  roots  were  torn  up.  It
was  proper,  nay,  necessary,  that  not  one  of  them  should  be
suffered  to  survive,  more  especially  such  as  had  been  over-
taken by  the  bonds  and  captivity  of  the  Government.  But
by  chance,  and  through  the  ill-considered  policy  of  former
officials,  one  of  them,  to  wit  Mirza  Husayn  'Ali  of  Nilr^,
obtained  release  from  the  Anbdr  prison  and  permission  to

^  Allusion  is  made  to  the  great  persecution  of  the  B^bis  in  Tihran  in
the  summer  of  1852.
2  i.e.  Baha'u'llah.


284     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  bAbI  RELIGION

reside  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Shrines,  whose  rank  is
as  that  of  God's  Throne  \  whither  he  departed.  From  that
time  until  now,  as  your  Excellency  is  aware,  he  is  in  Bagh-
dad, and  at  no  time  hath  he  ceased  from  secretly  corrupting
and  misleading  foolish  persons  and  ignorant  weaklings.
Sometimes,  moreover,  he  hath  put  his  hand  to  sedition
and  incitements  to  murder,  as  in  the  case  of  His  most
accomplished  Reverence  Mulla  Aqa  of  Darband,  whom  they
grievously  wounded  with  intent  to  kill,  though  Providence
permitted  him  to  survive  for  some  while ;  besides  sundry
other  assassinations  which  took  place.  Yet  had  his  affair
not  then  reached  the  pitch  which  it  hath  now  attained;  nor
had  he  gathered  round  himself  so  many  disciples  and  followers
as  it  is  heard  he  hath  done  in  these  days ;  nor  did  he  dare  to
display  the  ambitions  which  he  harboured,  or  to  surround
himself  with  armed  and  devoted  men  when  going  hither  and
thither,  or  passing  backwards  and  forwards,  or  remaining  out-
side his  lodging,  or  to  encompass  himself  with  this  self-devoted
crew.  Besides  the  informations  which  have  been  acquired
through  numerous  channels  by  the  intermediary  of  persons
of  consideration  and  worthy  of  credence,  a  letter  from  the
highly-placed  and  well-beloved  of  the  Supreme  Court  Mirza
Buzurg  Khan,  Consul  of  the  Persian  Government  resident
in  Baghdad,  has  reached  the  illustrious  Prince  ^Imddti^d-
Daivla,  Governor  of  Kirmanshahan  and  its  dependencies,
while  a  representation  has  been  made  by  the  Prince  above
mentioned  to  the  most  beneficent  Sacred  and  Imperial
Presence,  which  depicts  and  portrays  before  our  eyes  these
proceedings  of  Mirza  Husayn  *Ali.  In  face  of  these  pro-
ceedings, it  would  be  a  proof  of  the  most  complete  negligence
and  lack  of  prudence  on  the  part  of  the  Persian  Government

^  i.e.  Karbala  .ind  Najaf.


VI.   TWO  STATE  PAPERS  OF  1 862      285

to  disregard  these  acts  which  may  produce  such  deplorable
consequences,  and  not  to  set  itself  to  seek  some  means  to
remedy  or  remove  them.

'  /  see  beneath  the  ashes  the  glow  of  fire ^
And  it  wants  but  little  to  burst  into  a  blaze^J'

"  For  the  character  and  nature  of  this  misguided  sect  in
the  dominions  of  the  Persian  Government,  and  their  bold-
ness and  audacity  in  the  most  perilous  enterprises  have  been
repeatedly  put  to  the  proof,  and  it  is  clear  that  the  principles
of  this  new,  false  and  detestable  creed  are  based  on  two
horrible  things,  first  an  extraordinary  hostility  and  enmity
towards  this  Islamic  State,  and  secondly  an  incredible  piti-
lessness  and  ruthlessness  towards  all  individuals  of  this
nation,  and  a  readiness  to  lose  their  own  lives  in  order  to
achieve  this  sinister  object.  But  it  is  evident  that,  thanks
be  to  God  Most  High,  through  the  good  dispositions  and
sincerity  of  the  governors  of  the  two  Empires  [Persia  and
Turkey],  the  developments  of  friendship  and  single-minded-
ness  between  these  two  powerful  Islamic  States  have  reached
such  a  point  that,  alike  in  profit  and  loss,  they  have  brought
about  complete  participation  and  equality.  How  then
should  it  be  that  the  great  statesmen  of  that  Empire,  after
acquainting  themselves  with  these  matters,  should  grudge
or  withhold  their  united  support  and  participation  to  the
statesmen  of  this  Sublime  State  [i.e.  Persia]  in  taking  the
necessary  measures  for  the  removal  of  this  [plague]  ?  There-
fore, in  accordance  with  the  Royal  command,  resistless  as
fate,  of  His  Imperial  Majesty,  the  Shadow  of  God,  the
Benefactor  of  all  the  protected  provinces  of  Persia  (may  my

^  This  celebrated  verse  is  the  first  of  several  written  by  the  Umayyad
Governor  of  Khurasan,  Nasr  ibn  Sayyar,  as  a  warning  to  his  sovereign
on  the  eve  of  Abu  Muslim's  successful  rebellion  in  a.h.  129  (a.d.  746-7).


286     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABf  RELIGION

life  be  his  sacrifice!),  I  your  faithful  friend  have  been
ordereci  to  convey  these  matters  to  Your  Excellency's  know-
ledge by  means  of  a  special  messenger,  and  to  instruct  you
without  delay  to  seek  an  appointment  with  their  most  glorious
Excellencies  the  [Ottoman]  Prime  Minister  and  Minister  of
Foreign  Affairs,  and  to  set  forth  this  matter  in  such  wise  as
the  friendship  and  harmony  of  these  two  SubHme  States
require,  and  as  the  character  for  benevolence  and  sound
understanding  of  their  Excellencies  above  mentioned  sug-
gests, and,  having  devoted  the  deepest  and  most  careful
consideration  to  all  its  aspects,  to  request  of  their  extreme
benevolence  and  disinterestedness  the  removal  of  this  source
of  mischief  from  a  place  like  Baghdad,  which  is  the  meeting-
place  of  many  different  peoples  and  is  situated  near  the
frontiers  of  the  protected  provinces  of  Persia.

"This  point  is  agreed  upon  in  the  view  of  our  states-
men, that  it  will  not  do  to  leave  Mirza  Husayn  *Ali  and  his
intimate  followers  there,  or  to  allow  fuller  scope  to  their
mischievous  ideas  and  probable  actions.  One  of  two  courses
appears  proper  in  the  eyes  of  our  statesmen,  to  wit  that
if  the  statesmen  of  the  Ottoman  Empire  are  prepared  to
cooperate  fully  in  this  important  matter  with  the  statesmen
of  this  country,  without  showing  any  personal  consideration
for  those  irreligious  and  mischievous  persons,  and,  as  is  fully
hoped  and  expected,  do  not  introduce  any  discussion  foreign
to  this  question  into  this  field  wherein  stands  the  foot  of  State
expediency,  then  the  best  thing  is  that  explicit  orders  should
be  given  to  His  Excellency  Namiq  Pasha  the  governor  of
the  Province  of  Baghdad,  while  on  this  side  also  orders
should  be  issued  to  the  Prince-Governor  of  Kirmanshahan,
that  Mirza  Husayn  *Ali  and  such  of  his  followers  and  familiars
as  are  the  cause  and  root  of  the  mischief  should  be  arrested
in  such  manner  as  is  requisite,  and  handed  over  at  the


VI.      TWO   STATE    PAPERS   OF    1 862  287

frontier  to  the  officers  of  the  afore-mentioned  Prince;  and.
that  the  Government  should  detain  them,  under  guard  and
supervision,  in  some  place  in  the  interior  of  the  country
which  it  regards  as  suitable,  and  not  allow  their  evil  and
mischief  to  spread.  But  supposing  that  the  statesmen  of
that  [ie.  the  Ottoman]  Government  hesitate,  on  whatever
consideration  it  may  be,  to  act  in  accordance  with  this  first
alternative,  then  it  is  unfailingly  necessary  that  they  should
arrange  as  quickly  as  possible  to  deport  and  detain  that
mischief-maker  [z.e.  Baha'u'llah]  and  his  several  intimates
from  Baghdad  to  some  other  place  in  the  interior  of  the
Ottoman  kingdom  which  has  no  means  of  communication
with  our  frontiers,  so  that  the  channel  of  their  mischief-
making  and  sedition  may  be  stopped.

"  Let  your  Excellency  take  such  steps  and  show  such
zeal  in  this  matter  as  accords  with  this  emphatic  Imperial
command  and  the  despatch  of  this  special  [King's]  messenger,
and  let  him  notify  his  agreement  in  writing  as  soon  as  possible,
that  it  may  be  so  notified  before  the  Most  High  and  Sacred
Presence  (may  our  lives  be  his  sacrifice !).

"Written  on  the  12th  of  Dhu'l-Hijja,  a.h.  1278"

(=May  10,  1862).


VII

PERSECUTIONS  OF  bAbIS  IN   1888-1891
AT  ISFAHAN  AND  YAZD


B.  B,  19


The  persecutions  at  Si-dih  and  Najafabad  near  Isfahan
took  place  in  the  latter  part  of  1888  and  beginning  of  1889;
Mirza  Ashraf  of  Abada  was  put  to  death  at  Isfahan  in  October,
1888  ;  and  the  Yazd  persecutions  took  place  in  May,  1891.
Of  Mirza  Ashraf  s  martyrdom  I  published  an  account  in  the
J.  R.  A.  S.  for  1888,  pp.  998 — 9,  and  concerning  the  Yazd
persecution  I  received  several  letters  at  the  time  from  'Akka,
enclosing  one  from  Yazd,  of  which  I  shall  here  give  the
translations.  First,  however,  I  shall  quote  extracts  from
three  letters  received  during  the  autumn -of  1889  and  the
spring  of  1890  from  English  residents  in  Persia,  which  throw
some  light  on  the  persecutions  of  Si-dih  and  Najafabad.


(i)    From  Dr  Robert  Bruce,    Church   Missionary  Society,
Julfd,  Isfahan;  September  6,   1889.

*'  Yes,  it  is  quite  true  that  Aqa  Mirza  Ashraf  of  Abada  was
put  to  death  for  his  religion  in  the  most  barbarous  manner
in  Isfahan  about  October  last.  The  hatred  of  the  Mullds
was  not  satisfied  with  his  murder ;  they  mutilated  his  poor
body  publicly  in  the  Mayddn  in  the  most  savage  manner,
and  then  burned  what  was  left  of  it.  Since  then  we  have
had  two  other  persecutions  of  Babis,  one  in  Si-dih  and  the

19 — 2


292      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

Other  in  Najafabad.  In  Si-dih,  where  the  Babi  community
is  small,  their  houses  were  burned  and  their  wives  and
children  ill-treated.  The  men  saved  themselves  by  flight
to  Tihran,  and  I  am  told  that  about  25  of  them  have  just
returned  to  Isfahan  and  are  in  the  Prince's  stables  in  bast^.
In  Najafabad  there  are  about  2000  Babis.  They  tried  the
same  game  with  them,  but  some  hundreds  of  them  took
refuge  in  the  English  Telegraph  Office  in  Julfa,  and  the
Prince  took  their  part  and  banished  from  Najafabad  to
Karbala  the  Mujtaliid  who  persecuted  them,  so  the  result
is  that  they  are  freer  now  than  they  have  ever  been.  I  took
very  great  interest  in  the  poor  people,  not  only  for  their  own
sakes,  but  for  the  sake  of  Persia  also  ;  as,  if  liberty  is  gained
for  them,  it  will  be  a  great  step  towards  breaking  the  power
of  the  Mullds  and  getting  liberty  for  all.  Just  before  the
last  persecution  of  the  Babis  the  Mujtahids  in  Isfahan,
especially  Hajji  Najafi,  tried  a  persecution  of  Jews  also,  and
threatened  Christians  with  the  same.  The  13  rules  (of
'Umar  I  believe,  at  least  most  of  them  may  be  traced  to
him)  were  enforced  for  a  short  time  :  (i)  that  no  Jew  should
wear  an  ^abd^ ;  (2)  that  they  should  wear  a  mark  on  their
dress ;  (3)  not  to  ride  any  beast  of  burden  in  the  city ;
(4)  not  to  leave  their  houses  on  a  wet  day^;  (5)  not  to
purchase  merchandize  from  a  Muslim  ;  (6)  that  when  a
Jew  "meets  a  Muslim  he  is  to  salute  him  and  walk  behind
him;  (7)  not  to  return  abuse;  (8)  not  to  build  a  house
higher  than  a  Muslim  neighbour;  (9)  not  to  eat  in  the
presence  of  a  Muslim  during  Ramazan,  etc.,  etc."

1  i.e.  sanctuary.

2  Cloak.

^  This  rule  used  also  to  be  applied  to  the  gabrs,  or  Zoroastrians,  of
Yazd.  The  reason  is  that  an  impure  creature  (such  as  a  dog  or  an
unbeliever)  only  defiles  by  contact  when  it  is  wet.


VII.      PERSECUTIONS   OF    1888-1891  293


(2)     From  Sidney   Churchill^  Esqr.^   British  Legation^
Tihrdn,   December  12,    1889.

"  The  Babi  sect  are  multiplying  in  numbers  daily,  and
their  increasing  multitudes  are  giving  cause  for  anxiety  as  to
the  attitude  which  the  authorities  will  have  to  adopt  towards
them  in  the  immediate  future.  The  extraordinary  develop-
ment of  this  faith  is  not  quite  in  itself  a  source  of  surprise.
The  Persian  as  a  rule  is  ready  to  adopt  any  new  creed,  no
matter  what  it  is ;  but  when  he  finds  in  it  as  one  of  its
fundamental  principles  the  liberty  of  thought  and  the  ex-
pression thereof,  with  the  ultimate  possibility  as  a  result
that  he  may  shake  off  the  oppression  he  suffers  at  the  hands
of  the  local  authorities,  who  are  beyond  the  sphere  of  the
Shah's  immediate  supervision  and  control,  he  readily  affiliates
himself  with  those  holding  such  doctrines  with  the  object  of
combating  existing  evils.

"  The  spread  of  Babism  of  late  in  Persia,  particularly  its
development  during  the  Shah's  absence,  has  caused  much
surprise,  and  is  likely  to  give  us  trouble.  But  the  question
is,  what  are  the  real  ideas  of  most  of  those  professing  Babism.
Do  they  look  upon  themselves  as  followers  of  a  new  religion,
or  as  the  members  of  a  society  for  political  and  social
reform?..."


(3)    From  Walter  Townley,  Esq.  {noiv  Sir  Walter  Townley),
British  Legation,  Tihrdn,  April  13,  1890.

"  I  am  afraid  I  have  not  been  able  to  do  much  for  you  in
the  furtherance  of  your  two  requests  beyond  having  searched
through  our   archives  from  a.d.    1868  to   1875    for  some


294     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

reference  to  the  young  Babi  who  brought  Baha's  letter  to
the  Shah\  without,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  finding  any  notification
at  all  of  the  event,  but  I  am,  told  that  it  was  in  the  summer
(about  July)  of  187 1  or  1872,  and  have  still  hopes  of  getting
an  authentic  date  fixed.  Had  such  an  event  occurred  under
our  present  Minister  it  would  most  undoubtedly  have  been
recorded,  but  in  those  days  Persia  was  not  so  well  known  as

it  is  now,  and  affairs  were  conducted  less  minutely

"You  have  doubtless  heard  of  the  late  Babi  massacre  at
Isfahan,  and  I  will  only  therefore  tell  you,  in  case  you  have
not,  the  principal  points.  They  are  inhabitants  of  a  district
called  Si-dih,  and  last  summer  a  large  number  of  them,
owing  to  constant  persecution,  left  their  villages  and  came
to  Isfahan,  whence  after  a  time  they  returned  home,  with
the  exception  of  a  certain  number  who  came  to  Tihran.
On  the  return  of  these  men  to  their  homes  about  six  weeks
ago  they  were  met  and  attacked  by  a  mob  headed  by  a  man
called  Aqa  Najafi,  and  seven  or  eight  of  them  were  killed
and  their  bodies  burnt  with  oil.  They  then  took  refuge  at
the  Telegraph  Office,  and  finally,  after  persistent  representa-
tions from  this  Legation,  have  been  received  by  the  Deputy
Governor.  It  is  hoped  that  on  the  Zill[u's-Sultan]'s  return
in  a  few  days  they  will  be  able  to  go  home.  Aqa  Najafi  has
been  summoned  to  Tihran  and  well  received.  Of  course
they  are  said  to  be  Babis,  though  there  seems  to  be  no  real
proof  that  they  are  of  that  persuasion.  When  the  murders
took  place  they  were  under  the  care  of  an  escort  which  was
intimidated  by  the  mob  and  left  them."

Concerning  the  Yazd  persecution  I  received  four  letters
in  Persian,  of  which  translations  of  the  relevant  portions
here  follow.

^  i.e.  Mirzd  Badi*.     See  pp.  262 — 4  supra  and  footnote  to  p.  262.


VII.      PERSECUTIONS   OF    1888-1891  295

(i)     Translation  of  part  of  a  letter  written  to  me  from  ^Akkd
by  'Abbas  Efendi  ^Abdu'l-Bahd  on  August  19,  1891.

"  The  events  which  have  recently  taken  place  in  Persia
have  darkened  the  world ;  one  cannot  speak  of  them  save
with  weeping  eyes  and  burning  heart,  for  their  recital  is
enough  to  break  the  hardest  heart  and  wring  from  it  sighs
and  groans.  Briefly  they  are  as  follows.  For  some  while
the  partisans  of  Mirza  Malkom  Khan^  in  Persia  have  been
in  a  Siate  of  activity  and  agitation,  and  engaged  in  carrying
on  an  active  propaganda,  censuring  and  blaming  the  heads
of  the  administration  and  their  actions.  Sometimes  by  impli-
cation and  suggestion,  but  in  private  in  the  plainest  language,
they  violently  attacked  the  conduct  of  the  Prime  Minister^
and  loudly  complained  of  the  incompetence  of  the  govern-
ment and  the  thoughtlessness  of  the  ruler.  At  length  the
newspaper  Qdniin^  appeared,  and  Shaykh  Jamalu'd-Din
al- Afghan^  too,  from  every  side  and  corner,  began  to  criticize
and  condemn  the  government,  with  which  he  was  highly
displeased,  and  in  the  course  of  his  conversation  used  openly
to  excite  and  inflame  the  people  and  disparage  and  attack
[the  Shah].  According  to  accounts  received,  matters  reached
such  a  point  that  they  wrote  pamphlets  and  scattered  them
in  the  streets  and  bazars,  and  even,  by  a  clever  stratagem,
succeeded  in  conveying  a  most  strongly-worded  letter  to
the  Shah  himself.  And  since  they  are  well  acquainted  with
the  Shah's  character,  they  made  it  appear  that  there  was
a  large  party  which  would  soon  raise  up  the  standard  of

^  See  my  Persian  Revolution,  pp.  32 — 45.

2  i.e.  the  Aminu's-Sultdn,  aiterwards  entitled  Atdhak-i-A'zam,  who
was  finally  assassinated  by  'Abbas  Aqa  of  Tabriz  on  August  31,  1907.
See  ray  Persian  jRevolution,  Tp^.iSjO — i.

*  See  Persian  Revolution,  pp.  35 — 42.  -

*  Ibid.  ^Y*-  I — 3°-  ;


296      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

liberty.  So  the  government  determined  to  attack  them,
thinking  to  extirpate  and  crush  them.  The  partisans  of
Malkom  Khan  and  Jamalu'd-Din  devised  a  plan  to  alarm,
intimidate,  and  greatly  disturb  the  government  by  involving
the  Babis  also  in  suspicion,  and  wrote  pamphlets  so  worded
that  it  might  appear  that  there  was  an  alliance  between
these  and  themselves.  To  be  brief,  they  arrested  Malkom
Khan's  brother  with  your  friend  the  Mirza  of  Hamadan^  and
several  others,  and  also  two  Babis,  and  the  government
officials,  without  any  enquiry  or  investigation,  began  on  every
side  to  persecute  this  oppressed  community,  although  these
poor  innocents,  as  I  swear  by  God's  Might,  knew  absolutely
nothing  of  this  agitation  and  disturbance,  non-interference
in  political  matters  being  required  by  their  creed.

"  No  sooner  did  this  news  reach  Isfahan  than  the  Prince
[^Zulu's- Sulfdn\  one  of  whose  confidential  advisers  had  been
accused  and  arrested,  considered  it  expedient,  for  the  excul-
pation of  himself  from  all  suspicion  of  complicity  in  this  plot
and  for  the  concealment  of  his  own  evil  deeds,  to  inaugurate
a  violent  and  cruel  persecution  of  the  Babis.  So  he  entered
into  correspondence  with  [his  son]  Prince  Jalalu'd-Dawla,
and  a  persecution  was  set  on  foot  in  the  city  of  Yazd  and
the  surrounding  villages,  where  such  cruelties  and  injustices
were  perpetrated  as  are  unparalleled  in  the  history  of  the
world.

"  Amongst  other  instances,  with  chains  and  fetters,  swords
and  scimitars,  they  dragged  seven  men,  to  whose  purity,
nobility,  excellence,  and  virtue  all  bore  witness,  who  had

^  A  former  attache  at  the  Persian  Legation  in  London.  He  was
recalled  to  Persia  when  Mfrz^  Malkom  Khan  was  dismissed  from  the
post  of  Minister.  Some  time  afterwards,  in  the  early  part  of  this  year
(1891),  he  was  arrested,  cast  into  prison,  and,  I  believe,  narrowly
escaped  death.


VII.      PERSECUTIONS   OF    1 888- 1 89 1  297

never  in  their  lives  injured  even  an  ant,  and  against  whom
nothing  could  be  alleged  save  that  they  were  Babis,  before
a  few  ignorant  wretches  like  unto  Annas  and  Caiaphas  who
account  themselves  learned,  and  commanded  them  to  dis-
avow their  connection  with  this  creed.  When  they  refused  *
to  do  this,  and  indeed  confessed  and  admitted  it,  they
beheaded  each  of  these  poor  oppressed  ones  in  a  public
thoroughfare,  affixed  them  to  gibbets,  dragged  their  bodies
with  ropes  through  the  streets  and  bazars^  and  at  length  cut
them  in  fragments  and  burned  them  with  fire.  Some  others
they  spirited  away,  and  it  is  not  known  what  sufferings  were
inflicted  upon  them.  About  a  thousand  persons  have  fled
from  Yazd  into  the  wilderness  and  open  country,  some  have
died  from  thirst  in  the  mountains  and  plains,  and  all  their
possessions  have  been  plundered  and  spoiled.  Oppression
and  tyranny  have  so  destroyed  and  uprooted  these  poor
oppressed  people  that  for  several  days  the  families  and  wives
and  children  of  the  murdered  men  were  weeping,  sorrowing,
and  shivering,  hungry  and  thirsty,  in  underground  cellars,
unable  even  to  ask  for  water ;  none  had  any  pity  for  them,
but  only  blows  ;  and  indeed  the  common  people,  incited
and  goaded  on  by  the  clergy  and  the  government,  strove
to  injure  them  in  every  way,  in  which  endeavour  they  showed
neither  ruth  nor  remission.  Only  after  some  days  certain
Christian  merchants  who  were  passing  through  Yazd  brought
bread  and  water  for  the  children  of  the  victims ;  but  the
poor  unfortunates  were  so  filled  with  fear  and  apprehension
that  they  would  not  open  the  door.  That  night  all  the
townsfolk  decorated  and  illuminated  the  city  and  made
great  rejoicings  that  so  signal  a  victory  and  so  glorious  a
triumph  had  been  accomplished,  not  seeing  in  their  ignor-
ance that  in  truth  they  are  striking  the  axe  on  their  own  roots
and  rejoicing  thereat,  and  overthrowing  the  foundations  of


298      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

their  own  house  and  accounting  it  eternal  life.  Moreover
they  fail  to  see  that  the  tears  of  the  oppressed  are  a  rising
torrent  and  the  sighs  of  their  victims  a  kindling  fire  !..."


(2)     Translation  of  a  letter  written  to  me  from  ^Akkd  by
Mirzd    Badi'uHldh^    on    Muharratn     15,     ah.     1309

(^August    21,    A.D.     1 891).

"he  is  the  speaking,  the  enduring.

"  The  appearance  of  afflictions  and  calamities  in  the
Land  of  Yd  (  Yazd).  The  eye  of  Justice  weepeth  :  Equity
waileth  !  O  God!  In  Persia  men  glory  in  cruelty,  oppres-
sion, ruthlessness,  and  the  attributes  of  beasts  of  prey  !  The
wolves  of  the  islands  of  ignorance  and  folly  have  torn  God's
lambs.  Grievous  loss  they  account  great  gain.  To-day  lamen-
tation arises  from  all  things  in  the  Land  of  Ya,  and  the  moans
and  mourning  of  the  Josephs  of  the  Spirit  rise  up  from  the  pit
of  the  seat  of  the  oppressors.  A  grievous  wound  hath  been
inflicted  on  the  bosom  of  Justice,  and  a  sore  blow  hath
fallen  on  the  frame  of  Equity.  The  hunters  of  hatred  lie  in
ambush  for  the  gazelles  of  the  plains  of  love  and  purity,
and  shameless  unblushing  tyrants  pursue  after  babes  in
their  cradles.  In  place  of  Justice  and  its  hosts  stand
Oppression  and  its  troops.  Mercy  has  become  in  Persia
like  the  Phoenix,  a  mere  name  without  substance,  and
equity  like  the  Philosopher's  Stone',  heard  of,  but  not  seen  !

"  On  the  evening  of  the  23rd  of  Ramazan^  a  mighty
dust  and  smoke  of  spirit  rose  up  from  the  hatred  and  malice
of  the  unbelievers  and  scoffers,  in  such  wise  that  it  obscured
the  radiance  of  the  luminary  of  Justice,  nay,  blotted  it  out.

1  A'z^^rzV-t-^/^w^r,  lit.  "  Red  Sulphur."

2  A.H.  1 308  =  May  2,  1891.


VU.      PERSECUTIONS   OF    1 888- 1 89 1  299

Without  cause  or  reason  they  seized  two  poor  friendless
victims,  Aqa  'AH  and  Aqa  'All  Asghar  (upon  whom  be  the
Splendour  of  God  and  His  Grace),  in  the  mosque  of  Shaykh
Hasan  of  Sabzawar,  and  carried  them  in  the  custody  of
Hajji  Na'ib  before  the  Prince  with  every  kind  of  indignity.
Then  they  inflicted  on  them  all  manner  of  punishments,
and  afterwards  imprisoned  them.  They  took  from  them,  as
is  related,  all  the  money  they  could  get  and  then  released
them.

"  After  this  another  smoke  arose  from  the  well-springs
of  wickedness  and  sin,  and  that  seizure  of  saintly  souls  was
at  another  time.  They  arrested  seven,  amongst  them  being
Mulla  'AH  of  Sabzawar  and  likewise  Mulla  Mahdi  (upon
whom  be  the  Splendour  of  God  and  His  Grace).  The
Prince  said  to  one, '  Recant,  that  I  may  release  thee.'  That
truly  devoted  man  replied,  '  For  forty  years  I  have  been
awaiting  this  day :  praise  be  to  God  that  to-day  I  have
attained  to  it ! '  Another,  as  he  was  being  dragged  through
the  streets,  cried  to  the  executioners,  farrdshes,  and  spec-
tators, '  O  people  !  The  Chief  of  martyrs  said,  "  Is  there
anyone  who  will  help  me  (yansuru-m) ? "  But  I  say,  "  Is
there  anyone  who  will  l<^ok  upon  me  {yaftzuru-ni)  ?  " '

"  At  all  events,  in  such  wise  was  the  fire  of  persecution
kindled  that  the  pen  is  unable  to  portray  it.  These  two
saintly  souls,  together  with  the  others,  laid  down  their  lives
with  the  utmost  steadfastness.  The  blood  of  these  it  is  which
now  causes  the  people  of  Persia  to  hear  somewhat  of  the
matter  and  maintain  silence,  or  even  acquiesce.  The  people
of  Persia  have  held  no  intercourse  with  strangers  because
(God  is  our  refuge  !)  they  regarded  them  all  as  unclean,  and
accounted  it  unlawful  to  converse  with  them.  Now,  by
the  Grace  of  this  Most  Mighty  Manifestation,  the  gates  of
Wisdom    are   opened,   and  these  immoderate   barbarisms,


300     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI.  RELIGION

these  shunnings  and  repellings,  are  departing  from  their
midst,  while  He  hath  gladdened  them  with  the  good  tidings
of  friendly  converse  and  association,  and  caused  them  to
attain  thereunto.  The  blood  of  lovers  hath  wrought  miracles
throughout  the  horizons  and  hath  driven  away  the  causes
of  isolation  with  the  scourge  of  the  Baydn,  substituting
in  their  place  an  approach  to  peace  and  quietude,  so  that
now  most  of  them  \i.e.  the  Persians]  hold  friendly  and
familiar  intercourse  with  all  nations  of  the  world.  In  truth
there  hath  been  made  manifest  a  love  for  all  mankind
which  seemed  to  human  eyes  an  impossibility.  Blessed  is
the  Beneficent  One,  the  Lord  of  great  bounty !  Now  all
have  become  eyes  to  see  and  ears  to  hear.  I'he  hosts  of
confession  have  driven  denial  from  the  field.  Think  on
the  influence  of  the  Supreme  Pen  and  the  power  of  the
Most  High  Word,  how  great  a  change  they  have  wrought
and  how  they  have  brought  nigh  [what  seemed  unattainable].
"To  return,  however.  They  martyred  those  of  whom
we  have  spoken  with  the  worst  torments  in  the  world.  One
they  strangled  to  death  with  the  bow-string,  and  after  him
they  slew  and  carried  away  the  rest.  Some  with  stones,
some  with  sticks,  some  with  chains,  and  some  with  weapons
of  war,  they  tore  in  pieces  those  holy  frames.  Afterwards
they  set  fire  [to  their  bodies]  and  cast  their  bones  into  pits.
According  to  the  accounts  received,  a  thousand  persons  have
fled  into  the  wilderness,  neither  is  it  known  whither  they
have  gone  or  what  has  become  of  them.  And  in  those  days
none  enquired  after  the  widows  and  children  of  these  wronged
ones  nor  went  near  them,  through  fear  and  dread,  and  the
unfortunate  ones  remained  without  food.  But,  as  has  been
heard,  some  of  the  followers  of  His  Holiness  the  Spirit^

1  R'^ku^lldh,  i.e.  Jesus  Christ.


VII.      PERSECUTIONS   OF    1888-1891  3OI

(may  God  strengthen  them  !)  went  with  the  utmost  secrecy
and  without  the  knowledge  of  any  man  and  succoured  them,
sending  them  daily  provision.  O  spiritual  friend  !  today
lamentation  arises  from  the  very  pebbles  in  the  deserts  and
wailing  goes  up  from  the  trees  !  On  the  night  of  that  day
by  command  of  the  government  the  people  held  high  festival
and  made  great  rejoicing,  as  though  they  had  captured  a
kingdom."


(3)  Translation  of  a  letter  written  to  me  from  Alexandria
on  Muharram  19,  a.h.  1309  {AugiMt  19,  a.d.  1891)  by
Aqd  Muhammad  ^Ali,  merchant^  of  Yazd.

"  The  first  arrests  on  the  ground  of  Babiism  took  place
on  the  evening  of  the  23rd  of  Ramazan,  a.h.  1308  (May  2,
1891),  in  the  mosque.  Shaykh  Hasan  of  Sabzawar,  a
prominent  member  of  the  clergy,  caused  two  men,  named
Aqa  'All  and  Aqa  ['Ali]  Asghar,  to  be  seized.  Gradually
they  arrested  twelve  persons  in  all,  inflicted  on  them
several  severe  beatings,  and  cast  them  into  prison.  On  the
morning  of  Monday  the  9th  of  Shawwal  (May  18,  1891)  they
brought  seven  of  them  before  Prince  Jalalu'd-Dawla,  the
Governor  of  Yazd.  Several  of-  the  clergy  sat  concealed
[in  the  room].  The  Prince  said,  '  The  Babis  are  released  :
let  them  go.'  After  giving  them  these  good  tidings  he
conjured  them,  saying,  '  By  my  life,  are  you  Babis  ? '  They
answered, '  Yes.'  Then  the  clergy  wrote  their  death  warrant.
They  first  ordered  one  named  Asghar,  a  man  of  about
thirty  years  of  age,  to  be  strangled  with  the  bow-string.
Before  carrying  the  sentence  into  execution  they  said  to
him,  '  Revile  [the  Bab].'  He  refused.  Then  they  applied
the  cord  and  cruelly  slew  him.    The  six  others  were  present


302     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

there.  Then  they  came  out  thence  with  trumpets  and
drums  and  many  other  instruments  of  music,  accompanied
by  a  great  multitude  shouting  and  clamouring.  At  the  back
of  the  Telegraph  Office  they  tried  to  make  Mulla  Mahdi  of
Khawirak  (an  old  man  about  eighty  years  of  age)  curse  the
Bab.  He  answered, '  For  forty  years  I  have  been  expecting
this  day.'  So  they  cut  his  throat  even  where  he  stood,  and
ere  he  was  dead  ripped  open  his  belly  and  cast  stones  at
him.  After  that  they  carried  away  his  body  and  set  fire  to
it.  They  next  beheaded  Aqa  'Ali  (a  man  of  about  thirty
years  of  age)  opposite  to  the  gate  of  Jazira-i-Mulla,  stuck
the  head  on  a  spear,  and  stoned  the  body.  Mulla  'Ali  of
Sabzawar  they  brought  to  the  door  of  Shaykh  Hasan  of
Sabzawar.  He  cried  out,  '  The  Imam  Husayn,  the  Chief
of  martyrs,  said  to  the  people,  "  Will  any  help  me  ?  "  but  I
say,  "  Will  any  look  upon  me  ?  "  '  Him  also  they  beheaded,
and  cast  stones  at  his  body.  And  his  age  was  about  thirty-
five.  Then  they  beheaded  Aqa  Muhammad  Baqir  at  the
door  of  the  Sadr's  house.  He  also  was  about  thirty-five
years  old.  Two  others,  brothers,  they  carried  to  the  Maydan-
i-Shah.  According  to  some  accounts  they  bound  Aqa  Asghar
(aged  about  twenty-five)  to  a  tree,  first  cut  off  his  hands,  then
beheaded  and  stoned  him.  The  other  brother,  Aqa  Hasan,
aged  twenty  years,  they  beat  and  chased  about,  saying,
'  Revile  the  Bab  ! '  He  answered,  '  What  should  I  say  ?
Do  what  you  are  commanded.'  One  of  those  present  cried
out,  '  Let  every  one  who  loves  'Ali  strike  a  blow  at  him.'
A  man  thrust  a  sword  into  his  side,  and  the  rest  then  cut
his  body  to  pieces  with  their  daggers,  while  another  drove  a
spear  into  his  breast.  Then  the  executioner  severed  his
head  from  his  body,  stuck  it  on  his  knife,  and  carried  it  to
Shaykh  Hasan  of  Sabzawar,  famed  for  his  learning,  from
whom  he  received  a  present  of  ten  tiimdns  {jQz)-    The  body,


VII.      PERSECUTIONS   OF    1888-189I  303

as  it  would  seem,  was  burned,  while  the  head  was  paraded
through  that  quarter  of  the  town.  Some  of  the  bodies  they
dragged  in  the  dust  round  the  bazars,  while  the  people
pelted  them  with  stones,  or  struck  them  with  sticks.  After-
wards they  carried  away  what  was  left  of  the  bodies  and  cast
them  all  together  into  a  well.  Then,  by  the  Prince's  com-
mand, they  illuminated  and  decorated  the  city.  For  two
nights,  the  populace  continued  their  rejoicings,  and  shut  up
all  the  shops  in  the  bazars.  One  can  easily  imagine  what
took  place  at  such  a  time  :  the  people  congratulated  one
another,  and  played  music  at  the  doors  of  the  murdered
men,  while  their  poor  widows  and  children  shut  themselves
within  and  none  dared  bring  anything  for  them,  neither  did
they  dare  to  go  out.  Some  paid  fines  and  were  suffered  to
go  forth,  and  some  were  cast  into  prison.  At  length  after
all  this  they  seized  a  saintly  old  man  named  Hajji  MuUa
Muhammad  Ibrahim  Mas^ila-gii,  who  had  always  been  noted
for  his  learning,  virtue,  and  piety,  and  had  afterwards  become
a  Babi,  and  imprisoned  him.  Some  Europeans  made  inter-
cession for  him.  At  length  the  Prince  said,  '  I  will  not  kill
him  ;  I  will  send  him  to  Tihran.'  But,  as  it  would  appear,
traces  of  his  mangled  limbs  and  body  were  afterwards  seen
outside  the  city,  and  in  all  probability  he  too  was  secretly
put  to  death.

"Since  the  utmost  tumult  and  disorder  prevail,  it  is
impossible  to  obtain  an  accurate  account  of  all  that  took
place.  I  have  written  it  very  briefly:  the  full  details  far
exceed  this.  We  have  no  certain  account  of  the  cruelties
and  indignities  suffered  by  Hajji  Muhammad  Ibrahim.  The
greater  part  of  what  happened  I  have  not  written,  and  much
is  not  known.  According  to  later  information  quiet  has
been  restored  and  the  arrests  have  ceased.  Since  that  we
have  had  no  further  news."


304     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

(4)  Translation  of  a  letter  written  from  Yazd  on  Shawwdl
15,  A.H.  1308  (yMay  24,  1 891)  by  one  Husayn  to  Hdjji
Sayyid  ''Alt  Shirdzi  at  ''Ishqdbdd ;  and  by  him  com-
municated to  me.

''On  the  evening  of  the  23rd  of  the  month  of  Ramazan
A.H.  1308  (May  2,  A.D.  1891)  two  persons,  named  respec-
tively Aqa  'All  Asghar  Yiizdariini  and  Aqa  Gazargahi,  went
to  the  mosque  of  Amir  Chaqmaq.  The  people  who  were  in
the  mosque  recognised  these  two  as  Babis,  and  said  to  them,
'  You  are  Babis ;  why  do  you  come  to  the  mosque  ?  Curse
[the  Bab],  or  we  will  torment  you.'  They  answered,  '  We
are  not  Babis.'  '  If  you  are  not  Babis,'  said  their  perse-
cutors, 'then  curse.'  As  they  refused  to  curse  or  revile
[the  Bab],  the  people  loaded  them  with  abuse,  and  raised
a  clamour,  crying,  '  These  two  men  are  Babis  and  have
entered  our  mosque,'  and  began  to  insult  and  maltreat  them.
Hajji  Na'ib,  the  Farrdsh-bdshi  of  Prince  Jalalu'd-Dawla,
who  was  present  in  the  mosque,  seized  these  two  men  and
carried  them  before  the  Prince.  They  were  severely  beaten,
cast  into  prison,  and  fined.  Three  days  later  they  were
released.

"Three  days  after  their  release.  Prince  Jalalu'd-Dawla
again  demanded  them  at  the  hands  of  the  Farrdsh-bdshi,
who  set  himself  to  discover  them.  One  Mahdi  by  name,
the  son  of  Ustad  Baqir  the  druggist,  offered  his  services  to
the  Farrdsh-bdshi,  saying,  '  I  know  where  they  are,  and  will
point  them  out  to  you.'  So  he  accompanied  the  Farrdsh-
bdshi,  together  with  ttn/arrdshes,  as  a  guide,  and  led  them
to  the  house  of  Ustad  'Abdu'r-Rahim  Mushki-bdf,  where
they  arrested  these  two  men  and  five  others  who  were  with
them  in  the  house.  The  seven  they  seized  and  brought
before  the  Prince-governor,  Jalalu'd-Dawla,  striking  them


VII.      PERSECUTIONS  OF    1888-1891  305

often  on  the  way  about  the  face  and  head,  and  finally
casting  them  into  prison.  The  names  of  the  other  five
prisoners  were,  MuUa  'All  of  Sabzawar,  Asghar,  Hasan,  Aqa
Baqir,  and  Mulla  Mahdi.

"  Next  day  Prince  Jalalu'd-Dawla  summoned  them
before  him  and  interrogated  them,  bidding  them  curse
and  revile  [the  BabJ,  that  he  might  set  them  free.  They
refused  to  do  this,  and  frankly  avowed  that  they  were
Babis.

*'  The  clergy,  who  have  ever  been  mischief-makers  and
are  always  eager  to  provoke  trouble  and  bloodshed,  hastened
to  avail  themselves  of  this  opportunity,  and  urged  Prince
Jalalu'd-Dawla  to  kill  these  seven  men.  So  far  as  can  be
ascertained,  the  Prince  wrote  his  consent  and  desired  the
clergy  to  ratify  it  with  their  seals  and  signatures.  So  they
agreed  to  make  these  seven  pass  beneath  the  sword  of
cruelty  and  injustice.  While  the  Prince  was  interrogating
them,  some  of  his  own  attendants  who  were  in  his  presence
were  filled  with  wonder  and  amazement,  saying  to  them-
selves, '  These  have  done  nothing  for  which  they  deserve  to
incur  wrath  and  punishment ! '

"  On  the  morning  of  Monday  the  9th  of  Shawwal
(May  18,  189 1)  the  following  members  of  the  clergy,
Shaykh  Hasan  of  Sabzawar,  Shaykh  Muhammad  Taqi  of
Sabzawar,  Mirza  Sayyid  *Ali  Mudarris,  Mulla  Hasan  of
Ardakan,  and  Mulla  Husayn  of  Ardakan  came  to  Prince
Jalalu'd-Dawla's  palace.  They  were  concealed  behind  a
curtain,  and  the  seven  Babis  were  then  brought  in.  The
Prince  said  to  them,  '  I  wish  to  set  you  free.  Now  by  my
head  I  conjure  you  to  tell  me  truly  whether  you  are  Babis
or  not.'  'Yes,'  they  replied,  'we  are  Babis,'  confessing  and
acknowledging  it.  The  clergy  who  were  concealed  behind
the  curtain  of  deceit  heard  their  avowal,  and  at  once  wrote
B.  B.  20


306      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

out  and  sealed  the  warrant  for  their  death.  The  executioner
was  summoned  forthwith  and  ordered  to  slay  them.  *Ali
Asghar  was  strangled  with  the  bow-string  in  the  Prince's
presence  in  the  most  cruel  manner.  The  other  six  were  led
through  the  bazars  with  music  and  beating  of  drums  to  the
market-place,  where  they  were  killed  one  after  another.
The  rabble  of  the  people  mobbed  them,  striking  them
with  sticks,  spitting  on  them,  reviling  them  and  mocking
them.  As  the  throat  of  each  one  was  cut,  the  mob  tore  open
the  body  to  look  at  the  heart,  saying,  '  How  bold  they  are  in
the  presence  of  death  and  the  death-warrant  and  the  heads-
man !  With  what  strength  of  heart  do  they  yield  up  their
life,  while  no  word  of  cursing  or  reviling  escapes  their  lips  !
We  must  see  what  sort  of  hearts  they  have.'

"When  they  had  slain  all  the  seven,  they  poured  tar
over  their  bodies  and  set  fire  to  them.  Never  before  this
day  have  such  behaviour,  such  malevolence  and  wickedness,
been  seen  in  any  people  as  are  seen  amongst  these  Shi'ites  in
Persia.  One  of  the  Babis  (he  who  was  named  Asghar)  they
bound  to  a  tree  in  the  market-place,  cut  off  his  hands  with
the  sword,  then  ripped  open  his  belly,  and  finally  beheaded
him.  Another,  Hasan,  they  wounded  in  the  head  with
swords  and  sticks,  driving  him  about  the  market-place  and
bidding  him  curse  and  revile  [the  Bab].  '  What  should  I
say?'  he  answered,  'do  whatever  is  commanded  you.'  So
they  cut  him  in  pieces.

**  Till  sunset  of  that  day  the  bodies  of  these  seven  were
in  the  hands  of  the  roughs  and  rabble  of  the  populace,  and
they  brutally  pelted  them  with  stones,  set  fire  to  them,  and
burned  them.  After  they  had  killed  them  and  burned  their
bodies  they  asked  permission  of  Prince  Jalalu'd-Dawla  to
illuminate  the  city,  and  he  give  them  permission  for  two  nights,
but  such  was  the  disorderly  conduct  of  the  roughs  and  the


VII.      PERSECUTIONS   OF    1 888- 1 89 1  307

exultation  of  the  clergy  on  the  first  night  that  permission  for
the  next  night  was  withdrawn.

"  The  widows  and  children  of  these  seven  men  dared
not,  for  fear  of  the  mob,  leave  their  houses  or  enter  the
bazars  even  to  obtain  food  and  drink,  and  so  remained
without  water  or  food  until  at  length  some  Christian  mer-
chants of  the  Dutch  nation  sent  provisions  to  them.

"  After  the  blood  of  these  seven  had  been  shed,  a  Babi
named  Hajji  Mulla  Muhammad  Ibrahim  Mas'ilagti^  who
had  gone  to  a  place  ten  hours  distant  from  the  city  towards
the  mountains,  was  followed  and  arrested  by  Hajji  Na'ib  the
Farrdsh-bdshi^  severely  beaten,  brought  back  with  every
indignity  to  the  city,  carried  before  Prince  Jalalu'd-Dawla,
and  cast  into  prison.  His  wife  and  children  went  to  the
Dutch  merchants  and  entreated  them  to  intercede  and
deliver  him  from  the  cruel  clutches  of  his  persecutors.
These  accordingly  went  before  the  Prince,  but  he  would
not  admit  their  mediation,  and  declared  that  he  had  already
sent  the  man  to  Tihran.  On  the  following  night  he  slew
him  with  his  own  hands  and  had  the  body  cast  into  a  well.

"  By  reason  of  these  events  many  persons  have  fled  into
the  surrounding  country,  and  a  strange  commotion  and  dis-
quietude prevail.  The  authorities  have  made  it  a  pretext
for  extorting  money,  and  have  fined  and  mulcted  many
persons.  They  have  also  arrested  several  more,  who  are
still  in  prison.  They  seized  one  named  Aqa  Husayn,  a  silk-
merchant,  who  had  in  his  possession  nearly  five  hundred
ttimdns^  {jQi^o)  worth  of  silk  belonging  to  himself  and
others,  all  of  which  they  took  from  him.  The  clergy  and
Prince  Jalalu'd-Dawla  have  made  this  thing  a  means  of
obtaining  money,  and  have  extorted  large  sums  from  all
[the  Babis],  leaving  their  wives  and  children  without  bread.

"  Never   before   has    such   injustice    been   seen.     Why

20 — 2


308      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

should  loyal  and  obedient  subjects,  who  have  been  guilty  of
no  offence,  and  who  seek  but  to  reform  men's  morals  and
to  increase  the  welfare  of  the  world,  be  subjected  to  such
cruel  persecutions  by  order  of  the  foolish  ones  of  the  earth
who  show  themselves  under  a  garb  of  knowledge  ?  Why
should  they  be  compelled  to  flee  as  outlaws  and  to  wander
as  beggars  from  door  to  door,  or  be  scattered  abroad  in
mountains  and  deserts  ?  Loyalty  forbids  us  to  appeal  to
foreign  Powers,  and  we  can  but  cry  in  our  anguish,  '  O  God !
We  submit  with  patience  and  resignation  to  what  we  suffer
at  the  hands  of  these  godless,  merciless  and  cruel  people ! '
Thus  do  we  tell  our  sorrow  to  our  God,  praying  Him  to
take  away  from  us  the  wickedness  and  oppression  of  the
froward  and  ignorant  ones  of  the  earth.  We  have  no  helper
but  God,  and  none  to  support  and  succour  us  save  Him.

"  This  which  has  been  written  is  a  full  account  of  the
events  of  these  days  and  the  tyranny  of  the  clergy  and  Prince
Jalalu'd-Dawla.  We  do  not  complain  of  the  cruelty  of  the
common  folk,  for  they  are  completely  under  the  control  of
the  clergy  and  Prince  Jalalu'd-Dawla.  The  city  is  now  in  a
most  disturbed  state,  and  the  roughs  and  rowdies  act  as  they
please ;  whatever  they  do  no  one  hinders  them.  Several
other  persons  were  cast  into  prison,  but  it  is  not  known
what  they  will  do  with  them.  I  have  nothing  further  to
add."


VIII

account   of  the   death   of   mirza
yahyA    subh-i-azal,    communicated

BY  HIS  SON   RIZWAn  'ALI  TO  THE   LATE

CLAUDE    DELAVAL    COBHAM,    Esqre,    ON

JULY    II,    1912,    TRANSLATED    FROM    THE

ORIGINAL   PERSIAN


"Know  that  the  Eternal  Fruit  {Thamara-i-AzaHyya  =
Subh-i-Azal)  fell  somewhat  sick  in  July,  191 1.  Gradually
he  ceased  to  go  from  one  house  to  another,  until  he  even
ceased  to  come  down  from  the  upper  story,  and  lost  his
appetite.  In  the  month  of  September  his  condition  became
very  critical ;  he  lost  all  strength  and  a  great  debility  appeared
in  his  body.  He  was  compelled  to  accept  the  ministrations
of  the  physician,  who,  however,  was  unable  to  cure  him.
In  consequence  of  material  troubles  and  endless  vexations
he  had  no  rest,  and  finally  on  the  28th  of  April  [191 2]  his
condition  became  suddenly  much  worse.  At  seven  o'clock
on  the  morning  of  Monday,  the  29th  of  April,  he  bade  fare-
well to  this  transitory  world  and  passed  into  the  world  of
Immortality.  His  household  and  its  members  applied  to
the  government  and  asked  permission  from  the  Governor  \i.e.
Commissioner]  of  Famagusta  to  deposit  his  body  in  a  place
which  belonged  to  that  Blessed  Being  and  which  is  situated
about  one  European  mile  outside  Famagusta  near  to  the
house  of  Bardtji-zada  Hajji  Hafiz  Efendi.  His  Excellency
the  Commissioner  granted  this  permission  with  the  utmost
kindness  and  consideration,  and  a  grave  was  dug  in  that  place
and  built  up  with  stones.  A  coffin  was  then  constructed  and
prepared,  and  in  the  afternoon  all  the  government  officials,
by  command  of  the  Commissioner  and  at  their  own  wish
and  desire,  together  with  a  number  of  the  people  of  the
country,  all  on  foot,  bore  the  corpse  of  that  Holy  Being  on
their  shoulders,  with  pious  ejaculatiorls  and   prayers,  and


312      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

every  mark  of  extreme  respect,  from  his  house  to  the  site  of
the  Holy  Sepulchre.  But  none  were  to  be  found  there  of
witnesses  to  the  Baydn'^,  therefore  the  Imdm-Jum'-a  of
Famagusta  and  some  others  of  the  doctors  of  Islam,  having
uttered  [the  customary]  invocations,  placed  the  body  in  the
coffin  and  buried  it.  And  when  they  brought  it  forth  from
the  gate  of  Famagusta  some  of  the  Europeans  also  accom-
panied the  Blessed  Body,  and  the  son  of  the  Quarantine
doctor  took  a  photograph  of  it  with  a  great  number  [of  the
bystanders],  and  again  took  another  photograph  at  the
Blessed  Tomb^.

"Now  this  Holy  Person  \i.e.  Subh-i-Azal~\  before  his
death  had  nominated  [as  his  executor  or  successor]  the  son
of  Aqa  Mirza  Muhammad  Hadi  of  Dawlatabad,  who  was  one
of  the  leading  believers  and  relatively  better  than  the  others,
in  accordance  with  the  command  of  His  Holiness  the  Point
[i.e.  the  Bab],  glorious  in  his  mention,  who  commanded
saying,  '  And  if  God  causeth  mourning  to  appear  in  thy  days,
then  make  manifest  the  Eight  Paths,'  etc.,  until  he  says,
'  But  if  not,  then  the  authority  shall  return  to  the  Witnesses
of  the  Baydn^.^  Therefore  he  appointed  him,  though  hitherto
no  one  has  found  his  testament  amongst  the  writings  of  that
Blessed  Being.  Moreover  twenty-eight  years  ago  he  had
written  for  himself  a  lengthy  form  of  visitation^  at  the  be-
ginning of  which  he  wrote  Li' I-  WahidV I- FaridV l-Mawtur,
Please  God  after  the  lapse  of  some  days  1  will  write  it  out  for

^  i.e.  Babis.

2  These  photographs  were  published  by  Mr  H.  C.  Lukach  in  his
book  The  Fringe  of  the  East,  pp.  264  and  266,  and  he  has  most  kindly
permitted  me  to  reproduce  them  here.

^  This  obscure  quotation  is  doubtless  from  the  Bay  an,  but  I  have
not  found  it,  and  do  not  know  the  context.

^  Ziydrat-nd/na,  i.e.  a  form  of  prayer  to  be  used  by  those  visiting
the  tomb  of  a  saint  or  martyr.


Photographs  of  the  Funeral  of  Mirza  Yahya  Subh-i-Azal  at

Famagusta,  Cyprus,  on  April  29,  1912.

(Reproduced  by  kind  permission  of  Mr  H.  C.  Lukach  and  Messrs

Macmillan  from  his  book  The  fringe  of  the  East.)

To  /ace  p.  312.


VIII.      DEATH   OF   SUBH-I-AZAL  313

your  Excellency  and  send  it.  I  cannot  copy  it  now  because
my  eyes  see  badly.  Please  God  you  will  forgive  me.  I  hope
that  God  Most  High  will  vouchsafe  a  complete  cure  to  your
Honour  and  remove  the  sickness  which  you  have.

"  At  all  events  that  Most  Blessed  Being  four  hours  before
his  death  wept  and  sorrowed  because  those  of  the  notable
and  great  men  of  Europe  and  other  lands  whom  he  had
met  were  not  present  at  his  last  breath.  I  have  nothing
more  to  add  except  that  whatever  dilficulties  you  and  equally
Mr  Edward  Browne  may  have,  if  you  will  refer  them  to  me
1  will  so  far  as  possible  give  a  satisfactory  answer.  The
Light  be  upon  you,  and  may  God  heal  you  and  assuage
your  suffering.

"July  II,  1912.         C.  P."  (Constantine  the  Persian).

The  above  account  of  Subh-i-Azal's  death  and  burial
was  communicated  to  me  on  September  3,  191 2,  by  Mr  C.  D.
Cobham,  for  whom  it  was  written  in  Persian  by  Rizwan  'All
(or,  as  he  has  called  himself  since  his  conversion  to  Chris-
tianity, 6  riepo-r/'s  Kcoi/cTTai/Tii/o?).  On  the  preceding  May  19
Mr  H.  C.  Lukach,  secretary  to  the  High  Commissioner  of
Cyprus,  had  already  written  to  ask  me  for  a  copy  of  my
"brochure  on  the  subject  of  the  community  of  Babis  dwelling
at  Famagusta,"  adding  that  "  the  Bab  "  (meaning  Subh-i-
Azal)  "died  on  April  29th  last,  aet.  circa  82."  On  the  5th  of
September  he  very  kindly  communicated  to  me  the  following
further  particulars  concerning  Subh-i-Azal's  family  and
possessions :

"  I  am  now  able  to  give  you  a  little  further  information
with  regard  to  the  family  of  the  late  Subh-i-Azal.

•'  It  appears  that  Subh-i-Azal  left  a  letter  saying  that  he
of  his  sons  who  resembled  him  most  closely  in  his  mode  of
life  and  principles  was  to  be  his  successor.    The  point  as  to


314      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

which  of  the  sons  fulfils  this  condition  has  not  yet  been
decided ;  consequently  all  the  children  would  appear  at
present  to  be  co-heirs.

"  The  eldest  surviving  son  is  Ahmad  Subh-i-Azal,  a  poor
man  who  is  obliged  to  earn  his  living  as  a  railway  porter  in
Famagusta.  The  most  affluent  of  the  brothers  is  'Ali^  who
keeps  a  shop.  Another,  Mehmed  {i.e.  Muhammad)  is  not
quite  right  in  his  head.  The  youngest,  and,  as  far  as  I  can
gather,  the  favourite  son  (by  a  second  wife)  is  one  Taqiyyu'd-
Din,  who  was  always  near  his  father.  '  Constantine  the
Persian,'  alias  'Costi^',  has  been  away  from  Famagusta  for
some  time.  It  may  be  that  he  will  consent  to  sell  some  of
his  father's  manuscripts  in  his  possession.  The  other
brothers  are  at  present  not  prepared  to  sell  theirs.

"No  steps  have,  as  far  as  I  am  aware,  yet  been  taken  to
elect  a  laa/i  {i.e.  successor  or  executor).  I  am  afraid  this
information  is  meagre,  but,  having  been  on  Mount  Troodos
for  the  last  few  months,  I  have  had  no  opportunity  of  making
personal  investigations  in  Famagusta."

On  the  23rd  of  January,  191 3,  Mr  Lukach  wrote  to  me
again,  enclosing  a  letter  from  a  Syrian  named  Mughabghab
who  lived  in  Famagusta,  and  kindly  offering  his  help  should
I  desire  to  enter  into  negotiations  for  the  purchase  of  any  of
the  late  Subh-i-Azal's  manuscripts.  From  Mr  Mughabghab's
letter  it  appeared  that  Subh-i-Azal's  son  ''Costi  "  {i.e.  Rizwan
'All)  was  prepared  to  sell  his  share  of  his  father's  manuscripts,
nine  in  number,  but  was  anxious  that  his  brothers  should
not  know  of  his  intention,  as  they  desired  to  keep  all  these
books  and  manuscripts  together.      The  prices  demanded


^  This,  I  think,  must  be  'Abdu'l-'Alf,  who  kept  a  shop  in  Varoshia,
a  suburb  of  Famagusta.

^  His  proper  original  name  was  Rizwan  'AH.


VIII.      DEATH   OF   SUBH-I-AZAL  315

were,  in  my  opinion,  excessive,  and  I  did  not  pursue  the
matter  further.     The  list  was  as  follows  :

(i)  Kitdbu'n-Niir  {"  Book  of  Light")  (see  p.  216  supra),
the  first  and  largest  of  the  works  so  entitled,  composed  at
Baghdad,  ;^3o.


(2
(3
(4
(5
(6
(7
(8
(9


DiwdnuH-Azal  {^Q&  p.  214  suprd)^  £'^^-
Lahadhdt^  ;^20.
Sata^dt,  ;^20.
Jawdmt^u' i-IIaydkii,  ;^ 2 o.
Lawdmi\  ^20.

Lawdhidh  wa  IVafdyi^  (507  stiras),  jQ2o.
As-Sawdfi\  £,20.
Lataifu^l-Azal,  jQ2o.


Four  of  these  manuscripts  (Nos.  3,  4,  6  and  7  in  the
above  list)  have,  as  I  have  recently  learned  (Sept.  26,  191 7),
been  offered  to  the  British  Museum.  The  title  of  No.  7  is
somewhat  differently  given  as  LawdhidhiCn-Nafdih^  which
is  no  doubt  correct.


IX


LIST  OF  THE  DESCENDANTS  OF  MfRZA
BUZURG   OF    NUR,   THE    FATHER    BOTH

OF  bahA'U'llah  and  of  SUBH-I-AZAL


This  list  was  sent  to  me  in  June,  191 2,  by  the  already-
mentioned  Azali  scribe  of  Isfahan,  resident  in  Tihran,  with
whom  I  succeeded  in  establishing  relations,  and  who  supplied
me  with  numerous  precious  documents.  The  original  is
written,  not  very  distinctly,  by  a  certain  Mirza  Ibrahim  Khan,
the  son  of  Fatima  Khanim,  the  niece  of  Mirza  Buzurg's
daughter  (the  half-sister  of  both  Baha'u'llah  and  Subh-i-Azal)
Shah  Sultan  Khanim,  commonly  known  as  Hdjji  (or  Hdjjiya)
Khdnim-i-Buzurg.  It  is  accompanied  by  a  more  legible
transcript  by  the  aforesaid  scribe.

Mirza  Buzurg  seems  to  have  had  six  wives  (unnamed
in  the  Hst)  who  bore  him  children,  and  who  are  here  dis-
tinguished by  Roman  numbers.

I.     (i)  Mirza  Yahya  Subh-i-Azal.

II.  (2)  MixziUn^Siyn' AM  Bahd'u'lldh:  (3)MirzaMusa
Kalimu''lldh\  who  followed  Baha :  (4)  an  un-
named daughter.

III.  (5)  Mirza  Muhammad  Hasan  (Azali).

IV.  (6)  Mirza- quli :    (7)    an    unnamed   daughter   (both

Bahd'fs).

^  The  only  one  of  Mirz^  Musa's  sons  with  whom  I  was  acquainted
was  Majdu'd-Din,  but  he  had  three  other  sons  named  'Alf  Riza,  Jamil
and  Kamal.


320     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

V.  (8)  Ijlajji  Mirza  Riza-quli,  known  as  Hakim  (the
Philosopher),  d.  a.h.  131  i  (=  a.d.  1893-4),
aet.  90 :  (9)  Shah  Sultan  Khanim,  commonly
called  Hdjji  Khdnim-i-Buzurg^  d.  a.h.  1322
(=A.D.  1904-5),  aet.  84.  She  wrote  in  1310/
1892-3  a  refutation  of  'Abdu'1-Baha  ('Abbas
Efendi)  known  as  Risdla-i-^Amma  ("the
Aunt's  Epistle")^:  (10)  Mirza  Muhammad
Taqi,  known  as  Farishdn^  d.  a.h.  1292
(=A.D.  1875-6),  aet.  45  :  (11)  Mirza  Ibrahim,
aet.  30:  (12)  Fatima  Khanim,  still  living  in
A.D.  191 2,  aet.  70.    All  these  five  were  Azalis.

VI.  (13)  Husayniyya  (Azali).

In  191 2  five  of  Fatima  Khanim's  children,  three
daughters  (Fakhriyya,  Hamida  and  Zamzam)  and  two  sons
(Muhammad  Khan  and  Ibrahim  Khan),  all  Azalis,  were
still  living.


Descendants  of  Mirzd  Husayn  ^Ali  BahduUldh.

Baha'u'llah  had  two  wives,  each  of  whom  bore  him  six
children.

In  1251/1835,  when  18  years  of  age,  he  married  Nawwab,
who  bore  him  :

(i)     Sadiq,  who  died  at  the  age  of  3  or  4.

(2)  'Abbas,  now  known  as  'Abdu'1-Baha,  who  was  born
in  1 257/ 1 841.  He  had  four  daughters,  two  of  whom  were
married  to  Mirza  Hadi  and  Mirza  Muhsin  respectively.

^  See  p.  227  supra.


IX.      LIST  OF  DESCENDANTS  OF  MIRZA  BUZUKG       32 1

(3)  Bahiyya  Khanim,  b.  1 260/1844  (unmarried).

(4)  'AH  Muhammad,  d.  aged  7  in  Mazandaran.

(5)  Mahdi,  who  died  at  'Akka  1 287/1870-1.

•   (6)     'Ah'  Muhammad,  b.  and  d.  at  Baghdad,  aged  2.

In  1 266/1849  he  married  his  cousin  Mahd-i-'Ulya,  who
bore  him  :

(i)  Muhammad  'AH  in  1270/1853,  the  rival  claimant
to  'Abbas.  He  has  three  sons,  Shu'a'u'llah,  Aminu'llah  and
Miisa.

(2)  Samadiyya  Khanim,  b.  at  Baghdad,  d.  aged  49  in
13  2  2/1 904-5.  She  was  married  to  her  cousin  Majdu'd-Din
(son  of  Mirza  Musa)  and  had  two  daughters.

(3)  'AH  Muhammad,  d.  at  Baghdad,  aged  2.

(4)  Sadhajiyya  Khanim  \  b.  at  Baghdad,  d.  aged  2  at
Constantinople.

(5)  Ziya'u'Uah,  b.  at  Adrianople  1 282/1865,  d.  at  Hayfa,
aged  34,  13 1 6/ 1898  He  was  married,  but  died  without
issue.

(6)  Badi'u'llah,  b.  at  Adrianople  1 285/1868.

Descendants  of  Mirzd  Yahyd  Subh-i-Azal.

Concerning  those  of  Subh-i-AzaPs  family  who  came
with  him  to  Cyprus  and  resided  or  were  born  there  full
particulars,  abstracted  from  official  documents  preserved  in
the  island,  were  pubHshed  by  me  in  Vol.  ii  of  my  Traveller's
Narrative^  pp.  376 — 386.  They  included  two  wives,  Fatima
and  Ruqayya  ;  nine  sons,  of  whom  the  two  eldest,  Niiru'Uah

^  I  have  been  informed  that  Baha'u'llah  had  another  daughter  named
Fdnkqiyya^  who  married  Say y id  'Alf  Afnan  and  bore  him  two  sons.

B.  B.  21


322      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

and  Hadi,  seem  to  have  resided  in  Persia  and  only  to  have
visited  their  father  occasionally,  while  a  third,  Ahmad,  left
Cyprus  for  Constantinople  (probably  with  his  wife  Fatima
and  his  four-year  old  daughter  'Adila)  in  1884;  and  five
daughters.  Of  the  sons  whom  I  met  in  Cyprus  the  eldest
and  most  intelligent  was  'Abdu'i-'Ali\  The  next,  Rizwan
'All,  who  was  for  some  time  in  the  service  of  the  late
C.  D.  Cobham,  Esq.,  Commissioner  of  Larnaca,  turned
Christian  and  took  the  name  of  "  Constantine  the  Persian."
He  died  recently.  Most  of  the  Azali  mss.  in  the  British
Museum  were  transcribed  by  him.

^  See  p.  314,  n.  i  supra.


X


THIRTY    HERETICAL    DOCTRINES
ASCRIBED  TO  THE  bAbIS  IN  THE
IHQAQU'L-HAQQ  of  AQA  MUHAM-
MAD TAQI  OF    HAMADAn


21


Mention  has  been  already  made  (pp.  189 — 190  supra)  of
a  very  elaborate  and  detailed  refutation  of  the  Babis  entitled
IhqdquU-Haqq^  in  the  course  of  which  (pp.  244 — 279)  the
author,  Aqa  Muhammad  Taqi  of  Hamadan,  enumerates
some  thirty  heresies  which  he  ascribes  to  the  Babis  (including
under  this  term  the  Baha'is  and  the  Azalis)  and  which  he
endeavours  to  refute.  This  portion  of  the  work,  which  gives
a  convenient  synopsis  of  most  of  the  characteristic  doctrines
of  this  sect,  I  shall  here  abridge  and  summarize  in  my  own
words  for  the  information  of  those  who  desire  to  form  a
general  idea  of  Babi  theology,  and  to  understand  the  extreme
aversion  with  which  it  is  regarded  by  Muslims,  alike  of  the
Sunni  and  Shi'a  persuasions.

I.     Denial  of  miracles.

They  assert  that  God  does  not  violate  the  laws  of  nature,
and  that  the  miracles  ascribed  in  the  scriptures  and  in
tradition  to  the  Prophets  are  to  be  explained  allegorically.
(Baha'u'llah's  tqdn^  one  of  the  chief  polemical  works  of
the  Babis,  affords  many  instances  of  such  allegorical  inter-
pretation of  signs  and  wonders;  and  when  more  or  less
miraculous  occurrences  are  mentioned  by  Babi  historians
and  biographers,^.^,  in  the  Ta^ rikh-i Jadid ox  "New  History,"
care  is  almost  always  taken  by  the  writer  to  explain  that  he
attaches  little  importance  to  them,  and  that  they  are  of  no
evidential  value.)


326      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

2.     The  only  jnirade  is  the  Revelation  itself.

They  assert  that  the  receiving  of  revelations  and  the
production  of  a  Scripture  or  revealed  Book  are  sufficient
in  themselves  to  establish  the  claim  to  Prophethood,  without
any  adventitious  support  from  such  miracles  as  are  generally
ascribed  to  the  great  Prophets  of  yore.  (In  this  connection
the  Babis  are  very  fond  of  quoting  Qur'dn  xviii,  no  and
xli,  5  :  "  /  am  only  a  human  being  like  unto  yourselves  [but]
revelations  are  made  to  me.^^)

3.     Revelation  not  subject  to  the  laws  of  grammar.

The  Bab's  grammar,  especially  in  his  Arabic  utterances,
afforded  an  easy  target  for  criticism,  being,  in  fact,  judged
by  ordinary  standards,  extremely  incorrect^  His  reply  to
his  critics  was  that  the  rules  of  grammar  were  deduced  from
the  Scriptures,  while  the  Scriptures  were  not  compelled  to
conform  to  the  rules  of  grammar.  He  had  "  freed "  the
Arabic  language  from  the  many  limitations  {quyud)  or  rules
wherewith  it  had  hitherto  been  fettered.  But  why,  asks  the
author  of  the  Ihqdq^  should  Persian  prophets  (if  such  there
be)  address  their  countrymen  in  a  foreign  tongue  like  Arabic,
contrary  to  the  practice  of  all  previous  prophets,  and  to  the
explicit  verse  of  the  Qur'dn  (xiv,  4) :  "  We  have  not  sent  any
Apostle  save  with  the  speech  of  his  own  people.,  that  he  ?nay
make  clear  to  them  \his  message^ ''  ?

4.     By  "  Signs  "  they  understand  revealed  verses  only.

The  author  has  no  difficulty  in  showing  that  in  the
Qur'dn  the  word  dyat  (pi.  dydt)  is  used  of  any  "sign  "by
which  the  Divine  Power  is  manifested,  not  only  by  revealed

^  Cf.  p.  254  supra,  last  paragraph.


X.      THIRTY   HERETICAL  DOCTRINES  327

verses,  in  which  sense  especially  if  not  exclusively  the  Babis
understand  it.  According  to  a  prevalent  theory  of  the
Muhammadans',  each  prophet  was  given  as  his  special
"  sign  "  the  power  to  work  that  miracle  which  most  appealed
to  his  own  people  and  his  own  period.  Thus  in  the  time  of
Moses  and  amongst  the  Egyptians,  magic  was  rated  most
highly,  so  he  was  given  power  to  excel  the  most  skilful  of
Pharaoh's  magicians  in  their  own  art ;  in  the  time  of  Jesus
Christ  medical  skill  was  most  esteemed,  so  He  was  given
miracles  of  healing ;  while  the  Arabs  contemporary  with
Muhammad  valued  eloquence  above  all  else,  and  he  there-
fore received  the  miracle  of  eloquence,  the  Qur'dn,  the  like
of  which  none  can  produce,  as  it  is  said  (xvii,  90):  "''  Say^
verily  if  mankind  and  the  Jinn  should  combine  to  produce  the
like  of  this  Qur'dn,  they  will  not  produce  the  like  of  it^  even
though  one  of  them  should  aid  another''^ ;  and  again  (ii,  21  —  2) :
"  And  if  ye  be  in  doubt  concerning  that  ivhich  We  have
revealed  to  Our  se-rvafit^  then  produce  a  sdra  like  unto  it^
and  summon  your  witnesses  besides  God,  if  ye  be  truthful.
(22)  But  if  ye  do  it  not  {and  ye  will  not  do  it),  then  fear  the
Fire  whose  fuel  is  men  and  stones,  prepared  for  the  unbeliever s^
'1  he  well-known  saying,  "  His  signs  are  His  proof  and  His
existence  His  affirmation^''  refers  to  God,  not  to  tiie  prophets,
and  will  not  bear  the  construction  the  Babis  place  on  it.

5.      The  Qur^dn  can  be  understood  by  all  and  needs
no  exponent.

It  is  said  in  the  Qur'dn  (iii,  5):  "  None  knoweth  its  inter-
pretition  save  God  and  those  who  are  firmly  grounded  in
knowledge  ^^ ;  and  the  Prophet  said:  "I  shall  depart  from

1  See    Dawlatsh^h's    "Memoirs    of   the    Poets"    [Tadhkiratu'sh-
S/iu^ard),  pp.  s^ — 6  of  my  edition.


/


328     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

your  midst,  but  I  leave  with  you  two  great,  weighty  and
precious  things,  which  two  things  will  never  be  separated  or
parted  from  one  another  until  they  come  to  me  by  the  brink
of  the  Fountain  of  al-Kawthar ;  and  these  are.  God's  Word
and  my  kin."  So  not  even  the  Prophet's  contemporaries
and  fellow-countrymen  could  without  help  understand  the
revelation  given  to  him,  though  in  their  own  language.
How,  then,  can  the  Babis  pretend  that  a  revelation  in  Arabic
can  be  understood  without  external  help  by  Persians,  even
the  illiterate  ?

6.     The  signs  by  which  each  Prophet  foretold  that  his  successor
would  be  distinguished  are  to  be  understood  allegorically .

The  Mahdi  or  Qa'im  whom  the  Shi'a  expect  and  for
whose  advent  they  pray  is  the  identical  Twelfth  Imam,  the
son  of  the  Eleventh  Imam  and  Narjis  Khatiln,  who  dis-
appeared a  thousand  years  ago,  and  who  has  been  miracu-
lously hidden  away  until  the  fulness  of  time,  when  he
shall  appear  with  sundry  signs  and  wonders,  enumerated  in
the  Traditions,  and  -'  fill  the  earth  with  justice  after  it  has
been  filled  with  iniquity."  But  the  Babis,  giving  the  lie  to
all  these  traditions,  would  have  us  befieve  that  Mirza  'All
Muhammad  of  Shiraz,  the  son  of  Mirza  Rizathe  cloth-seller
and  Khadija  Khanim,  who  grew  up  in  the  ordinary  way
and  at  the  age  of  twenty-four  advanced  his  claim,  was  the
Expected  Imam.

7.      The  Prophets  arc  not  ''immaculate ^^  (ma'silm).

In  support  of  this  view  the  Babis  appeal  to  certain  doubt-
ful phrases  in  the  Qur'dn  and  to  certain  incidents  narrated
in  the  Old  Testament  (which  the  author,  in  common  with
most  Muslims,  holds  to  be  corrupt  and  distorted  in  the  form


X.      THIRTY   HERETICAL  DOCTRINES  329

in  which  it  now  exists).  But  if  the  prophets  be  not  "immacu-
late "  and  without  sin,  what  virtue  have  they  over  other  men,
and  what  claim  have  they  to  be  listened  to  ?

8.     Purity  and  impurity^  lawfulness  and  unlawfulness,  and
the  like,  depend  solely  upon  the  Prophefs  arbitrary  volition.

The  prohibitions,  sanctions  and  obligations  laid  down
by  the  Prophet  are  all  based  on  reason  and  prompted  by
care  for  the  welfare  of  mankind  :  they  are  not  mere  arbitrary
enactments,  and,  though  they  may  be  modified  in  detail  in
successive  dispensations,  they  cannot  be  altered  in  principle.
The  contrary  view,  held  by  the  Babis,  is  both  heretical  and
opposed  to  reason.

9.     The  term  "  Seal  of  the  Prophets  "  explained  away.

In  the  Qur'dn  (xxxiii,  40)  Muhammad  is  called  "the
Seal  of  the  Prophets"  {Khdtamu^n-N^abiyyi?t),  and,  according
to  a  well-known  tradition,  he  declared  that  there  would  be
no  prophet  after  him.  Belief  in  the  finality  of  his  mission
and  revelation  is  therefore  a  cardinal  and  universal  tenet  of
the  Muslims  ;  but  the  Babis,  desiring  to  represent  the  Qur'dn
and  the  Law  of  Islam  as  abrogated  in  favour  of  their  own
Scriptures  and  Law,  endeavour  to  explain  away  this  explicit
and  unambiguous  declaration.^'^'---^  •'  'P     /

■^,   ^  10.     The  claim  that  the  Bab  or  BahduHldh  is  the

Qa'im  or  Khatam.

The  Babis  claim  that  certain  of  the  signs  (such  as  earth-
quakes, famine  and  the  like)  which  shall  herald  the  advent
of  "Him  who  shall  arise  {al-Qaim)  of  the  House  of  Mu-
hammad," i.e  the  Mahdi,  did  actually  precede  or  accompany


330     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

the  "  Manifestation  "  of  the  Bab.  Now  as  we  have  seen
above  (No.  6)  they  assert  that  these  promised  "  Signs  "  are
to  be  understood  allegorically,  not  literally.  They  cannot
have  it  both  ways,  or  claim  that  such  of  these  signs  as
happened  to  accompany  the  Bab's  advent  are  to  be  taken
literally,  while  such  as  did  not  appear  are  to  be  explained
allegorically.

1 1 .     Denial  of  the  Resurrection  and  belief  in  Metempsychosis

and  the  like.

The  Babis  deny  the  Resurrection  of  the  body,  for  which
they  substitute  the  doctrine  of  the  "Return"  {Rafat)  to  the
life  of  this  world  of  the  dramatis  personae — both  believers
and  unbelievers — of  previous  "Manifestations"  or  Dispensa-
tions. This  doctrine  the  author  regards  as  hardly  distin-
guishable from  transmigration  {tandsukh)  and  re-incarnation
{hulul),  but  in  reality  it  appears  that  such  "  returns "  are
regarded  by  Babis  less  as  re-incarnations  than  as  re-mani-
festations of  former  types,  comparable  to  the  repetition  of
the  same  parts  in  a  drama  by  fresh  actors,  or  the  re-writing
of  an  old  story.  Significant  in  this  connection  is  the  favourite
Babi  designation  of  the  protagonists  on  either  side  as  'Letters
of  Light "  {HurHfu'n-Nur)  an^  "  Letters  of  Fire  "  {Hurufu'n-

1 2.     Denial  of  a  Future  Life.

The  Babis  deny  the  Resurrection  of  the  body,  and
explain  allegorically  all  the  beliefs  connected  therewith.
Thus  Heaven  is  belief  in  and  Hell  denial  of  the  New
Theophany  ;  the  Angels  are  its  emissaries  and  the  Devils
its  antagonists ;  and  so  with  the  Questioning  of  the  Tomb,
the  Bridge  of  Sirdt^  the  Balance,  the  Reckoning,  and  the  like.


X.      THIRTY   HERETICAL   DOCTRINES  33 1

13.     Denial  of  the  miraculous  eloquence  of  the  Qur'dn.

The  Babis  eagerly  associate  themselves  with  the  Jews
and  Christians  in  denying  not  only  the  supreme  eloquence
of  the  Qur'dn^  but  even  in  some  cases  the  correctness  of  its
phraseology  and  grammar.  Thi%  they  do  to  palliate  the
manifest  and  manifold  errors  of  their  own  Scriptures.

14.      Their  claim  that  the  Bab,  Bahd^u'lldh  and
Subh-i-Azal  were  '"''illiterate''^  (Ummi).

In  two  passages  in  the  Qut'dn  (vii,  156  and  158)  the
Prophet  Muhammad  is  described  as  "  the  illiterate  Prophet "
{an-Nabiyyul-Ujnmi).  "This  defect,"  says  Sale  in  Sect,  ii
of  his  Preliminary  Discourse,  "  was  so  far  from  being  preju-
dicial or  putting  a  stop  to  his  design,  that  he  made  the  greatest
use  of  it ;  insisting  that  the  writings  which  he  produced  as
revelations  from  God  could  not  possibly  be  a  forgery  of  his
own ;  because  it  was  not  conceivable  that  a  person  who  could
neither  write  nor  read  should  be  able  to  compose  a  book  of
such  excellent  doctrine,  and  in  so  elegant  a  style ,  and  thereby
obviating  an  objection  that  might  have  carried  a  great  deal
of  weight."  The  same  claim,  prompted  by  similar  motives,
was  advanced  in  turn  by  the  Bab,  Baha'u'llah  and  Subh-i-
Azal ;  but  in  their  case  our  author  is  at  some  pains  to  show
that  it  is  not  true,  and  that  each  of  them  received  at  any
rate  a  respectable  education.

15.     Rapidity  and  quantity  of  output  of  "  verses  "  deemed
by  the  Babis  an  additional  miracle.

As  every  letter,  nay,  every  line,  written  by,  or  at  the
dictation  of,  the  Bab,  Baha'u'Uah  or  Subh-i-Azalis  deemed
inspired,  and  as  they  wrote  or  dictated  almost  incessantly,


332      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

the  amount  of  their  writings  is  prodigious  ;  while  the  Bab  in
particular  repeatedly  boasts  of  the  number  of  "verses"  he
could  produce  in  a  given  time,  so  that  it  is  said  that  ten
scribes  writing  simultaneously  could  hardly  succeed  in  re-
cording his  utterances.  The  idea  that  this,  apart  from  the
quality  of  the  "  verses, 'i  is  a  miracle  or  even  a  merit  is
strongly  combated  by  our  author,  who  inclines  to  the  view-
expressed  in  the  well-known  Arabic  saying,  "  the  best  speech
is  that  which  is  briefest  and  most  to  the  point."

1 6.  Their  assertion  that  the  miraculous  quality  (Tjaz)  of
the  Qur'an  can  be  appreciated  by  the  ignorant  and
illiterate.

The  Babis  say  that  if  the  miraculous  quality  of  the
Qur^dn  were  not  apparent  to  all,  learned  and  illiterate,  Arab
and  non-Arab,  alike,  its  proof  would  not  be  complete ;  and
they  adduce  in  support  of  this  view  the  tradition,  "  Know-
ledge is  a  light  which  God  casteth  into  the  heart  of  whom-
soever He  will."  This  view  also  the  author  energetically
repudiates.

17.     Their  contention  that  willingness  to  die  for  one's
religious  convictions  is  a  proof  of  truth.

In  support  of  this  view  (which  the  author  repudiates)  the
Babis  cite  Qur'an  Ixii,  6,  '■^  Say,  O  ye  who  follow  the  Jewish
faith,  if  ye  suppose  that  ye  are  the  friends  of  God  beyond  other
?nen,  then  invoke  Death,  if  ye  be  sincere.''^  (In  spite  of  our
author,  there  is,  however,  no  douI>t  that  nothing  so  greatly
conduced  to  the  fame  and  diffusion  of  the  Babi  religion  as
the  unflinching  courage  with  which  its  adherents  confronted
death  in  the  most  cruel  forms.    Compare  p.  268  supra.)


X.      THIRTY   HERETICAL   DOCTRINES  333

18.  Their  assertion  that  the  Muhammadan  doctors  persecute
them  because  they  cannot  answer  their  arguments.

All  that  the  author  has  to  say  on  this  head  is  that  the
'■Ulamd  did  not  resort  to  violent  methods  until  they  had  first
tried  persuasion  and  offered  opportunities  for  recantation,
and  that  in  this  they  did  but  follow  the  example  of  the
Prophets,  whose  heirs  they  are,  in  their  dealings  with  heretics
and  infidels.

19.  Their  refusal  to  listen  to  rational  or  traditional  argu-
ments based  on  Scripture  and  tradition^  philosophy  and
reason^  or  experience  and  perception.

The  author's  meaning,  which  is  not  very  clearly  expressed
here,  appears  to  be  that  while  the  Babis  constantly  quote
texts  from  the  Old  and  New  Testaments  and  the  Qur'dn
when  these  serve  their  purpose,  they  refuse  to  listen  to  such
texts  as  run  contrary  to  their  beliefs,  on  the  ground  that  the
later  and  more  perfect  Theophany  is  its  own  proof  (as  the
sun  shining  in  heaven  is  its  own  proof)  and  that  earlier  and
lesser  manifestations  are  proved  by  it  rather  than  it  by  them.

20.  Their  assertion  that  the  Jewish  and  Christian  Scriptures

have  not  been  tampered  with.

It  is  implied  in  the  Qur'dn^  and  Traditions,  and  almost
universally  believed  by  the  Muslims,  that  the  Scriptures  now
possessed  by  the  Jews  and  Christians  have  been  corrupted
and  mutilated,  especially  as  regards  the  prophecies  of  Mu-
hammad's- mission  which  they  were  alleged  to  contain.
The  Babis  hold  the  contrary  view,  asserting  that  no  people

^  See  especially  ii,  39  ;  iii,  63^ — 4  ;  and  iv,  48  and  the  commentaries
thereon.


334     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

possessing  a  Scripture  which  they  regard  as  God's  Word
would  willingly  and  deliberately  tamper  with  its  text;  and
they  take  a  similarly  indulgent  view  of  the  Zoroastrian  Scrip-
tures. Their  object  in  this,  says  our  author,  is  to  flatter  and
gratify  these  people  and  win  them  over  to  their  doctrines,  in
which  aim  they  have  had  no  small  success.

21.     Their  pretended  tolerance  and  gentleness  towards  all.

Baha'u'llah's  commendation  of  tolerance,  charity  and
loving  kindness  towards  all  men,  irrespective  of  race  and
creed,  is  constant  and  continuous,  but  the  author  (with
some  reason)  maintains  that  the  practice  of  his  followers,
especially  in  relation  to  the  Muslims,  more  particularly  the
Shi'ites,  is  very  far  removed  from  their  professions.

2  2.     Their  adherence  to  the  heresy  called  Bada.

The  verb  badd^  yabdu  in  Arabic  means  "  to  appear,"
and  with  the  preposition  li  "  to  occur  to,"  of  a  new  idea
occurring  to  a  person.  In  theological  terminology  the  verbal
noun  al-badd  denotes  the  heresy  of  those  who  assert  that
God  can  change  his  mind,  especially  in  the  designation  of  a
prophet  or  Imam.  The  classical  case  of  this  use  of  the  term
is  a  traditional  saying  of  the  Sixth  Imam  of  the  Shi'a,  Ja'far
as-Sadiq,  who  intended  or  desired  that  his  son  Isma'il  should
succeed  him  as  Imam,  but  subsequently  bequeathed  the
I  mam  ate  to  his  other  son  Miisa,  called  d\-Kdzimy  Q.or\-
cerning  which  substitution  he  is  alleged  to  have  said  "  God
never  changed  His  mind  about  anything  as  He  did  about
IsmaHl^."  Thereafter  this  doctrine  became  very  famous  in
Islam  as  characteristic  of  certain  heretical  sects,  notably  the

'  J^toti-^i  ^^5  a)  I ju  U^  ^  ^^i  4.JU  t ju  U  ^


X.      THIRTY   HERETICAL   DOCTRINES  335

Ghuldt,  or  extreme  Shi'ites,  of  whom  ash  Shahristani  says
in  his  "Book  of  Sects"  (^Kitdbu l-Milal  wa'n-NihaP)  that  all
branches  of  them  agree  in  four  cardinal  heresies,  viz.  metem-
psychosis {tandsukh),  incarnation (-^w/z^/),  return^  {raj^ai),  and
change  in  the  Divine  intention  {Ifudd).  The  author  discusses
this  question  very  fully  and  repudiates  this  meaning  of  badd
as  applied  to  God.  He  says  that  the  Babis  cling  to  it  so
that,  when  confronted  by  arguments  as  to  the  signs  accom-
panying the  Advent  of  the  Promised  Imam  in  the  last  days,
they  may  say,  "  Yes,  this  was  what  God  originally  intended,
but  He  changed  His  mind  and  altered  His  plan."

23.     Their  assertion  that  no  one  can  falsely  claim  to  be
a  Prophet  or  Imdm.  v  "'

In  support  of  this  view  the  Babis  adduce  Qur'dn  Ixix,
44—6,  which  Sale  translates:  "If  Muhammad  had  forged
any  part  of  these  discoveries  concerning  us,  verily  We  had
taken  him  by  the  right  hand,  and  had  cut  in  sunder  the  vein
of  his  heart ;  neither  would  we  have  withheld  any  of  you
from  chastising  him."  This  means,  they  say,  that  God  would
not  suffer  a  false  prophet  to  live,  or  his  religion  and  law  to
continue  on  earth.  (They  even  go  so  far  as  to  say  that  as
the  proof  of  the  architect  is  his  ability  to  build  a  house,  and
of  the  physician  to  heal  the  sick,  so  the  proof  of  the  prophet
lies  in  his  ability  to  found  a  religion ;  and  this  is  what  they
mean  by  their  favourite  phrase  of  niifudh-i-kaldm,  or  the
compelling  and  penetrating  power  of  his  creative  Word,  con-
cerning which  doctrine  see  the  article  immediately  following.
Hence  the  Babis,  unlike  the  Muhammadans,  are  compelled
to  admit  that  such  religious  leaders  as  Zoroaster  and  Buddha
were  true  prophets.     Compare  article  25  below.)

^  See  Cureton's  edition,  p.  132.  '^  See  p.  330  supra.


336      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

24.  Their  assertion  that  the  froof  of  a  Prophet  lies  not  in  the
eloquence  hut  in  the  compelling  power  of  his  utterance.

According  to  the  Babis  the  rniraculous  quality  of  the
Qur'dn  was  not  its  eloquence  (fasdhat  wa  baldghat),  but  its
compelling  power  {nufiidh^  gdhiriyyat),  so  that,  for  example,
the  Prophet  ordered  all  his  followers  to  fast  during  the
month  of  Ramazan,  and  to  this  day,  for  more  than  thirteen
centuries,  this  hard  discipline  has  been  scrupulously  observed
by  millions  of  believers.  The  author  repudiates  this  view,
which  he  says  that  the  Babis  have  taught  in  order  to  divert
attention  from  the  lack  of  eloquence  and  even  of  grammatical
accuracy  of  their  own  Scriptures.

25.  Their  assertion  that  the  Founders  of  all  religions  were
really  P^'ophets^  and  their  books  Divine  Revelations^  and
that  only  the  subsequent  idolatrous  accretions  were  ?iot

from  God.
This  doctrine  the  author  ascribes  not  so  much  to  the
Babis  and  Baha'is  in  general  as  to  their  celebrated  apologist
Mirza  Abu'1-Fazl  of  Gulpayagan,  who  explicitly  lays  it  down
in  his  book  entitled  Kitdbii  I- FardHd^ ,  declaring  that  all  the
religions  of  the  world,  Brahminism,  Buddhism,  Zoroastri-
anism,  and  even  Fetish-worship  and  Idolatry,  were  originally
based  on  a  true  Revelation,  though  they  may  have  become
corrupted  in  course  of  time.

26.  Their  assertion  that  the  promised  Messiah^  Mahdi^  or
Qa'im  will  not  be,  as  the  Muhammadans  imagine,  a
victorious  and  all-compelling  conqueror,  but  one  oppressed
(mazlilm)  and  constrained  (maqhur).

The  author  says  that  the  early  Babis  who  fought  at
Shaykh  Tabarsi,  Zanjan,  Nayriz  and  elsewhere  believed,  in

^  See  p.  196  supra.


X.      THIRTY    HERETICAL   DOCTRINES  337

common  with  their  antagonists,  that  the  Imam  Mahdi  or
Qd'tm  (by  whom  they  understood  the  Bab)  should  be  a
conqueror  and  rule  by  virtue  of  the  sword  ;  and  that  only
later,  when  they  were  defeated  and  their  hopes  and  aspira-
tions disappointed,  did  they  evolve  this  theory  of  a  patient,
gentle,  persecuted  Messiah.

27.  Their  assertion  that  the  interpretation  of  the  prophecies
given  in  one  Dispensation  only  becomes  clear  in  the  suc-
ceeding one.

The  purpose  of  this  doctrine,  as  of  the  doctrine  of  Badd
noticed  above  (article  22),  is,  according  to  our  author,  to
evade  the  argument  of  those  who  seek  to  prove  that  the
appearance  of  the  Bab  was  not  accompanied  by  the  signs
foretold  as  heralding  the  advtnt  of  the  Mahdi.  (The  Babis
on  their  part  appeal  to  the  history  of  Christ,  who  was  the
Messiah  expected  by  the  Jews,  though  He  did  not  appear  as
they  expected.  The  signs  foretold  as  heralding  his  advent
were  duly  manifested,  but  in  an  allegorical,  not  in  a  literal
way.)

28.  Their  assertion  that  the  Mahdi  or  Qd'im  is  not  771  ere ly
a  Divine  Messenger  but  a  Manifestation  of  the  Deity
Hiinself.

It  does  not  suffice  the  Babis  to  claim  that  the  Bab  was
actually  the  expected  Mahdi,  Qa'im,  or  Twelfth  Imam;  they
go  further,  and  assert  that  he  is  the  bringer  of  a  new  Dispen-
sation, a  new  l^aw  and  a  new  Scripture  abrogating  those  of
Muhammad.    To  the  clear  declaration^  "What  Muhammad

^  1      OiO        0^  y       S    "  •'        J  i    ^  >■        <         ^  \      6tO        0  ^  <f  0    ^    ^  Cl    *     i       3    ^    ^

A.ff^Sji^  jJJ^j^ft.  A*olj.».  J  A.o-jA)i>^  j^J  J^l».  JL-O*".^  J'^J^  ^

K.  B.  22


338     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

hath  sanctioned  will  remain  lawful  until  the  Resurrection  Day,
and  what  he  hath  forbidden  unlawful,"  they  oppose  certain
ambiguous  traditions  which  speak  of  the  Mahdi  as  bringing
"a  new  law,"  "a  new  Book,"  or  "a  new  Dispensation,"
which  traditions  are  susceptible  of  a  different  explanation.

29.  Their  assertion  that  the  imagined  retur7i  of  the  Mahdi^
the  Messiah  and  the  Imam  Husayn  is  really  a  re-mani-
festation of  the  same  prototypes^  not  an  actual  return  of

these  individuals.

This  is  practically,  to  some  extent  at  any  rate,  a  repetition
of  article  11  dealing  with  the  Babi  doctrine  of  "Return"
{Rafat).  It  is  very  characteristic  of  Babi  thought,  and  I
have  discussed  it  pretty  fully  in  my  translation  of  the  New
History^  pp.  334  et  seqq.  It  was  in  that  sense,  no  doubt,
that  Khayru'llah  told  his  American  proselytes  (p.  118  supra)
that  "  Abraham,  Jacob,  Moses,  Joshua  and  Daniel  are  re-
incarnated and  are  at  Acre,  the  '  Holy  Place.' "  In  our
author's  terminology,  they  hold  that  the  qualities  of  Christ-
hood  {Masihiyyat),  Mahdi-hood  {Mahdawiyyat),  Qa'im-hood
{QdHmiyyat)  and  Husayn-hood  {Husayniyyat),  if  these  ex-
pressions may  be  permitted,  are  generic  {nawH),  not  personal
{shakhsi).

30.  Their  doctrine  that  God,  the  Eternal  Essence,  is  beyofid
all  human  cognizance  and  defaiition,  and  that  we  can
only  see,  meet,  know,  revere,  worship  and  obey  Hi7n  in  His
Manifestations,  to  wit  the  Prophets,  Imams,  "  Gates, '^  etc.

This  doctrine  is  also  discussed  in  the  New  History
(P-  331)  ^"<i  elaborated  in  the  Bab's  Persian  Baydft,  to
which  references  are  given  in  Vol.  xv  of  the  E.  /.  W.  Gibb
Memorial  Series  (text  of  Mirza  Jani's  NuqtatuH-Kdf),  p.  Ixvi.


X.      THIRTY   HERETICAL   DOCTRINES  339

It  is  Strongly  denounced  by  our  author  as  the  quintessence
of  heresy,  leading  to  an  anthropomorphism  which  oscillates
between  polytheism  and  atheism.  He  concludes  this  sec-
tion of  his  work  (p.  279)  by  saying  that  this  list  of  Babi
heresies  is  by  no  means  exhaustive,  but  lack  of  time  prevents
him  from  enlarging  it,  though  incidental  allusion  will  be
made  elsewhere  to  other  heretical  tenets  of  the  sect.


22—2


XI


SELECTED  POEMS  BY  QURRATU'L-'AYN,
NABIL  AND  OTHER  BABIS.


The  following  Persian  poem  was  given  to  me  in  manu-
script by  the  late  Shaykh  Ahmad  Richioi  Kirman,the  ill-fated
son-in-law  and  follower  of  Subh-i-Azal,  who  told  me  that  the
poem  (of  which,  so  far  as  I  know,  no  other  copy  exists)  was
composed  by  Qurratu'l-'Ayn,  and  that  the  manuscript  which
I  now  publish  is  in  her  own  handwriting^  Without  being
able  to  guarantee  either  of  these  assertions,  I  am  inclined  to
credit  them,  for  the  poem  is  evidently  by  a  Babi,  and  the  hand-
writing appears  to  be  a  woman's,  closely  resembling  that  of
a  letter  from  Qurratu'l-*Ayn  to  Mulla  Shaykh  'Ali  (called
Jandb-i-Azini)  given  to  me  by  Subh-i-Azal,  and  reproduced
in  fac-simile,  with  printed  text  and  translation,  in  my  trans-
lation of  the  New  History  (pp.  434 — 44 1 ).  The  two  or  three
other  poems  ascribed  to  her  are  ghazals  written  in  the  Kdmil
metre.  This,  on  the  other  hand,  is  a  mathnawi  of  the  kind
known  as  Sdqi-ndma^  or  Invocations  to  the  Cup-bearer,  such
as  Hafiz  and  other  lyrical  poets  have  written.

^  It  was  enclosed  in  a  letter  written  from  Constantinople  on  Sept.  19,
1892,  and  received  by  me  five  days  later.  The  writer  says  that  in
response  to  his  request  his  friends  in  Persia  had  sent  one  leaf  in  "the
blessed  writing  of  Jan^b-i-T^hira,  who  herself  transcribed  some  of  her
works."


344      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION
,jL^;kj^l   Aj   ,J.£>  ^j3  j^^^i'      '0^^-3j-®  >:>   lAs>*-:»  ^  J   ^^5^t>*■

j-*j  J  >o-^3A  >-5  J-:*  j.-^3  v«^s^  J      'j->t  ^jLo-*-  O-t^^J^   L^Wv^  J

>Ia-Lw;  A-.0-A  ^^^   3^  **-?>-5  J       '^1a2^  J^  3»i  j^^  >-^  ^^-^J"^

i>-H  o-t-^'  ?r^-*  >>  >v-*  y^    '  ^>H  OtJ^  b]  w^A*>-«  Jj^  j'  !/-»

^  This  is   perhaps  an   allusion    to    Qurratu'l-'Ayn's   title  Jandb-i-
Tdhira  ("  Her  Holiness  the  Pure").
■^  i.e.  jbj\jJ  =jtjk^  ljH«


cy


I


<^


rt..


c-


'(.'


v«


<-^.  '&.


fd^:^^  ^-


■\c


'^^\^-


-r^:;^       -^M.   C^  ^:<^


H-^^^NJ


\^


C        <^  -


'TL


L^  ,  .       On  *»*  ^        ^^*^^        ^-'^


Fac-simile  of  alleged  autograph  poem  by  Qurratu'l-'Ayn.

To  face  p.  344.


i


XI.      SELECTED   POEMS  345

'O^ji'  »iUi  ji  .iAXo  jk.j^^  A^     ' «J>i'*i  j**^'  >^   c>^*«^   L5^^

'jk^j  C^jJL^  ^*^j^ji^  JW  A,^        '  Jk^^^      6^      L^SLrf      O^^     ^JJ^laifc  J

'^15  ^»-A  3  »^   ^  ^-i^J--^      '^^    CH^    J'^    **'^''    L5^>»

^  There  may  be  an  allusion  here  to  the  Babf  assembly  at  Badasht,
where  the  meeting  of  Qurratu'l-'Ayn  and  Janab-i-Quddus  Mas  hailed  as
"the  conjunction  of  the  Sun  and  Moon."  See  JVew  History,  p.  359,
n.  2  ad  calc.


346     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION


wl

'  dJcJIf     t JUJ^.A     UbljCA.     J*^-*-

wl

'  tj-J  ^L-^t  ,>_ioLo-J  jj^.-.^^

^jiJkS    «t».j    w>t3   j»y»ia.«o    15-^3-^


wl

JUa.  olj^  <^^JU^  J^  >^  >«^  ^


f  wl

^r  wl  <«

L-O— id)     ^J^i^yS   ^3-J    J-y-l

wl


^  The  rare  Azalf  controversial  work   entitled  Hasht  Bihisht  (see
J.  R.  A.  S.  for  1892,  pp.  680 — 697)  complains  that  Baha'u'llah,  not  con-
tent with  making  himself  God,  and  even  a  "  Creator  of  gods,"  assigns
the  latter  title  "even  to  his  meanest  servants."     It  quotes  the  Baha'f
poet  Nabil  as  saying  :

'  ^t  J^ft.  e^>^  >^^^  >A^.»^^  <aLlwt>  jj  djkji^

' '  Men  say  that  Thou  art  God,  and  I  am  moved  to  anger :  remove  the
veil  and  submit  no  longer  to  the  disgrace  of  [mere]  Godhead !  "

*^  These  verses  appear  to  be  addressed  to  Subh-i-Azal,  who  is  also
entitled  "the  Eternal  Fruit"  {Thatnara-i-Azaliyya).


XI.      SELECTED   POEMS  347

'  *  "

'vftjilai"^  j^l>»;i£>  4.0A  ;kJ>*-»  A^    '->*/^  vftjtrf  \Jk^  jI  ^Ufc.  jJCj
'-.«^  C>^  >*;^  ''^^■^^•'^  >* V  J

Though  Qurratu'l-'Ayn's  fame  as  a  poetess  is  consider-
able, I  know  only  two  other  poems  commonly  ascribed  to
her,  both  ghazals  composed  in  the  A'fi/w// metre,  which, though
common  in  Arabic,  is  little  used  in  Persian  save  by  a  few
mystical  poets  like  Jami.  Both  of  these  poems  are  very
fine,  being  only  marred  by  the  incorrectness  of  the  Arabic
phrases  which  they  contain — a  defect  only  too  common  in
Babi  writings.  In  spite  of  this  I  think  them  worth  pre-
serving, and,  though  I  have  published  both  of  them  before,
the  first  in  they.  R.  A.  S.  for  1899  (Vol.  xxi,  pp.  936 — 7  and
991 — 2)  and  the  second  in  my  edition  and  translation  of  the
Traveller's  Narrative  (Vol.  ii,  pp.  314 — 316),  I  here  reprint
them,  together  with  the  versified  translations,  in  which  I  have
made  a  few  trifling  alterations.

|i^  "^t    3vfr*Jt    J-rf';iL^    C-^aJ)    ^^    ^W*>^


348     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION
Ua*.  dL.0^  ^jil£9  djJj  (j>^^  4.o-(^  ^<iiU  ojkij

^y   L5^  J   A)'^  JnjA^  J   ,^AJJft-9  j.^-i^  J-0*  <*^

{Translation.^

The  thralls  of  yearning  love  constrain  in  the  bonds  of  pain

and  calamity
These  broken-hearted  lovers  of  thine  to  yield  their  lives  in

their  zeal  for  thee^
Though  with  sword  in  hand  my  Darling  stand  with  intent

to  slay,  though  I  sinless  be,
If  it  pleases  him,  this  tyrant's  whim,  I  am  well  content  with

his  tyranny.
As  in  sleep  I  lay  at  the  break  of  day  that  cruel  charmer

came  to  me,
And  in  the  grace  of  his  form  and  face  the  dawn  of  the  morn

1  seemed  to  see.
The  musk  of  Cathay  might  perfume  gain  from  the  scent

those  fragrant  tresses  rain,

^  This  poem  is  presumably  addressed  to  the  B^b.


XI.      SELECTED   POEMS  349

While  his  eyes  demolish  a  faith  in  vain  attacked  by  the

pagans  of  Tartary^
With  you,  who  contemn  both  love  and  wine^  for  the  hermit's

cell  and  the  zealot's  shrine,
What  can  I  do,  for  our  Faith  divine  you  hold  as  a  thing  of

infamy  ?
The  tangled  curls  of  thy  darling's  hair,  and  thy  saddle  and

steed  are  thy  only  care ;
In  thy  heart  the  Absolute  hath  no  share,  nor  the  thought  of

the  poor  man's  poverty.
Sikandar's*  pomp  and  display  be  thine,  the    Qaiandar's^

habit  and  way  be  mine  ;
That,  if  it  please  thee,  I  resign,  while  this,  though  bad,  is

enough  for  me.
Pass  from  the  station  of  "  I "  and  "  We,"  and  choose  for

thy  home  Nonentity,
For  when  thou  hast  done  the  like  of  this,  thou  shalt  reach

the  supreme  Felicity.

The  second  of  these  two  odes  or  ghazals  is  as  follows  :
^JUfrt   ^^JlodLi?    cSjsdi  3  <L^j^\   '•^V^'J  Oljc»J
^i   L5^   **^    Cih*   L5^J^-*^>;    ^^^-^^  ^}   ^  J

5jj  !i^  s^'^'O  jJj  ^».  A^  3j-}^  **-*  O'  4>^  3  O^
*%)jSi)  J4v-^1  Ot  A^  jji  jLi  AyAy5  J  yiijo

1  i.e.  the  religion  of  Islam,  which,  having  survived  the  terrible  Tartar
or  Mongol  invasion  of  the  thirteenth  century,  fell  before  the  Bdb.

2  '  •  Love  and  wine "  are  to  be  understood  here  in  a  mystical  sense.
^  Alexander  the  Great.

*  A  Qalandar  is  a  kind  of  darwtsh  or  religious  mendicant.


350     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION
O^  ^>i  3  **^   L>*  J^***   L5»  *-^  ^^^^  **^^   ^*^  ^"^

Ml  J  ^  ^

Ji  j^    ^4jij  ^^3j    j^j-jft.    u^i    A^    >5^    Afifc.
^Lo^ji£»   c^!>»»  J   ««--«'^   <*-oA  J^    (J-^   O^^   0'>^   ^^

(Translation.)

The  effulgence  of  thy  face  flashed  forth  and  the  rays  of  thy

visage  arose  on  high ;
Then  speak  the  word,  "  Am  I  not  your  LordV  and  "  Thou

art,  Thou  art  T^  we  will  all  reply  ^.
Thy  trumpet-call  "  Am  I  not  ?  "  to  greet  how  loud  the  drums

of  affliction^  beat !
At  the  gates  of  my  heart  there  tramp  the  feet  and  camp  the

hosts  of  calamity.
That  fair  moon's  love  is  enough,   I  trow,  for  me,   for  he

laughed  at  the  haiP  of  woe,
And  triumphant  cried,  as  he  sunk  below,  ''The  Martyr  of

Karbalaam  IM"

*  See  Qur'dn  vii,  171.  The  meaning  is,  "  If  you  claim  to  be  God,
we  will  all  accept  your  claim."

2  There  is  a  play  on  the  word  bald,  which  means  "yea"  and  also
"  affliction."

'  Said,  which  I  have  translated  "hail,"  means  a  general  invitation
or  summons.

^  i.e.  the  Imdm  Husayn,  of  whom  several  of  the  Bibf  leaders  claimed
to  be  a  "  Return."     See  p.  338  supra.


XI.      SELECTED   POEMS  35 1

When  he  heard  my  death-dirge  drear,  for  me  he  prepared,

and  arranged  my  gear  for  me  ;
He  advanced  to  mourn  at  my  bier  for  me,  and  o'er  me  wept

right  bitterly.
What  harm  if  thou  with  the  fire  of  amaze  should'st  set  my

Sinai-heart  ablaze,
Which  thou  first  mad'st  fast  in  a  hundred  ways  but  to  shake

and  shatter  so  ruthlessly  ?
To  convene  the  guests  to  his  feast  of  love  all  night  from  the

angel  host  above
Peals  forth  this  summons  ineffable,  "  Hail,  sorrow-stricken

fraternity!"  ..    -   .    :

Can  a  scale  of  the  fish  of  amaze  like  thee  aspire  to  enquire

of  Being's  Sea  ?
Sit  mute  like  Tahira,  hearkening  to  the  whale  of  "No"  and

its  ceaseless  sigh\

There  is  another  Babi  poem  in  the  same  metre  and
rhyme  which  is  sometimes  ascribed  to  Qurratu'l-'Ayn,  but
more  often,  and  with  greater  probability,  to  Nabil  of  Zarand,
who  at  one  time  advanced  a  "  claim  "  on  his  own  behalf,  but
afterwards  became  the  devoted  follower  and,  if  the  term  may
be  permitted,  the  poet-laureate  of  Baha'u'Uah.  This  poem  I
published  with  a  prose  translation  in  they.  R.  A.  S.  for  1892,
pp.  323 — 5,  together  with  another,  a  tarkib-band  of  unknown
authorship,  in  praise  of  Baha'u'Uah.  Its  boastful  character
may  be  judged  by  the  three  following  verses,  which  are  not
devoid  of  a  certain  grandeur  :

*^\  ^  cua>..«  J  jJbjJ  ^^  o-«  jM»Lft  4.01  yb  A^

^  i.e.  "Thou  art  a  mere  tiny  scale  on  the  smallest  fish  of  the  Ocean
of  Being,  and  even  the  Leviathans  of  that  Ocean  can  but  proclaim  their
own  insignificance  and  non-existence."


352      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

(Translation^
If  anyone  walks  in  my  path  I  will  cry  to  him  that  he  may  be

warned
That  whoever  becomes  my  lover  shall  not  escape  from  sorrow

and  affliction.
If  anyone  obeys  me  not  and  does  not  grasp  the  cord  of  my

protection^
I  will  drive  him  far  from  my  sanctuary,  I  will  cast  him  in

wrath  to  the  winds  of  "  No^."
I  am  Eternal  from  the  Everlasting  World ;  I  am  the  One

from  the  Realms  of  the  Limitless  ;
I  am  come  [to  seek  for]  the  people  of  the  Spirit,  and  towards

me  indeed  do  they  advance'*.

Yet  a  fourth  poem  in  the  same  rhyme  and  Kdmil  metre,
of  uncertain  authorship,  occurs  in  a  manuscript  (BBP.  7)
which  I  brought  back  from  Persia,  and  which  is  described
in  they.  R.  A.  S.  for  1892,  pp.  444 — 9;  and  I  have  copies
of  several  more  contained  in  a  manuscript  bearing  the  class-
mark  P.  92  kindly  lent  to  me  many  years  ago  by  the  late
M.  Ch.  Schefer,  to  whom  it  belonged.  Indeed  it  would  be
easy  to  compile  a  fair-sized  anthology  of  Babi  poems,  but  in

^  Or  Saintship,  for  Wildyat\\2i%  both  meanings.  Amongst  the  Arabs
he  who  would  seek  the  protection  of  some  great  Shaykh  or  Amfr  catches
hold  of  one  of  the  cords  of  his  tent,  crying  And  dakhiluk!  "  I  place
myself  under  thy  protection  !  "

2  Not-Being,  or  Negation,  or  Annihilation.

^  The  Arabic  words  with  which  this  line  concludes  are,  as  is  too
often  the  case  with  the  Babi's,  hopelessly  ungrammatical.


XT.      SELECTED   POEMS  353

this  place  I  shall  only  add  two  of  the  best,  both  by  Nabil.
The  first  is  a  very  fine  address  to  Baha'u  Hah,  in  the  same
Kdmil  metre  for  which  the  Babis  show  so  marked  a  pre-
dilection. The  following  English  rendering  of  the  five
opening  verses,  intended  to  give  some  idea  of  the  form
as  well  as  the  sense  of  the  original,  was  read  before  the
Persia  Society  on  April  26,  191 2,  and  was  afterwards  pub-
lished for  them  by  Mr  John  Hogg  of  13,  Paternoster  Row.

Though  the  Night  of  Parting  endless  seem  as  thy  night-black

hair,  Baha,  Baha,
Yet  we  meet  at  last,  and  the  gloom  is  past  in  thy  lightning's

glare,  Baha,  Baha !
To  my  heart  from  thee  was  a  signal  shown  that  I  to  all  men

should  make  known
That  they,  as  the  ball  to  the  goal  doth  fly,  should  to  thee

repair,  Baha,  Baha !
At  this   my  call  from  the  quarters  four  men's  hearts  and

souls  to  thy  quarters  pour  :
What,  forsooth,  could  attract  them  more  than  that  region

fair,  Baha,  Baha  ?
The  World  hath  attained  to  Heaven's  worth,  and  a  Paradise

is  the  face  of  earth
Since  at  length  thereon  a  breeze  hath  blown  from  thy  nature

rare,  Baha,  Baha !
Bountiful  art   thou,   as   all   men   know :   at  a  glance  two

Worlds  thou  would'st  e'en  bestow
On  the  suppliant  hands  of  thy  direst  foe,  if  he  makes  his

prayer,  Baha,  Baha  !


lyj  l^j  Ojj  ^J$JJ  J  jJt  >oU3  A^  UJJI   ^5

B.  B.  23


354     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

lyj  l^  03.£»  j^Ca  Vt!>^  >»•  Jo^j  J--J  A^
JD  >;^  y  {^3^  O  V  3  J>  ^  jK^  J  ^h^  J

d»A-w   s^j-t^j  {^3J  C^.»t>yj  3»i   dfcXw  CHj^  JkX^  u^J^   A^
^j  Ijj  ^>»-  Ol-o--^  Ji   ^^-*J   »^J3  iS3^  3»-

J^  <S3^  3^>^  1^  <»^  j>^>ji  jJ^  O^   ^^3^

Ml  Wl

3^   KS3^   ^^^^*^^r:^3J    *oA  ^3   \^^  ^IL    JU^   4.0^

0-«  w>W^  ^3J  3^J^  J  0-«  '^W*"  ^>«^«^  J


XI.      SELECTED   POEMS  355

-  ^  ^  ^

d>j  ^   3  J>a»-^    'j-«   <*^    OAJ  J"^*!^  J>^    '>*    **^

j^jji.  jJo  33J  lj-«  *£»  ,^_j^  J*xj  3W«  c^^  J

Ij^      lyj      ^>*J      ^     ^    j      >^      olio      3      Ot^   >©5W      A^

^j   l^   O>o^   ^)  y^  >^  OU-«   ^>J  >*^   A^
l^   l^  O^  ^A>   CHJ^^  ^>   >>^  "-r-*^  *^


15;3  >^j^  w>L«  jUj  U-3J  y  tp  ^^  jW

23—3


356     MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BABI  RELIGION

L5*^3**  3  ?";i'***'^  ^'^^  3ii  Ch*^  sIU***'  ^^>:0_53  ^jlJi^o-I»flj.  Ar?  .^.oy^
^U-)l   ^b-^  J-^^   \^^>    O^W"  iJ^-*^  J>*^U5  j5t

ft

^  0    J

j^^l    j^UJ   C-.9J   *Xwj    OjUo    dju    'jOW-  3>*^   <*^

J^>    JU^    i,^-*??^    ^^    *^^  jjX«    djLw    JJktj   3J    J3

U— ^    -^^    *>-«'   jAUs    d^  jXXa  ^^^jJ  JJ^^J  ^^**>\  J

t*»»J^  j^^  A^^  v:xo-»o  j^U^Uo  ,j£>  jjc^  L^
^jr*^  ^^t^)  ^y^  f'j^  J  «A  0 g*»"<  L>!>v^  *^^'  **^  *V

1  ^«/^a«  liii,  8.


-    >


XI.      SELECTED   POEMS  357


j^Vt   Jl„^  s.,^  j\  >^   j^U^  j-o5  j^U--  (J>i

>«  »       >d

juot    ^2>A;>*^    O^!/^    kXoA^    JL«1     y^J-t*^    ^(^y^  jyif^

^  J  ^  ^  f  Vi  Ml

^-j^J©   C^A-j^  J^3^  L>«*^  **^'   c>!i*^  ^J^JJ«J  3  ^  J

IjU  w)lw  ^Jftff.^  ^L.^  \^^  j^^'-^  ^^  l4J^

ULft  ^Ufc.   ij.^^  o'jtJ  i^'^-*^  J  ^^'  ^J  *^

There  is  another  poem  by  Nabil  which,  though  singularly
devoid  of  literary  merit,  is  valuable  for  its  contents,  since  it
gives  a  chronology  of  Baha'u'llah's  life  from  his  birth  on
Muharram  2,  1233  (=  Nov.  12,  181 7)  to  his  arrival  at  'Akka
on  the  1 2th  of  Jumada  i^  1285  (=Aug,  30,  1868).  This
poem,  which  comprises  19  stanzas,  was  written  a  year  and
four  months  later,  in  Shaban,  1286  (=  Nov.-Dec.  1869),
when  Baha'u'llah  was  54  years  of  age,  and  Nabil  himself,  as
he  informs  us  in  the  last  stanza,  just  40,  so  that  he  must  have
been  born  about  1 246/1 830-1.  The  dates  given  in  this
poem,  which  I  published  with  a  translation  in  they^  R.  A.  S.
for  1889,  pp.  9*83 — 990,  agree  for  the  mcst  part  with  those
given  by  Mirza  Muhammad  Jawad  in  the  first  section  of
this  book.


358      MATERIALS  FOR  STUDY  OF  THE  BAbI  RELIGION

Muhammadan  compilers  of  anthologies  and  memoirs  of
poets  generally  ignore  the  Babi  poets,  but  a  short  notice  is
devoted  to  Qurratu'l-'Ayn  in  the  Tadhkiratu' l-Khawdlin,  or
"  Memoirs  of  illustrious  women,"  lithographed  at  Bombay
in  1306/1888,  pp.  155 — 157.  It  contains,  however,  no  new
facts.


INDEX


INDEX


'Abb^s  Aqa  (assassin  of  Aminu's-
Sultdn),  295  ad  calc.

'Abbas' Efendi  (son  of  Baha'u'lldh,
entitled  Ghusn-i-A^zam,  'Ad-
du'l-Bahd,  etc.),  supposed  au-
thor of  Traveller's  Narrative,
4  ad  calc,  at  Baghdad,  17;
on  voyage  to  'Akka,  32  ;  34
ad  calc. ;  arrested  in  connection
with  assassination  of  AzaHs
at  'Akka,  55-6 ;  residence  at
' Akka,  59 ;  his  mother,  brother
and  sister,  62 ;  his  ambition
made  responsible  for  the  schism
after  Baha'u'Uah's  death,  74-
93;  his  claims,  77  et  seqq.;
his  indifference  to  the  death  of
his  brother  Mirza  Ziya'u'llah,
85-7;  receives  first  letter  from
I.  G.  Khayru'lldh  as  to  suc-
cess of  American  propaganda,
95;  115;  116;  regarded  as  a
re-incarnation  of  Christ  by  the
American  Babfs,  118;  form
of  allegiance  to  —  signed  by
American  believers,  121;  123;
identified  with  Christ,  138;
approves  of  American  propa-
ganda, 144  ;  liberty  restricted
in  April,  1901,  147  ad  calc,
148  ;  in  American  newspapers,
150  ;  152  ;  153  ;  attempts
to  restore  Khayru'lMh's  al-
legiance to  —  154-5;  156;
titles  given  to  — ,  159  ;  letter
to  Hajji  Mirza  Hasan  of  Khu-
rasan, 164-7;  171;  "Table
Talks  of—,"  177-8;  his  travels


in  Europe  in  1911-14, 180;  por-
trait of —  180;  183;  185;  an-
nounced to  lecture  in  America
in  June,  1911,  183;  189;  191;
198  ;  letter  to  his  aunt,  227  ;
230;  letters  from  —  to  the
author,  234-5;  ditto,  295-8;
kinsmen  and  children,  320-2

'Abbas  al-Fdtimf,  192

'Abbas,  H^jji  —  of  Baghdad,
called  Nasir  the  Arab,  53

'Abbds,  Sayyid  Mfrza  —  (Baha'u
'llah's  father),  3.  See  Mirzd
Buzurg

'Abbas-qulf  Kh^n  Larijanf,  241

'Abdu'1-Ahad  of  Zanjan  (Azali),

'Abdu'i  'Alf  (son  of  Subh-i-Azal),

234,  "^i^  ad  calc,  322
'Abdu'l-'Aziz,  Sultan  — ,  15,  26,

31.  51.  59
'Abdu'i- Baha.    See  'Abbas  Efendi
'Abdu'l-Ghaffar,  Aqa  —  (exile  to

Cyprus),  44
'Abdu'l-Hamfd,   Sultan  — ,   213,

224
'Abdu'l-Husayn,    Shaykh   —   of

Tihran,  Shi'ite  divine,  12,  13,

•4.  37

'Abdu'l-Karfm  of  Qazwfri,  Mulld
— ,  entitled  Mirza  Ahmad,  20

Abdu'l-Karfm  of  Tihran  (promi-
nent Bah^'l  in  Egypt),  93,  95,
no,  143-6,  151,  169,  170,
196

'Abdu'i- Karim  the  turner,  55

'Abdu'llah,  Hdjji  Shaykh  —  of
M^zandar^n,  189


362


INDEX


'Abdu'llah  Pasha,  Palace  of  —
CAkka),  58

'Abdu'l-Majfd  of  Khurasan  (martyr
and  father  of  Mirza  Badi'),  40

'Ahdu'l-Majid  b.  Hajji  Muham-
mad of  Nfshapur,  238

*Abdu'n-Nabf  the  tailor  (martyr),

4J
'Abdu'r-Rahfm  Mushki-bdf,  304
'Abdu'r-Rahim,  Hajji  Shaykh  — ,

192-3
'Abdu'r-Rahim  of  Yazd,  41
'Abdu'r-Rasul  of  Kashan  (martyr),

38
'Abdu's-Salam,  Shaykh  — ,  196
*Abdu'l-Wahhab-i-J/2<«j/?/,  Mirza

— ,  208
'Abdu'l- Wahhab  of  Zanjan  (exiled

to  Khartum),  34
Abel,  134

Aberson,  Mrs  — ,  107
Abhdru  l-Quddusiyya,  209-11

Abhar,  Ibnu'l ,  102

Abi  'Ataba  CAkka),  89
Abjad  notation,  25,  n.  i  ad  calc.
"Abomination  of  Desolation,"  140
Abraham,  118,  137,  140,  338
Abu  Basir  of  Zanjan  (martyr),  36
Abu'1-Fazl   of  Gulp^yagan,    no,

146,  151,  153,   158,    170,  190,

195,  196,  336
Abu'1-Huda  (astrologer  to  Sultan

'Abdu'l-Hamid),  224
Abu'l-Ma'ali',  Shaykhu'r-Ra'fs  — ,

224
Abu  Muslim,  285
Abu'l-Qasim    al  -  Hasani    al  -  Hu-

saynf,  258-9
Abu'l-Qasim    (servant    of  Baha'u

'llah),  7
Abu'l-Qasim,   Hajji  —  of  Isfahan

(exiled  to  Khartum),  34
Abu'l-Qasim,  Hajji  —  of  Shfrdz,

33
Abu'l-Qasim  of  Sultanab^d,  46
Abu'sh-Shurur,  213,   219  ad  calc.

See  Dayydn,  Jandb-i-  —
Achaemenians,  221
Acre.     See  '■Akkd
Adam,  133,  134


'Adila  (granddaughter  of  Subh-i-
Azal),  322

Adrianople  (Edirne.  caUed  Arzu's-
Sirr,  "the  Land  of  the  Mys-
tery"), 19-29,  30,  33,  35,  36,
38,  51,  63,  84,  138,  321

A d7jance  (Chicdigo),  ji^o  ad  calc.

Adwaita  School  of  Vedantists,  126

Afndii,  kinsmen  of  the  Bab  so
called,  49  ad  calc;  63;  75;
90;   163  ad  calc.

Aghsdn^'''  Branches," pi.  oiGhnsn,
the  title  given  to  Baha'u'Uah's
sons);  17,  22,  29,  31,  49  ad
calc,  75,  76,  83,  88,  105,  141
ad  calc. ;  158  ;  163  ad  calc.
See  also  Ghusn

Ahmad   Ahsa'f,  Shaykh — ,  182,

194        "

Ahmad  Aq^-zada,  Sayyid  — ,  208

Ahmad  As'ad  Efendi,  224

Ahmad  Khan,  Dr  — ,  175,  199,
204,  207,  208,  209,  211,  212,
214,  215,  216,  217,  218

Ahmad,  Mulla  — ,  208

Ahmad,  Sayyid  —  (antagonist  of
Sikhs),  192

Ahmad,  Shaykh  —  of  Khurasan
■  (martyr),  35

Ahmad,  Shaykh  —  Ruhi  of  Kir-
man,  199,  213,  343.    See  Ri^hi

Ahmad  [sun  of]  Subh-i-Azal,  314,
322

Ahmad,  Ustad  — ,  55

Ahmad-i-Yazdi,  236

Ahsami'  l-Qisas=  K?^j«/",  Commen-
tary on  the  Suraiu  — ,  qv.

A' tna-i-Sika7tdari  {?^\%\2ixv  history
by  Mirza  Aqa  Khan),  222,  225

Akhtar  (Persian  newspaper),  221

'Akka  (St  Jean  d'Acre),   26,  29,

31.  35.  38,  45,  .^i,  53»  55.  58,
59,  63,  64,  79,  85,  89,  91,  97,
98,  99,  103,  108,  109.  112,  116,
118,  122,  137,  138,  141,  142,
147,  149,  150,  152,  153,  155,
1O8,  170,  191,  197,  229,  231,
262  ad  calc,  295.298,321,357
'  Akk^  al-Khadra.  See  Green  Acre
^Alamu'l-Hudd,  253  ad  calc.


INDEX


363


Alamiit,  Assassins  of — ,  224
Alexander   "the  Great"   [Iskan-

dar,  Sikandar),  348,  349
Alexander  II,  Czar  of  Russia,  138
Alexandria,  31,  32,  44,  98,  185
Alexandropol,  176
'All   Pasha,  19,  26,  31,  51,  277,

278,  286
'AH  ihn  Abi  Tdlib,   217,  255  ad

calc,  302
*Alf,  Aq^  —  son  of  Muhammad

Baqir   (martyr   of  Yazd),   42,

299.  391 »  302
'Alf,  Hajji  —  Afndn,  62
'All,  H^jji  Mulla  —  of  Kand,  36
'Alf,  Hajji  —  of  Kirman  (exiled

to  Khartum),  34
'AH,  Hajji  Mirza  ^ayyid  —  Afndn,

90,  197,  231,  235,  304
'All, Hajji  Sayyid —  I^awasani,  230
'All,  Mfrza  —  Sayydh,  44
'All,  Mirza  Sayyid  —  Micdarris,

305
'AH,  Mulla— of  Sabzaw^r  (martyr),

42,  299,  302,  305
'AH,    Mulla    Shaykh   — ,   called

Jandb-i-''Az{m,  343
'AH,  Sayyid  —  Afn^n,  ^21  ad  calc.
'AH,  Sayyid  —  of  Kirman,  200
'All  (son  of  Subh-i-Azal),  314
'AHAkbar,  Mashhadi — (assassin),

73  ad  calc.
'AH  Asghar  al-Hasanf  al-Husaynf,

258-9
'AH  Asghar  of  Yazd,  son  of  Mfrza

Abu'l-Qasim  (martyr),  42-3
'AH   Asghar,    Aqa  —  Yiizdarunf

(martyr   of  Yazd),   299,    301,

302,  304,  305,  306
'AH  Jan,  Mulla  —  of  Mazandaran

(martyr),  39
'AH    Muhammad,    Mirza    — ,    of

Shfraz.     See  Bdb.
'AH  Muhammad,  Mfrza  —  (son  of

Baha'u'llah),  62,  321 ;  a  second

son  so  named,  63,  321  ;  a  third

son  by  a  different  mother   so

named,  63,  321
'AH  Naqf,  Mfrza  —  of  Khurasan
(martyr),  35


'AH    Riza    (son    of  Mirzi   Miisa

Kallm),  319
'Alf-quH  Khan  (Bahd'i  missionary

to  America),  146
'Alf-ibad,  242

Alifiyya,  Qastda-i-  — ,  228-9
Alwdh  ("  Tablets  "),  pi.  of  Larvk

{q.v.),  published  collections  of

— ,  184,  190,  195
America,  77  ;  Baha'i  propaganda

in  — ,  93  et  seqq.;   113  et  seqq.,

236 ;  338.  See  also  Khayru  lldh
American  College  at  Beyrout,  93
American  Journal  of    Theology ^

149
Aminu'Uah,  son  of  Asadu'll^h  of

Isfahan,  236
Amfnu'llah,   grandson  of  Bah^'u

'llah,  321
Aminu^s-Sultdn,  Mfrza    'AH   As-

gha.rKha.nAlddak-t-A'zam,2ge,
Amul,  5,  238

Anbar  prison  (Tihran),  279,  283
Andreas,  Dr  F.  C.  — ,  175
Andraos    MaHk   (householder    in

'Akka),  50
Annas,  297

Antichrist,  117,  140,  191
Aqa  Jan  ''■  Kaj-Kuldh,'''  26,   51,
,    55  ;  assassinated,  55
Aqa  Jan,  Sayyid  —  (martyr),  39
Aqa  Khan,  Mirza  —  of  Kirman,

199-200, 213,22 1-5 ;  biography
,    of—,  225
Aqa  Mirzd  Jan  of  Keshan,  entitled

"the  Servant  of  God."     See

JChddimu^lldh
Aqdas,   Kitdbu^l-  — ,  64,  73,  76,

81,  159,  163,  195  ;  —  Russian

ed.  and  transl.,  187
Arabs  censured,  222-3
Arakfl  son  of  Hartiin,  197
Ardistan,  238
'Arfz.     See  Muhammad  Riza  of

Isfahdn
Armenians,  262
Arz-i-Maqsvid,  165  ad  calc.     See

'Akkd
Asadiyyun,  the  followers  of  Day-

ydn  {q.v.^  so  called,  218,  219


3^4


INDEX


Asadu'lMh,  Sayyid  —  (physician),

213
Asadu'Uah   of   Khuy,    213.      See

Dayydn,  Janab-i-  —
Asadu'llah  of  Qazwin,  208
Asadu'Uah   of  Isfahan,    no,    115,

116,  1,46,  T54,  156,  170,  236
Ashraf,  Aqa  Sayyid  —  (martyr),

36,  291
Ashraf,  Mirza  —  of  Abada  (mar-
tyr), 40
Askabad.     See  ''Ishgdbdd
Aslam,  Mirza  —  of  Niir,  228-9
Asian  Khan,  Amir  — ,  248,  249,

251,  253,  254
Asfnd.     See  under  Names
'y^jr.  Commentary  on  the  Suratu'l-

—,  203
Asrdru^l-Ghaybiyya,  178,  195
Astarabad,  241

Atrpet,  Sargis  Mubagajian,  176-7
"Aunt's  Epistle"  {Risdla-i-''Ani-

ma),  227
Austria,  271

Austrian  Lloyd  steamers,  31,  32
AivakeningoJ  the  Persians,  History

of  the  — ,  225
Ayydmu'sh  -  Shiddd    ("  Grievous

Days  "  or  "  Days  of  Stress  "),

22,  84
Ayyamu'r-Rizwdn,  16
Azal.     See  Subh-i-Azal
Azalfs,    assassination    of    --     at

*Akka,  52-8
Azalis  assassinated,  181,  233
Azali  writers  of  note,  220—9
Azarbayjan,  4
Azhar,   University  of  —  (Cairo),

191
*Aziz  Khan,  Sardar  — ,35
'Azfzu'Uah   (a  Jew)   of  Bukhara,

237

Bab(Mfrz^*Ali  Muhammad),  3-5,
9,  14,  20;  called  '"All  before
Nabfl,"  25,  n.  i  adcalc.  ;  anni-
versary of  birth,  37  ;  his  tomb
on  Mount  Carmel,  100;  123;
147;  152;  his  mission  and
death,  137-8  ;  portraits  of  — ,


176,  182;  191;  192;  Mss.  of
his  writings,  198-208  ;  dis-
posal of  his  body,  note  on — ,
201;  210;  218;  his  second
wife,  the  sister  of  Mulla  Rajab
'AH  called  Qahir,  died  on  Dec.
10,  1916,  220  ad  calc.\  docu-
ments referring  to  his  examina-
tion and  condemnation,  247-
59 ;  Dr  Cormick's  personal
impressions  of  — ,  260-2  ;  275  ;
his  incorrect  Arabic,  326;  328;

331

Bdbud-Din  ("the  Gate  of  Re-
ligion"), by  I.  G.Khayru'llah,
96,  116,  143,  180

B^bu'1-Bab  ("the  Gate  of  the
Gate,"  title  given  to  Mulla
Husayn  of  Bushrawayh),  238,
239,  240  ad  c ale.

Badd,  the  heresy  so  called,  334-5,

337

Badasht,  5,  233,  345

Badi'^,  Mirza  — ,  or  Janab-i-  —
(Aqa  Buzurg),  40,  47-9,  260,
262  ad  calc,  263,  294

Badi'u'llah  Efendi  (Baha'u'llah's
son),  63,  86,  90,  105,  141  and
142  ad  calc.'y  his  recantation,
197;  letter  from  — ,  298-301,
321

Baghdad,  6,  7,  8,  9,  10,  11,  J5,  16,
17,  20,  36;  riots  against  Babis
at—,  37-8;  50;  53.  63,  138,
199,  205,  227,  232,  275,  279,
280,  281,  282,  284,  286,  321

Baha'u'llah  (Mfrza  Husayn  'AH
son  of  Mirza  Buzurg  of  Niir),
birth  and  parentage,  3 ;  fore-
told by  Bab,  4  ;  part  played  by
—  in  Bab's  lifetime,  5  ;  im-
prisoned in  Tihran,  6  ;  exiled
to  Baghdad,  6-7 ;  withdraws
to  Sulaym^niyya  in  Kurdis-
tan, 7-9;  returns  to  Baghdad,
9-17;  is  invited  to  put  him-
self under  British  protection,
ir-12;  at  Baghdad,  12-16;
exiled  to  Constantinople  and
Adrianople,      17-29  ;     exiled


INDEX


365


thence  to  *Akka,  26-32  ;  an-
niversary of  birth,  37  ;  38  ;  40 ;
journey  toand  arrival  at  'Akka,
43  et  seqq. ;  gives  his  followers
a  prayer  to  avert  sickness,  47  ;
forbids  the  assassination  of
Azalfs,  53-4  ;  arrested  and  in-
terrogated by  Turkish  authori-
ties, 55-7 ;  last  illness  and
death,  61-2;  his  wives  and
children,  62-3,  141 ;  his  writ-
ings and  utterances,  64-74  ;
his  tomb,  100;  123;  first
American  pilgrimage  to  his
tomb,  144  ;  portrait  of — ,  177  ;
'  *  Glory  of  God  "  so  rendered  in
Revelation,  xxi,  23;  186;  217;
227  ;  228;  letter  announcing  his
death,  235  ;  regarded  by  the
Persian  Government  as  the
leader  of  the  Babis  at  end  of
Baghdad  period,  276  ;  Persian
Government's  correspondence
concerning  his  expulsion  from
Baghdad,  279  et  seqq.  ;  kins-
men and  children,  319-21;
3^9'  33 1'  346  adcalc.

BahdV  News  {Pay  dm  bar  or  Najm-
i-Bdkhiar),  177

Bahiyya,  daughter  of  Khayru'llah,
106

Bahiyya  Khanim  (daughter  of
Baha'u'llah),  62,  loi,  321

Bahja  or  Behje  (Baghcha),  Baha
'u'llah's  garden  at  'Akka),  61
and  ad  calc. ;  63,  85,  86,  87,
89,  91,  197

Bahram,  Shah  —  (the  Zoroastrian
Messiah),  77

Bahru'l  'Ulum  of  Kirm^n,  237

Balteau,  177

Baltimore,  i^d  ad  calc.^  149,  151

Baqara,  Bab's  Commentary  on  the
SurattCl-  — ,  202.  Subh-i-
Azal's  Commentary  on  the
same,  214

Baqir,  Mfrza  —  of  Shfraz  (martyr) ,

4>
Baqir,  Sayyid   —   the  Mnjtahid,

41


Baqir,  Shaykh  —  the  Mnjtahid  of
Isfahan,  39,  40,  179

Baqiyyatu'llah  ("Remnant  of
God"),  the  Bab  so  called,  201

Barfurush,  199,  208,  209,  238,
241,  243

Barney,  Miss  Laura  Clifford  —
(afterwards  Madame  H.  Drey-
fus), 177-8

Bariitjf-zada  Hajji  Hdfiz  Efendi,
house  of  —  at  Famagusta,  31 1

Baydn,  77,  78,  137,  182,  205-6,
212;  supplement  to  —  by  Subh-
i-Azal,   214;    226,    248,    300,

312.  338,  346

Baylu  Amrt'lldk  ("  the  House  of
God's  Command "  in  Adria-
nople),  19,  51

Bayt  iLyds  a/- A  dyad  {^  Akka),  59

Bedrf  Bey,  Colonel  — ,  106,  107

Behamdon,  93  ad  calc.

Behd'u'lldh  (so  entitled  for  Bahd
'u^lldh),2i  work  by  Khayru'llah,
first  pul)lished  at  Chicago  in
1900  and  again  in  1917,  94;
97;  115  ad  calc;  143,  169,
170;   iSo  and  ad  calc.

Bell,  Mrs  Anne — ,  97

Berlin,  94

Beshik-tash  (Constantinople),  224

Beyrout,  53,  54,  93,  155

Bibi,  Sayyida  —  (martyr),  41

Bonelli,  Luigi  —  of  Naples,  226

"Book  of  the  Favourites,"  118

Boston,  148

Brahmins,  131,  191,  336

Brief  Account  of  the  Bdbi  Move-
ment., by  Miss  E.  Rosenberg,
1 47  ad  calc.

British  Museum,  Babi  MSS.  in  — ,
198  et  seqq.,  315,  322

Brittingham,  Miss  Isabella  — ,  153,
178

Brooklyn  (New  York),  116

Browne,  E.   G.  — ,  5,   142,    183,

313
Bruce,  Dr  Robert  — ,  291-2
Buda-Pest,  150,  180
Buddha,  142,  335
Buddhists,  131,  191,  336


366


INDEX


Bukhara,  237

Burhanu'd-Dfn  of  Balkh,  Sayyid

— ,  224
Bushrawayh,  238
Bustani's  College  at  Beyrout,  93
Buzurg,  Mirza.  See  Mirzd  Buzurg

and  '•Abbas,  Sayyid  Mtrzd  —
Buzurg  Khan,  Mfrza  — ,  of  Qazwin

(Persian    Consul  -  General    at

Baghdad),    15,    37,   277,    280,

284

Caiaphas,  297

Cain,  134,  135

Cairo,  94,  143,  145,  185,  186,  191,

197
California,  97
Cambridge,  148, 168  ad  calc,  188,

199
Canaan,  8

Carmel,  Mount  — ,  45,  59,  100
Carnegie  Hall,  151,  183
Casablanca,  241
Catalogue  0/2*]  Bdbi  MSS.^  175,

179,    198,    201   ad  calc,    202,

203,  204,  207,  225
Catholics,  139
Celibacy  condemned,  141
Chaldaean  bible,  134
Chaqmaq.  Mosque  of  Amfr — ,  304
Chase.  Mr  Thornton  — ,  115
Chebar,  River  — ,  138
Chicago,  93  ad  calc,  95,  96,  97,

no,  115,  116,   118,  123,  124,

125,  139,  147,  148,   149,  150,

151,  r.s4,  155,  168,  170,  171
Chihriq,  252
Christ,  4,  117,  118,  130,  131,  132,

i33»  135.  136,  137.  138,  i39»
140,  141,  150,  152,  191,  300
ad  calc,  327,  337,  356

Christianity,  191,  198

Christians,  262,  263,  292,  297,  307,

331.333.
Christian  Scientists,  126
Chupan,  Dr  — ,  23
Churchill,  Mr  Sidney  — ,  293
Cincinnati,  148
Cobham,  Mr  Claude  Delaval  — ,

199,  201,  215,  309,  313,  322


Columbus,  the  Second— j  99,  100
Commentaries    {Tafdsir)    by   the

Bab,  201-4
"Conqueror  of  America," 99, 100,

lOI

"Constantine  the  Persian,"  199,
3  r  3- 1 4,  322,    See  Rizwdn,  ''Alt

Constantinople,  t6,  17,  18,  19,  20,
26,  27,  30,  31,  44,  50,  51,  63,
138,221,  224,  225,321,322,343

Cons'  itutional  Movement  in  Persia,
attitude  of  Baha'is  towards,
184;  — of  Azalis  towards,  221

Cork,  237

Cormick,  Dr  — ,  260,  264

"  Costi  "  See  '''' Constantine  the
Persian''''  and  Rizwdn  ''Alt

"Covenant,"  "Book  of  my  — "
{Kitdbu  ^Ahdt),  no

Cursing,  ordeal  by  —  {Mubdhala),

24-5
Curzon,  Lord  — ,  148
Cyprus,   44,    191,   198,    199,  213,

214,  216,  321,  322.     See  also

Famagusta

Z^a/za/ (Antichrist),  191

Dald'il-i-Sab^a,  181,  204-5

Ddmghdn,  240

Daniel,  118,  140  etc.  143,  338

Darbandi,  MuUa  Aqa-yi ,  279,

284

Darwish,  Hajji  —  (Turkish  offi-
cial), 213

David,  132,  142,  250,  254

Dawair[^'  Circles,"  pi.  of  DdHira),
216

Dawlatshah's  "Memoirs  of  the
Poets."  327  ad  calc

Dawud  Mirza,  242

Dawud,    Yuhanna   (Johanna)  — ,

178,  195
Dayydn,  Janab-i-  —  (Mfrza  Asa-

du'lMh  of  Khuy),  213;  218-

19;  227
Detroit  (Michigan),  149
Dih-i-Mulla,  240
Ditvdnu'l-Azal,  214,  315
Diyar  Bakr,  17
Dodge,  Mr  and  Mrs  Arthur  Pils-


INDEX


367


bury  ■:— ,  96,  1 25- and  ad  calc  ;

J48;  178
Dragon,     139,     140.      See     also

Serpent
Dreams,  revelations  in  — ,  131
Dreyfus,  Hippolyte  — ,   12,  n.   i

ad  calc,  178,  179,  197,  247-8
Druzes,  224

DuraruH-Bahiyya,  I46,  195-6
Dutch,  307
Duti  Prashad,  195

Eden,  134,  141

Egypt,  32,  33.  34.  87,  93,  94,
95.  98,  103,  los,  144,  146,  147
ad  calc,  164,  235.  See  also
Alexandria^  Cairo,  Port  Said,
etc.

Egyptian  bible,  134

Egyptian  magicians,  327

Elias,  136

Elias,  White  House  of —  ('Akka),

59
Elijah,  Bab  identified  with  — ,137

Eliot,  Maine,  U.S.A.,  147

England,  95,  98  ;  Baha'i  move-
ment in  — ,  184

Enterprise,  city  of — ,  96

Epistle  to  Maryam,  8.    See  Laivh

Esslingen,  180

"  Eternal  Fruit "  (  Thamara-i-
Azaliyya),  311.  See  Subh-i-
Azal

Etymology,  popular,  222-3

Euphrates,  218

Eve,  134

Exaggerated  estimates  of  number
of  Baha'fs,   118-20,  125,   142,

143.  147.  </•  '48-9.  151.  152;
—  of  Baha'i  books,  126,  139
Ezel,  Ezelfs.     See  Azal,  Azaiis

»

Faber,  Pastor  W.  — ,  176

♦'  Face  "  ( Wajh)  of  God,  1 32

Facts  for  BahdHsts,  168-70,  180

Faith-healing,  126

Fakhriyya    (daughter   of    Fatima

Khanim),  320
Famagusta,    191,    213,   311,   312,

313,  314


Fanwood,  New  Jersey,  153
Fard'id,  147,  190,  336
Faiaju'll^h  the  Kurd,  195
Farfd  Amfn,  116,  170
Faris,  a  Christian  of  Alexandria,

32^
Fartndn-farmd,  221,  225
Farmer,  Miss  Sarah  Jane  — ,  147

ad  calc
Fariiqiyya    (daughter    of    Baha'u

'llah),  321
Faslu^ /- A kbar  {^^  Supreme  Separa-
tion"), 22,  23,  26,  51
Faslu^l-Kfittdb  fi   tarjuinali  ah-

xvdli'l-Bdb,  226
Fasting,  Bal)f  month  of  —  called

ShahriCl-^ Uld,  215
Fdtiha,  Hab's  commentary  on  the

Sicratu'l-  — ,  201-2
Fdtima  (wife  of  Subh-i-Azal),  321
Fatima  (daughter-in-law  of  Subh-
i-Azal),  322
Fatima  Khanim  (niece  of  Khanim-

i  Buzurg  {(/.v.),  319,  320
Fazlu'llah,  Mirza — (Azali),  213
Fetishism,  191,  336
Firdawsf,  221

Fitzgerald,  Col.  Nat  Ward  — ,  151
"Five     Grades"     or     "Styles"

{Shu'uti-i- Khamsa),  201,  207,

213,  216,  2 1<)  ad  calc
"  Four  Rivers  "  are  the  four  sons

of  Baha'u'llah,  141
France,  95,  98,  117;   Baha'fmove-

ment  in  — ,  184
French,  attempt  to  connect  —  with

Persian,  222-3
Fringe  of  the  Easthy  II.  C.  Lukach,

312
Fu'ad  Pasha,  19,  26,  31,  51,  277,

278,  286
Furayyat  (near  Baghdad),    17
"Fiirst  Bismarck'''  (steamer),  98

Gallipoli,  29,  30,  31,  44
Gazargahi,    Aq^    —    (martyr    of

Yazd),  304
German  Emperor,  139
Germany,    Baha'ism   in  — ,    180,

184


368


INDEX


Getsinger,  96  ad  calc,  107,  108  ad
calc,  152

Ghodsia.     See  Qudsiyya  Khdnim

Ghulam  Ahmad  Qadiyani,  192

Ghulamu'llah,  son  of  Muhammad
Jawad,  168,  188,  236-7

Ghuldt  (extreme  Shi'a),  335

Ghusn  ("Branch,"  pi.  Aghsdn,
q.v.),  a  title  given,  together
with  some  qualifying  adjective,
to  each  of  Baha'u'llah's  sons.
Ghusn-i-A  ^zam  =  'Abbas  Efen-
di ;  Ghupt-i-Akbar  =  Muham-
mad 'Ali;  Ghtisn-i- Athar=
Mfrza  Ziya'u'llah  ;  Ghusn- i-
Anwar  =  Mirza.  Badf'u'llah

Gidd  Memorial  Series,  206  ad  calc. ,
231,  237

Gil  Bias,  221

Gobineau,  Comte  de  — ,  205,  216
ad  calc.  ,218

Golden  Calf,  162

Goldziher,  115,  150

Gordon  Pasha,  35

Gospels,  4,  333

Goumoens,  Capt.  von  — ,  267

Grant,  General  — ,  138

Greek  wi.eofKhayru'llah  divorced,

95
"Green  Acre"  {'Akkd'u'l-Khad-

rd),  147
Gulisidn,  221

Gulpayag^n,  no,  148,  336
Gurnsey,  Dr  — ,  97
Gyawur  Kyiiy,  30

Hadi  (son  of  Subh-i-Azal),  322
Hadi  (son-in-law  of  'Abbas  Efen-

di),  320
Hadi,  Sayyid  — ,  88  ad  calc.
Hafiz  (the  poet),  343
Hdjji  Bdbd,  ^Morier's  — ,221
Hajji  Mfrza  Aghasi  (prime  minister

of  Muhammad  Shah),  176
HalMj,  Husayn  b.  Mansur  — ,  253

ad  calc.
Hamadan,  148,  190,  238,  296,  325
Hamfda  (daughter  of  Fatima  Khd-
nim), 320
Hammond,  Eric  — ,  1 79


Hannen,  Joseph  S.  — ,  182
Harbinger  {Mubaskshir),  title  of

the  Bdb  {q.v.),  3,  5,  20,  21
Hasan  'Amu,  MuUa  — ,  13,  14
Hasan  A^qa  (Azali),  25
Hasan,  Aqa  —  (martyr  of  Yazd),

302,  305,  306
Hasan  of  Ardakan,  MuUa  — ,  305
Hasan  Efendi  (captain),  29,  30
Hasan,  Hajji  Mirza  —  of  Khura-
san, 87,  no,   147,   154-5'  157.

158,  164,  165,  168,  170,  195
Hasan  Hamid   (Turkish  official),

213
Hasan  Khan,  Hajji  Mirza  —  of

Khuy      (Persian     Consul      in

Egypt),  33
Hasan   Khan,   Mirza  —  (Persian

notable  at  Baghdad),  13
Hasan,   Mirza   — ,  son  of  Sayyid

Mahdi  of  Dahaj,  232
Hasan,  Sayyid  —  of  Yazd,    261

ad  calc.
Hasan,   Shaykh  —  of  Sabzawar,

the  Mujtahid,  42,  302,  305
Hasht  Bihisht  {\M}oi  philosophical

work),  162  ad  calc,  225-6,  346
le  Havre,  94
Haydar    'Ali,    Hajji    Mirza  —  of

Isfahan,  33-5
Hayfa,  32,  44,  45,  59,  63,  85,  99,

io5>  155,  15^  231,  321
Haydkil,  KitdbuU-  — ,   215,  216-

17
Haykcd,  S^ratuU-  —  or  fCttdbu'l

— .     See  Siiraiu' I- Haykal.
Hazar  Jarfb,  241
Hearst,  Mrs  Phoebe  — ,  97,  98,

99,  107,  109
Hebrew  Bible,  134
Herat,  238
Heresies,  enum^ation  of  30  Babi

— >  325-39
Herron,  Mrs   Sara  G.   — ,  97  ad

calc.
Hikmat  {?&xi\QXi  newspaper),  143,

191
Hindiyya  Press,  Cairo,  158
Hindoo  teachers  in  America,  123
Hindus,  237


INDEX


369


Hoar,  Mr   W.   H.  —  (American

Bahli),  152,  153
Hoboken,  149
Hogy,  Mr  lohn  — ,  353
Holhach,  Maude  M.  — ,  179-80
House  of  Spirituality  (Chicago),

115.  170

Howdah,  Tablet  of  the  —  {Law-
huH-Hawdaj)^  ry

Huart,  M.  Clement  — ,  216  ad
calc.

Hulul  (incarnation).  3;?o,  335

Hui  ufu  n- Ndr  wdn-Nur  (•'  Let-
ters of  Fire  "  and  '  *  of  Light "),

330
Husayn,  the  Imam  — ,  37,  42,  228,

^99»  302 '  338.  ^^o  ad  calc.
Husayn     'AH,     Mirzd    — .      See

Bahd'nUldh.
Husayn,  Aqa  —  of  Ka>h£n,  55
Husayn,  Aqa  —  (silk-merchant  of

Yazd),  307
Husayn  ot  IBushrawayh,  MuUa  — ,

23X-42
Husayn  the  confecti<mer,  158
Husavn,   Hajji   Mdza  —  of  Lar,

156,  159,  160,  164    165,  166
Husayn,  Hajji  Mirza  —  of  Shfraz,

33  and  n.  i  ad  calc,  34  and  ad

calc,  35,  195
Husayn,  Hajji  Mirza  — ,  known  as

Kuchak.  of  ^hiraz,  236
Husayn,    Mirza    — ,    01    Kashan

(exiled  to  Khartum),  34
Husayn  of  Khamna  (near  Tabrfz),

99
Husayn,   Mashhadf  —  (assassin),

73  ad  calc.

Husayn,  Mfrza  —  of  Kashdn,  55

Husayn  Khan,  Mirza  —  (Persian
Ambassador  at  Constanti-
nople), 15,  18,  26

Husayn  Ruhl  (son  of  Hajji  Mulla
'All  of  Tabriz),  146,  154

Husayn,  Sayyid  —  of  Yazd  (the
Ban's  amanuensis),  205,  208,
2b\  ad  calc

Husayn,  Shaykh  —  (?  of  Shiraz),

Husayn-i-Yazdf,  236
B.  B.


Husayniyya    (daughter    of   M(rz^

Buizurg).  320
Husayn-quliyaaf/^/wV-ZrAfw,  196

Ibrdhfm,  Hajji  Mulla  —  (martyr),

41.  43

Ibidlifm  Kh^n,  son  of  Fdtima
Khanim,  319,  320

Ibrdhfm,  Mfrza  —  (son  of  Mirz^
Buzurg),  320

Idolatry,  3^  ,(i

Ihqdqu  l-Haqq,  189-90,  325-39

rjdztH-Qui-''dn,  332

'Jliiyin,  Ktdb  i-  — ,  216

'Imadu'd-Dawla,  Prince  —  (Go-
vernor of  Kirmanshah  in  1862),
277,  278,  280  :  284

Imam-Jum'a  of  Isfahan,  40

Imams,  334.  335

India,  II,  103,  129,  156,  190,  192,
221,  238

IngersoU,  Col.  — ,  153

Iqdn  ("Book  of  Assurance"),
when  and  for  whom  composed,
12;  translation  into  French,
i2n.   I  ad  calc,   179,  325

'Iraq-i-'Arab(Mesopo  amia).  7.  8,
14,  20,  277,  278.  See  also
Baghddl

'Isa  (jesus).     See  Christ

Isfahan,  10,  39,  179,  203,  208,
238,  291,  292,  294,  296,
319;  "Martyrs  of—,"  39-40;
lmam-Jum*a  of — ,  203

'Ishqabad  (Askabad),  73,  170,  304

Iskandariyya,  196

Islam,  191

Isma'il,  Im^m,  334

Isma'fl  Pasha  (Ktiedive  of  Egypt),

34

Isma'il-i-Sabbagh  (the  dyer),  233

Isma'fl,  Sayyid  —  of  Zawara,  his

suicide,  10- 11
Israfil  (the  angel),  356
Ithaca,  U.S.A.,  96,  116
Itydnu\l-Dalil,  -]<)  ad  calc^  188-9

Jacob,  118, 140,  338
Ja'far, Hajji  — of  Tabrfz,  attempted
suicide,  28-9

24


y


370


INDEX


Ja'far-i-Kafif£sh  (the  bootmaker),

233
Ja'far,  Mirza  —  of  Yazd,  55
Jafar-i-Sadiq,  Imam,  334
Jaffa  (Yafa  in  Syria),  32,  44
Jaghbub,  192
Jahangfr  Khan,  Mirza  —  of  Shiraz,

221,  225
Jahrumi,  194
Jalalu'd-Dawla,  Prince  — of  Persia,

222-4
Jalalu'd-Dfn  Mirza  (son  of  Prince

Zillu's-Sultan),  41-3,  296,  301,

303-8
Jalalu'd-Din  Rumf,  220
Jamalu'd-Din  al-Afghan,  Siiaykh

— ,  176,  224,  225,  295,  296
Jami  (the  poet),  347
Jamil  (son  of  Mirza  Musa  Kalim),

319

Jd^mi^u' l-Muwaddat,  224
Jamshid,  283
yaftdb-i-'Aztm,  343
/andb-i-Tdhira,    343,    344,    351.

See  Qurratu'l-'Ayn
Jani,  H^jji  Mfrz^  —  of  Kashan.

See  Nuqtatii' I- Kdf
Jawad,  Ustad  —  of  Yazd  (martyr),

43
Jawdmi^ti^l-Haydkil   (by   Subli-i-

Azal),  315
Jawr  wcCth-Thatnar,  214
Jazira-i-Mulla  (Yazd),  302
Jedda,  154, 156, 157,  159,  164, 194
Jehovah,  11 1,  139
Jerusalem,  137
Jessup,  Dr  H.  H.  — ,  181
Jesus  Christ.     See  Christ
Jews,  43,  292,  331,  333,  337;  —
converted  to  Babiism,  148,  237
John,  140
John  the  Baptist,  4
Joshua,  118,  141,  162,  338
Judaism,  191
Julfd  (Isfahan),  292

•'  Kaj-Kulah."     See  Aqd-Jdn
Kakhak,  238

Kamal  (son  of  Mfrza  Mus^  Kalim),
319


Kamdlu'd-Dawla  of  Dihlf,  Prince
— ,  222-4

Kand,  238

Kansas  State,  96

Karbala,  12,  37,  199,  220,  238,
284  ad  calc,  292,  349,  350

Karbala'f  Taqf,  29

Keshan,  148,  238

Kawthar^  64  ad  calc.  ;  80  ;  328

Kaivthar,  Commentary  on  the
Sui'atiCl'  — ,  203-4

Kazem-Bey,  Mirza  — ,  205

Kazim  Khan,  249,  252,  253

Kdzim,  Mulla  —  (martyr),  39

Kazimayn  (near  Baghdad),  11,  12

Kem^l  Pasha,  18

Kemball,  Sir  Arnold  Burrows
(British  Consul  -  General  at
Baghdad),  11  and  n.  1  ad  calc.

Kenosha,  Wisconsin,  95,  96,  97,
no,  148,  149,  150

Kerkuk,  17

Khabiru'l-Mulk,  Mfrza  Hasan
Khan  — ,  200,  213,  225

Khadija  Khdnim  (mother  of  the
Bab),  328

Khadimu'llah,  Janab  i-  —  (Aqa
Mfrza  Jan  of  Kashan  "the
Servant  of  God,"  or  "of  the
Presence"),  9  n.  2  ad  calc.  \
17  ;  21  ;  22  ;  55-6  ;  83  and  ad
calc.  ;  87  ;  his  protest  against
and  harsh  treatment  by  'Abbas
Efendi,  87-91;  162  ad  calc.  \
167;  194;  198;  230;  231

Khalil  Pasha  (Governor  of  Bey-
rout),  91

Khamna  (near  Tabriz),  99

Khanim-i-Buzurg,  227,  319,  320

Khanu'l-'Awamid  ('Akka),  50

Khartum,  34,  35,  195

Khdtajnu' n- N abiyyin  ("Seal  of
the  Prophets"),  329

Khatt-i-Badi'  (the  New  Writing),
190

Khayru'llah,  Ibrahim  George  — ,
49  ad  calc.  ;  93  ad  calc.  ;
autobiography,  describing  his
conversion  to  Baha'ism,  work
in  America,  visit  to  'Akka  and


INDEX


371


rupture  with  'Abbas  Efendi,
93-112,  168,  i8i  ;  account  of
his  propaganda  in  America
(Section  11),  pp.  1 13-71  ;
abstract  of  his  13  Lectures,
128-42;  malicious  account  of
\  his  work  by  Za'- imu' d- Dawla^

^  143-7;  148;  1495  150;  '53;

his    writings,    180-1,    188   ad

calc.\  338
Khedive  of  Egypt,  34
Khurasan,  40,  154,  233,  285
Khurshid     Pasha     (Governor    of

Adrianople),  27
Khutba-i-Aikdhiyya,  215
Khuy,  238

Kirman,  41,  170,  225,  234,  238
Kirmanshdh,  238,  280,  284,  286
KitdbiiH-Aqdas.     See  Aqdas
Kitdbu'l-Haydt,  215
KitdbuH-Imdnfi  Iz-hdri  Nuqtati^  l-

Baydn,  192-3
Kitdbtil-Iqdn.     See  Iqdn
Kitdbu  l-Milal     of     Shahristanf,

335
Kitdbi-Nur  ("Book  of  Light")

by  Subh-i-Azal,  216,  315
Koran,      138,      151.      See     also

Qur'dn
Kraft's  Hotel  (Hayfa),  155
Kruper,  Mrs  — ,  107
Kullu-ShayHs  (Old   B£bis),    148,

233

Kurdistan,  7,  9
Kurdish  language,  133

Lddli  wa  Majdlt,  2 1 7

Labaree,  Rev.  Benjamin  — ,  D.D. ,

260,  264
Lablba  (daughter  of  Khayru'llah),

155

Lahadhdt  (by  Subh-i-Azal),  315

Lama'dtul-Azal,  215,  217
"Land    of    the    Mystery."     See

Adrianople
"  Land  of  Kha."     See  Khurdsdn
"  Land  of  Ta,"  8.     See  Tihrdn
"Land  of  Taff,"  42
"  Land  of  Ya."     See  Yazd
Larnaca,  216,  322


Lai£i/u'l-Azal  (by  Subh-i-Azal),

315
Lawdhidhu^n-NafdHh,    or    wain-

Nafdyi''  (by  Subh-i-Azal),  315
Lawdmi^  (by  wSubh-i-Azal),  315
Lawhu'l-Amr,  21-2
Lawh-i-Bashdrdt,  187,  229
Lnwhul-HawdaJ,  17
Lawhu  Maryaniy  8
Lawhu''r-Ra^h,  29-31
LaylatuW-Raghdib,  224
"Leaf"  { JVaraqa),  thle  given  to

Baha'u'llah's    daughters,    loi,

141
Lebanon,  93
Leipzig,  180
Leyden,  200
LisdnuU-Mulk,  189
London,  'Abbas  Efendi  in  — ,  180
Lord  of  Hosts,  1 1 1
"Lote-tree   of  the   Limit."     See

Sidra\tti^  I- Muntahd^
Lubeck,  U.S.A.,  97
Luddon,  "  Letters  of — ,"  132
Lukach,  Mr  H.  C  — ,  312  adcalc,

313-14
Lutf  'Alf  Mirza  Qajar,  239

Mackenzie,  Capt.  C.  F.  — ,  241
MacNutt,    Mr    Howard   — ,    97,

153.  170
Mahall  al-Barrdnf     (Adrianople),

28,  51
Mahdi,   191,   192,  328,  329,  336,

337'    338-      See    also    Qd'im,

Messiah
Mahdi,  Lddli  wa  Majdli  written

for  — ,  217
Mahdi  (son  of  Baha'u'llih),  17;  his

death,  49-50;  62-3  ;  321
Mahdi    (son   of    Ustad    Baqir    of

Yazd),  304
Mahdi,    MuUa    —   of    Khawirak

(martyr   of   Yazd),    299,   302,

305
Mahdi,  Mulla  —  of  Y'azd  (martyr),

42    .
Mahdf,  Sayyid  —  of  Dahaj,  231,

237
Mahdf-quH  Mfrzd,  Prince  — ,  242

24 — 2


372


INDEX


Mahd-i- '  Ulyd  (Baha'u'Uah'sseconcT
wife),  63,  141  ad  calc,  321

Mahmud  (follower  of  Muhammad
'Ali),  155,  158

Mahmud,  Hajji  Mulla — ,  249, 251,

253;  255

Mahmud  b.  Muhammad  Ja'far  of
Kirman,  234

Maine,  U.S.A.,  97

Majdu'd-Din  (son  of  Miisa  Kalim
and  nephew  of  Baha'u'Uah),  56,
,75.  317  ad  calc,  321

Maku,  208,  240  ad  calc.

Malcolm,  Rev.  Napier  — ,  43  ad
calc.

Maliku'l-Mutakallimtn,  221

Malkom  Khan,  Mirza  — ,  Ndzi-
7nu^d-Dawla,  295,  296

Mamantov,  N.  P.  — ,181

Ma'mun  (the  Caliph),  251,  255

Manakjf  (Zoroasirian  Agent  in
Tihran),  187

al-Mandr  (Arabic  newspaper),
143.  191

Manifestation  {Zuhur)  of  the  Bab,  4

Mansur,  Mirza  — ,  156,  157

Mansiir,  Sultan  — ,  239.  See
Bdbu'l-Bdb

Mansur  al-Khawwam,  50

Mansiiriyya  (Eyypt),  33

Maqdla-i-Shakhsi  Sayydh,  4.  See
also  Traveller's  A^arrative

Mariqfn,  followers  of  'Abbas
Efendi  so  called  by  their  op-
ponents, 1 48

Mary  the  Mother,  141

Maryam  (Baha'u'llah's  sister-in-
law,  entitled  al-  WaraqatuH-
Hamrd,  "the  Red  Leaf"),  8

Mashhad,  40,  238

Mas'iid  Mirza.    See  Zillu^ s-Sultdn

il/a/^«aw/(of  Jalalu'd-Din  Riimi),
133  ad  calc,  220

-Mzz/fl?  (Tennyson's),  61  ad  calc

Mawsil  (Mossoul),  17,  21,  38

Mawsu^dt  Press,  195,  196-7

Mayami,  238

Maydan-i-Haft    Kachal    (Tabrfz),

35
Maydanu'1-Kh^n,  43


Mayddn-i-Shah  (Yazd),  302
Mazandaran,  3,  5,  39,  57,  62,  199,

228,  233,  237,  321
Mazdak,  224

Mecca,  35,  159,  212,  Tf^o,  254
"Mehmed"  [i.e.  Muhammad)  (son

of  Subh-i  Azal),  314
Messiah,  77,  336,  337,  338
Metempsychosis  {tandsukh,  q.v.),

3.^0.
Mevlevi  dervishes,  51

Micah,  138

Michigan,  95

Mihriz  Gate  (Yazd),  42

Millennium,  139,  140

Miller,   Miss    Marian   —  marries

Khayru'llah,  95
Millerites,  137
Milwaukee,  150
Minhdjii't-Talihhi,  193
Minvlchihr    Khan    Mu^tamadu'd-

Dawla,  208
MirdHi'l-Baydn,  217
Mir  Damad,  222
Mirza  Aqa  (martyr),  40
Mirza  Aqa  of  Kashan  {cdXltd/andb-

i-Miinti),  31
Mirza  Buzurg  (father  of  Baha'u'Uah

and  Sul)h-i-Azal),  3,  317,  319
Mfrza-quli  (son  of  Mfrz^  Buzurg),

3^9
Mongols,  349
Morier,  221
Morocco,  241
Moses   (Musa)    the  Patriarch,    9,

n.  i  ai  calc.  ;  56  and  aU  calc,

13^   134,  136,   i37»   140,  141.

250J  254,  321,  344
Mosque  of  Sultan  Seh'm  (Adria-

nople),  24-5
"Most  Great  Name,"  122,    127,

131

"  Most  Holy  Tablet,"   120.     See

Aqdas,  JCItdbu'l

Mughabghab,  Mr  — ,  314
al-Muhdjir  ila^lldhVl-Ahad,  208
Muhdjirin  ("  Exiles"),  75
Muhammad    (the    Prophet),    131,

138,  139,  327
Muhammad  Shah  Qajar,  176,  249


INDEX


373


Muhammad,  Hajji  Mirza  Sayyid
—  of  Shfraz  (kinsman  of  Bab),

12

Muhammad  ("Mehmed"),  son  of

Subh-i-Azal,  314
Muhammad,  Mirza  —  of  Zarand,

25.     See  Nabll
Muhammad,  Mfr  —  of  Shiraz,  24,

25,  26
Muhammad,  Mulla  —  Mamqani

(one  of  the  Bab's  inquisitors),

249,   250,    253    and   ad  calc,

Muhammad,  Sayyid  —  of  Isfahan
(partisan  of  Subh-i-Azal),  23,

24.  51-5

Muhammad,  Sayyid  —  of  Khura-
san (martyr),  35

Muhammad  (surgeon  of  Adria-
nople),  28

Muhammad  Khan  (son  of  Fatima
Khanim),  320

Muhammad  Ahmad,  the  Mahdi  of
the  Sudan,  192

Muhammad  'AH  Shah  (or  Mirza),
176,  200

Muhammad  *AH,  Hajji  Mulla  — ,
of  Barfurush  (or  of  Mazan-
daran),  5,  199.  See  Qudaiis,
Jandb-i

Muhammad  'AH,  Mirza  —  (Epis-
tle of  Bab  to  — ),  208

Muhammad  'AH  of  Zanwaz  (dis-
ciple of  Bab  put  to  death  with
him),  4

Muhammad  'AH  (son  of  Baha'u
'llah),  17;  0^^  ad  calc;  arrested
in  connection  with  assassina-
tion of  Azalis  at  'Akka,  55-6;
63 ;  difference  between  —  and
'Abbas  Efendi,  80-6 ;  89-92 ;
100;  104;  105;  106;  no;
in;  142  ad  calc,  145;  147;
148;  153;  155;  159; '60;  167;
170;  181;  189;  191;  194;  197;
200;  231;  235;  321

Muhammad  'AH,  Mirza  —  of
Zanjan  (martyr),  36

Muhammad  'AH,  Mulla  —  (mar-
tyr), 41


Muhammad  'AH  of  Isfahan,  the
barber,  23,  55

Muhammad  'AH  Nawsh^d  (mar-
tyr). 41

Muhammad   'AH   Yazdi,    235-6 ;

301-3

Muhammad  B^qir,  Hdjji  — ,  r65

Muhammad  Baqir[-i-Majlisi],
Mulla  —  (theologian),  212

Muhammad  Baqir  (exiled  to  Cy-
prus). 44

Muhammad  Baqir  (died  at '  Akk^),

Muhammad  Baqir  of  Yazd  (mar-
tyr), 42

Muhammad  Baqir  (martyr  of
Yazd),  302,  305

Muhammad  Hadi  of  Dawlatabdd,
the  son  of  —  nominated  as
Subh-i-Azal's  successor,  312

Muhammad  Hasan  (son  of  Mirza
Buzurg),  319

Muhammad  Hasan  (son  of '  Abdu'l-
Karim),  145

Muhammad  Hasan,  Mirza — (mar-
tyr), 39-40

Muhammad  Hasan  of  Yazd  (mar-
tyr), 43

Muhammad  Hashim  of  Niraq  (ex-
iled to  Khartum),  34

Muhammad  Husayn,  Mirza  —
(martyr),  39-40

Muhammad  Husayn  b.  Muham-
mad Hadi  of  Zuwara,  poeti-
cally surnamed  Mahjur,   238,

'^39
Muhammad  Ibrahim  of  Kashan,

54,  55
Muhammad   Ibrahim  MasHla-gu,

303^  307
Muhammad      Isma'il      (died     at

'Akka),  46
Muhammad    Jawad    of    Qazwin,

author  of  the  Arabic  tract  of

which  the  translation  occupies

pp.    1-112    of     this    volume.

Also  115,  168,  190,  194,  230,

2.^6,  237,  357
[uhammad  Kazim  al-Khurasdni,

180


374


INDEX


Muhammad    Mahdi    Khan.     See

Za  ''{mii'd-Dawla
Muhammad-quli,  Mirza — ,  17,  26,

55

Muhammad  Riza of  Isfahan,  called
al-^Atiz,  10

Muhammad  Taqf,  Hajji  Sayyid  —
Manshadf  (Secretary  of  'Abbas
Efendi),  143,  236

Muhammad  Taqi  (son  of  Muham-
mad *Ali  of  Niraq),  189,  325

Muhammad  Taqi,  known  as  Pari-
shdn  (son  of  Mirza  Buzurg),  320

Muhammad  Taqi,  Shaykh  —  of
Sabzawar,  305

Muhammad  Taqi  (father  of  Za-
Hniu'd-Dawla)^  191

Muhammadun  (village  in  Leba-
non), 93

Muharram,  month  of  — ,  37

al-Muhit,  200

Muhsin  (son-in-law  of  'Abbas
Efendi),  320

Muhsin,  Mfrza  — ,  89,  91

Muhsin,  Sayyid  —  of  Dahaj,  148
ad  calc.

Mujdwirin  (settlers  in  'Akka),  75

Munich,  180

Munir,  Janab-i (Mirza  Aqa  of

Kashan),  31

Muradiyya  (house  in  Adrianople),

Murtaza  al-Ansari,  Shaykh  — ,  13

Murtaza-quli,  MuUa  — ,  249,  250,
,251,,  253,  254,  255

Musa,  Aqa  Mirza — entitled  Kalim
(brother  of  Baha'u'Uah),  9,  17,
20,  26,  56  and  ad  calc,  319,
321

Musa   (grandson  of  Baha'u'Uah),

321

Musa  al-Jawahiri,  Mirza — ,  37
Miisa  Kazim  (the  Seventh  Imam),

334

Musdfirin  (temporary  visitors  to
'Akka),  75

Mushkln  Qalam,  Mfrza  Husayn  — ,
44,  190

Mustafa,  Mirza  —  of  Niraq  (mar-
tyr), 35


Mustawjiyu' l-Mamdlik,  264

al- Mustayqidh  ("Sleeper  Awak-
ened"), 218-19

Mutazalziltn  ( * '  vacillators ' '  or
"quakers"),  followers  of  Mu-
hammad 'Ali  so  called  by
'Abbas  Efendi,  81,  xd^  ad  calc.

Muwakkidun,  -in.  See  Tawhid,
Ak'ltii

Muzaffaru'd-Din  Shah,  35

Nabil  (numerically  equivalent  to
Muhammad,  for  which  name
it  is  sometimes  substituted  by
the  Babis),  25  n.  i  ad  calc.
In  particular  Mirza  Muhammad
of  Zarand  is  so  entitled,  25,
32-3,   205  ad  calc,  7,^6,  351,

353-7
an-Nafsu'z-Zakiyya,  192
Naghaindtu^r-Ruh,  219-20
Na'ib,  HaJji  — ,  299
Najaf,  12,  13,  2^ Af  ad  calc.
Najafabad  (Isfahan),  291,  292
Najaf  'Ali  (martyr)  of  Zanjan,  36
Najafi,  Aqa-yi  — ,  179,  292,  294
Najaf  quli,  Mirza  — ,  208
Najfb  Pasha,  16
Najm-i-Bdkhiar,  i"]"],  185
Ndma-i-Bdstdn   (poem    by  Mfrza

Aqa  Khan),  221,  225
'  'Names, "  ' '  Book  of—"  {KitdbuU-

Asmd),  206-7
Namiq  Pasha  (Governor  of  Bagh-
dad), 16,  282,  286
Napoleon  III,  138-9,  140
Napoleon  IV,  117,  139
Ndqiztn  ("Violators"  of  the  Cove-
nant, followers  of  Muhammad
'All     so     called     by     'Abbas
Efendi),  81,  148,  i$5  ad  calc,
160,  162  ad  calc.
Narjis  Khatiin,  328
Ndsikhii't-Tawdrikh,  189
Nasir  the  Arab,  53,  54,  220
Nasir,  Hajji  —  of  Qazwin  (martyr),

'39  ,

Nasiru'd-Din    Karbala'i,    Shaykh

— ,  208

Nasiru'd-Dfn     Shah     [or    Mirza,


INDEX


375


before  accession],  5,  12,  15,  35,
40  ;  Baha'u'lMh's  Letter  to — ,
47-9«  i50>  177.  221,  247,
260,  262-4,  267

Nasr  b.  Sayyar,  285  ad  calc.

Nationalists,  Persian  -*,  221.
See  also  Constitutional  Move-
ment in  Persia

Nawwab  (Baha'u'Uah's  first  wife),
62,  141  ad  calc,  320

Nayriz  insurrection,  204,  336

Nazimu'l- Islam  of  Kirman,  225

New  History  of  the  Bab,  120,
239.  338,  343',  345-  See  also
To!  rikh  -  i-Jadid

New  Jerusalem,  138

New  Testament,  333

New  York,  94,  95,  96,  97,  98,
ri6,  123,  124,  125,  144,  145,
148,  150,  151,  152,  237

New    York  Herald,    145  ad  calc,
150

New  York  Times,  152

Newark,  149

Nicolas,  A.-L.-M.  — ,  181-2,
200,  204,  248,  275,  276

Nile,  34

Nineteenth  Century  and  After ,  180

"Nineteenth  Century  Hall,"  97

Niraq,  228

Nishapiir,  40

Niyaz,  Hajji  —  of  Kirman,  146
ad  calc,  151,  170

Nizdmu'l-'Ulamd,  253  ad  calc.

Noah,  131,  135,  141

Nod,  Land  of—,  135

North  American,  i:\f>adcalc.,  151

Nufudh-i-Kaldm  ("Influence  of
the  Word"),  335,  336

Numbers,  sacred  — ,  130

Nuqta-i-Ula.  See  Point,  First  —,
and  Bad

Nuqiatu'l-Kaf  (by  Hajji  Mfrza
janf  of  Kashan),  206,  221,
237.  239,  247,  248,  338

Nur,  3,  57,  228

Nuru'lMh  (son  of  Subh-i-Azal),
321

Nuru'llah,  Ustad  —  (martyr),  39

Niishirwan,  224


O    Christians!     Why  do   ye   not

believe  in    Christ  ?   by   I.   G.

Khayru'lUh,  93  ad  calc,  181,

188  ad  calc
Old  Testament,  333
Orient-Occident  Unity,  182-3
Ouseley's  Notices  of  the  Persian

Poets,  135  ad  calc

Paris,  98,  109,  180,  222
Parishdn,   Muhammad  Taqf  — ,

320
Paydmhar-i-  Bdkhta  r,  177
Persia  in  the  Apocalypse,  137,  139
Persian  -  American      Educational

Society,  182
*'  Peter,"  "  Baha's  — ,"  99, 100, 101
Pharaoh,  327
Phelps,  Myron  H. — ,  183
Philadelphia,  97,  148-9,  151
Phillott,  Colonel  — ,  221
* '  Pilgrimage, ' ' '  'Journal  of  the — , "

205.    See  also  Ziydrat-ndma

Point,  First  —  {Nuqta-i-Uld)  or
Point  of  the  Bayan  {Nuqta-i-
Baydn),  3.     See  Bab

Poison,  alleged  attempts  to  —
amongst  the  Babis,  22-3

Polak,  Dr  — ,  267

Polygamy  defended,  181

Pope,  117,  138,  139,  140

Port  Said,  32,  108,  236

Psychic  Gazette,  International  — ,

185
Pyramids,  141

Qadiyanf,  Ghulam  Ahmad  — ,192

Qahlr,  Mulla  Rajab  'Ali  — ,  199,
208,  220;  —  was  brother-in-
law  of  the  Bab,  220  ad  calc.

Qdhiriyyat  ("compelling  power
of  the  Word"),  336

Qahraman,  Mirz^  — ,  35

Qa'im  ("He  who  shall  arise"),
12,  14,  208,  32«,  329,  336,
337,  338.   See  Mahdi,  Messiah

Qa'im-i-Khurds^nf,  239

Qd'in,  238

Qalandar,  349


376


INDEX


Qandil-geyjesi  ( ' '  Lam p-night ' ') ,
224

Qdniin  ^newspaper),  295

al-QawluH-Fasl^  194

Qayyumu'  I  -  Asnid=-  Yust^f,  Com-
mentary on  the  Stiratu  — ,  q.v.

Qazwfn,  238

Qudi/us,  Jandb-i-  — ,  199,  202,
208-11,  233,  238,  241-3,  345

Qudsiyya  Khanim,  183

Qum,  238

Qui-'dn,  204,  2T4,  216,  217,  219,
231,  ^26-^6  passim,  350

Qurratu'l-'Ayn  (Zarri'n  Taj,  also
entitled  Jandb  -  i -  Tdhird) ,  5,
177,  178,  182,  208,  233,  271,
343-5 1 »  358

Rabi'a  (householder  in  *Akka),  50
Rabino,  Mr  H.  L.  — ,  241
Racine,  150

Raff,  Mir?^  —  (martyr),  40
Rahim  Khan,  176
Rahmatu'Uah  (martyr),  41
Rajab  'AH,  Mulla  — ,  208,  213  (?)

See  Qahir
Rafat  (••  Return"),  102,  330,  335,

338
Rajniu  sh-Shnytdn  fi  Radhd'tlCl-

Bay  an,  192-3
Rasht,  39,  241
"Red  Drapn,"  117
Reincarnation,     117.       See    also

Rafat
Remey,  Chnrles  Mason — ,  184
Resurrection.  330
Richardson,  Robert  P.  — .  181
Rij'ot  or  Raj' at  ("Return"),  102,

330>  33^'  338
Risdla-i-'' Atnma,  189,  227,  320
RisdIa-i-Bushrd  wa  Aya-i-Kubrd,

158,  IQ3-4.
Risdlai-Raddiyya,  227
Riyaztd! l-Miihtadin,  215
Riza,  Imam  'All  — ,  251,  255
Riza,  Aqa  —  of  Shiraz,  75,  91
Riza  Bey,  house  of  —  in  Adria-

nople,  51
Rizd  (Sayvid  or  Mirza,  father  of

the  Bab),  328


Riz£-quli,  Hajji  Mlrza  — ,  known
as  Hakim  (son  of  M  frza  Buzurg) ,
320

Riza-qulf  of  Tafrish,  Mfrza — ,  52  ;
assassinated,  55

Rizw^n  'All,  son  of  Subh-i-Azal,
175,  199,  200,  201,  202,  203,
204,   211,  215,  217,  234,  309,

313.  314^  322
Rizwan,  Garden  of  —  ('Akka),  58
Rizwan,  Garden  of  —  (Baghdad),

16
Rizwdn,  Kitdb-i (imitation  of

GuUstdn),  221
Roemer,  Hermann,  184
Rosen,    Baron   Victor  — ,   64  ad

calc.,1'3^  adcalc,  184, 195,  202,

203,  205
RosenlDerg.  Miss  Ethel  J.,  147  ad

calc,  185
Royal  Asiatic  Society,  142,  188
Rudolph,  Felix  —  (Miss  Felicia

F.  Scatcherd),  185
Riih  wa'l-Qamar,  214
R^ihi  (Shaykh  Ahmad  of  Kirm^n),

199-200,   213,   221,  225,   226,

227
Ruhu'llah  (Subh-i-Azal's  nephew),

234
Ruqayya    (wife   of    Subh-i-Azal),

321
Russell,  Mr  Charles  ~  (U.S.A.

Minister   to    Persia   in   19 10),

183
Russian    Government,    6,    7,    73,

117
Russo-Turkish  "War.  31
Rustam  'AH  (the  Babi  heroine  of

Zanjan),  176

Sabzawar,  42

Sabzawdr,  Mosque  of  Shaykh
Hasan  of — ,  299.  301

Sabz-i-Maydan  (Harfurush),  243

Sacy,  Gabriel  — ,  185

Sadhaiiyva  (Baha'u'llah's  daugh-
ter), 63,  321

S^diq  (author  of  attempt  on
Nasiru'd-Dfn  Shah's  life  in
1852),  5


INDEX


177


Sddiq,    Mirza  —   (son  of  Bahi'u

'llah).  62,  320
Safawi  kings  censured,  222
Sahib-Qiran  Mfrzi,  242
Sahifa  (pi.  Sahd'if,  "tracts")  by

Subh-i-Azal,  2(5
as  -  Sahifatu     bayncCl-  Haramayn

(the  Bab's  earliest  work),  200
Sahifa-i-Riznviyya,  208
Sahifatu  ''r-Rijd  li-ayydmi  Shah-

1-Cl- '  Uld,  2  1 5
Sa'id    Khan,    Mirza   —    (Persian

Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs  in

1862),  276  et  seqq.
Sa'fd  Khan,  Dr  —  of  Hamadan,

190
Sa'fdu'l-'Ulama     (persecutor     of

Babis  in  Mazandaran),  209
St  Petersburg,  94,  184
Sdldriyya    (poem   by   Mfrza  Aqa

Khan),  221
Sale's  Quran,  331
Salih,  the  Prophet,  50
Salih  Pasha,  56
Salsabfl  (plain  near  Yazd),  43
Samadiyya  Khanim  (Baha'u  llah's

daughter),  63,  321
Samiri,  162
Samsun,  17
San  PVancisco,  149
Sang-i-sar,  238
as-Sanusi,  192
Saqi-ndma,  343
Sari,  241

Sata'dt  (by  Subh-i-Azal),  315
Satan,  r  17,  123,  141
Sawad-Kuh,  241
-Sawdti"  (by  Subh-i-Azal),  315
Say  yah,  Mfrza  'All  — ,  44
Scatcherd,    Miss    Felicia   F.    — ,

185
Schefer,  M.  Ch.  — ,  352
"Seal  of  the  Prophets"  (title  of

Muhammad),  329
Sententiae  of  'AH  ibn  Abf  Talib,

217
Serpent,  134,  139
"Servant    of   God"   or    "of  the

Presence,"  g.     See  Khddimu

'lldh,  Jandb-i


"Seven    Lamps"   are   the   seven

children  of  Baha'u'lldh,  141
"Seven     Proofs,"     204-5.      See

Dald'il-i-Sab^a
Shah  Miizar,  238
Shah  Sultan  Khanim,   319.     See

Khdnnn-i-Buzurg
Shdh-ndma,  221
Shahr-i-B^bak,  231
Shahristani's  Book  of  Sects,  335
Shahriid,  238

Shah-verdi  Khan  ('Akka),  56,  57
Sham''-djin  (a  torture),  269
Shattu'l-'Arab,  j  i,  16
Shaykh  Tabarsi.     See  Tabarsi
Shaykhi  school  or  sect,  182,  194,

224
Shedd,  Rev.  J.  H.  — ,  D.D.,  264
Shedd,  Mr  W.  A.  — ,  260,  264
Shemsi  Bey,  17
Shf'a,  12,  16,  37,  38,  42,  73,  182,

191,  194,  222,  255,  306,  325,
.3^8
Shihab,  Amir  Hani  —  (son-in-law

of  Khayru'llah),  155
Shimiran  (near  Tihran),  5
Shiraz,  12,  40,  176,  200,  208,  212,

238,  248
Shirwan,  196
Shu'a'u'lldh  (grandson  of  Baha'u

;ilah),  321
Shiishtar,  208

Shuster,  Mr  W.  Morgan  ~,  183
Shu  iin-i-khanisa,  207.     See  Five

Grades
Siberia,  73
Si-dih,  291,  294
Sidq  'All  of  Qazwin,  26
Sidra\_tu  l-AIuiitahd]    ("  Lote-tree

of  the  Limit"),  60,  78
Sikandar,  349

Sinai,  Mt  — ,  253,  344.     See  Tiir
Sion,  Mount  — ,  45,  137
Sirdt,  330

Skrine,  F.  H.  — ,  185
Smyrna,  31,  32
Soldatenfreund ,  26"]
Solomon,  250,  254
Solomon,  Temple  of — ,  135,  141
Sprague,  Mr  Sydney  — ,  183


378


INDEX


Star  of  the  West,  177

Stenstrand,  Mr  August  J. — ,  148,
186-7

Stuttgart,  180

Subh-i-Azal  ("the  Morning  of
Eternity,"  Mirza  Yahya,  son
of  Mirza  Buzurg  and  half-
brother  of  Baha'u'llah)  joins
Baha'uUlah  at  Baghdad,  7 ;
journey  to  and  behaviour  at
Adrianople,  19-25;  alleged  in-
trigues against  Baha'u'llah,  22-
6;  51;  called  "Satan"  by  the
American  Baha'is,  117,  123;
abandoned  by  his  follower
Mirza  Yahya  of  Isfahan,  159;
visited  by  ZaHmu'd-Dawla,
191  ;  his  writings,  198-9;  21 1-
20;  202;  204;  his  own  ac-
count of  his  conversion,  212,
218-19;  forbids  association
with  his  half-brother  Baha  u
'llah,  213;  227;  228;  232;  his
letters  to  the  author,  234  ;  275 ;
not  regarded  as  leader  of  Babis
at  Baghdad  by  Persian  Govern-
ment, 276  et  seqq.\  account  of
his  death  and  Imrial,  309-15;
kinsmen  and  children,  319  ^/

seqq- ;  33n  343
Subhi  Pasha,  56
Sudan,  35

Suhrab,  Mfrza  Ahmad  — ,  183
Sulayman-i-banna    (the    builder),

233
Sulayman  Khan  (martyr  of  1852),

.  269  ad  calc.^  271
Sulayman  Khan  (martyr),  176
Sulayman  Khan,  208
Sulayman  Khan,  262
Sulaymaniyya  (Kurdistan),  7,  9
Sultan,  Shaykh  —  of  'Iraq,  9
Sultanabad,  41
Sunnis,  191,  325
"Supreme     Schism,"    51.       See

FasluU-Akbar
Siiratu'l-Haykal,  64,  84,  190,  217
Sui-atuU-Qalam,  78
Surtej,  Aqa  'Abdu'llah  — ,  241
Siismdnid-Dawla,  223


Syria,  93.  See  also  ^AkkdyHayjd,
Carmel

Tabar-dar,  Amfr-i-  — ,  241

Tabaristan,  241

Tabarsi,  Shaykh  —  (in  Mazan-
daran  near  Barfurush),  5,  199,
208,  238-42,  336

"  Tablet  of  the  Mischief,"  84.  See
Lawh

Tabrfz,  4,  35,  191,  225,  238,  247,
249,  264

Tadhki)  atu' l-Ghd/iltn,  227-8

TadhkiratW l-Khawdltn,  358

Tahira,  Janab-i-  — .  See  Qurra-
tul-^Ayn

Talar  (river),  241

Talbot,  Mrs  L.  H.  — ,  96

Tandsukh,  330,  335.  See  Me-
tempsychosis

Tanhihu^ n-N£imin^  226-^

Taqf  Khan,  Mirza  — ,  entitled
Amir-i-Kabir,  20,  261

Taqiyyu'd-Din  Pasha  (governor  of
Baghdad),  38

Taqiyyu'd-Dfn  (son  of  Subh-i-
Azal),  314

Td'ri'khu' I- Bdbiyya,  by  Za'imu'd-
Dawla,  143,  191-2

Ta^ rikh-i- Biddri'yi- Irdiiiydn,  225

TaWikh-i-Jadid,  187, 202, 248, 325 .
See  New  History

Ta^rikh-i-Miiqaddas-i- Hindi  { "In-
dian Sacred  History"),  226

Tartars,  Tartnry,  349  and  ad  calc.

Tasbih-i- Fatinia,  203

Tawhid,  Ahiu't-  —  ("Unitar-
ians"), followers  of  Muham-
mad 'All  so  name  themselves,
81,  87,  90,  155

Tennyson,  61

Testament,  Last  —  of  Baha'u'llah.
See  IVasiyya,  KitdbuU-  —

Thdbitun  ("the  Steadfast"),  fol-
lowers of  Abbas  Efendi  so
name  themselves,  81

Thainara-i- Azaliyya  ("  Eternal
Fruit "),  346  and  n.  2  ad  calc.
See  Subh-i-Azal

Thornbourg,  Mrs  — ,  107


INDEX


379


Three  Questions^  by  Ibrabfm  Khay-
ru'llah,  143,  168,  r8o-i

Tiberias  (Tabariyya),  230

Tigris,  38,  218

Tihran,  3,  5,  6,  8,  36,  39,  41,  48,
62,  148,  183,  212,  225,  238,
241,  262,  263,  264,  292,  293,

294,  303.  307,  319
Tfmur,  223

Tomb,  Questioning  of  the  — ,  330

Totten,  139

Townley,  Sir  Walter  — ,  293-4

Transfiguration,  Mount  of — ,  136

Transmigration,  330,  335

Traveller' s  Narrative  {Maqdla-i-
Shakhsi  Sayydh),  4,  5  ad  calc.  ;
44  artf'  calc.  \  ^1  ad  calc.  \  ^t^  ad
calc. ;  61  ad  calc. ',  "j^  ad  calc. ;
84.  ad  calc,  142;  162  ad  calc.  ;
175;  184;  196;  201  ad  calc.  ;
202  ad  calc;  203,  205,  206,
216,  218  ad  calc;  225;  i^g  ad
calc,  255,  258   ad  calc,   267,

321,  347
Trebizonde,  225
Troodos,  Mount  — ,  314
"  Truth-knowers,"   title   assumed

by    the    Baha'fs   in    America,

149
Ttjba  (tree  in  Paradise),  357
Tiidd,  Kitdb-i-  — ,  Persian  poem

by  Subh-i-Azal,  211,  215-16
Tumanskiy,  A.  — ,  187,  229
Ibn  Tumart,  192
Tur  (Mt  Sinai),  250,  251,  253,  344,

345»  350

Turbat,  238

Turkey  (Rtim),  238;  relations  be-
tween —  and  Persia,  285 ;
in  the  Apocalypse,  137,  139

Turkish  Revolution,  147  ad  calc

Turshiz,  238

'Ubaydu'llah  al-Mahdi  al-Fatimf,

'Udi  Khamm^r,    house  of  —  in

'Akka,  50,  58,  60
'Umar  (Caliph),  292
•Umar  Bey,  37
'UmarEfendi,  30,  31


'Umar  Efendi,  Major  — ,  44
Umayyad  Caliphs,  .^7,  285  ad  calc.
£/>;//«/ ("illiterate"),  331
UmmuU-Kitdb,  66  ad  calc.
"  Unitarians,"    followers   of  Mu-
hammad 'AH  so  entitle  them-
selves. See  Taivhld,  AhluU

Urumiyya,  249,  252,  264

V^mbery,  180

Vatralsky,  Stoyan  Krstoff — ,  149,

1S7-8
Vedanta  philosophy,  123,  126
Vegetarians  condemned,  129
Veysi  Pasha,  1 7
Victoria,  Queen  — ,  138,  212
Vienna,  'Abbas  Efendi  in  — ,  180

Wahid- i  ■  Azvwal.      See    Yahyd,

Sayyid  —  of  Ddrdb
Wankegan,  Wis.  (U.S.A.),  151
Waqdyi^-i-Mimiyya    (History    of

the  Babi   insurrection  in  Ma-

zandaran),  238
Wdqi^a-i-hdHla,  88  ad  calc,  197-

8,  230
Washington,  149,   151,  152,    182,

r83
Wasiyya,  KitdhtCl-  — ,  or  Kitdhu

Wasiyyati  (Bah^'u'llah's  Last

Testament),  ^^,  74-5,  79,  80,

88,  112,  159,  229
Waskus  (Mazandaran),  242
Williams,  Basil  — ,  188,  190
Wilson,  Dr  S.  G.  — ,  181,  188

Yahya,  Mirza  ^-  (half-brother  of
Baha'u'llah).    See  Subh-i-Azal

Yahya,  Mirza  —  (present  at  Bab's
examination   at  Tabriz),    249,

253
Yahya,    Mirza   —  of  Jedda,    his

unhappy  fate,  154-67,  194
Yahya,  Sayyid  —  of  Darab,  204,

208,  232
Yazd,  41,  232,  233,  235,  236,238,

291,  292  ad  calc;  persecutions

at  — ,  295-308
Year  amongst  the   Persians,    by

E.  G.  Browne,  i^  ad  calc,  34


38o


INDEX


adcalc,  39  adcalc,  41  ad  calc,

47  ad  calc,  55  ad  c ale.
Kmjm/j  Commentary  on  the  Suratu

— ,    203-3    (3^1  so   called    ^(Xjj'-

y^mu'l-Asmd   and    Ahsanu'l

Qi'sas),  219,  228
Yusuf  Riz^  Pasha,  224.

Zafir,  Shaykh  — ,  224
Zahir  the  Arab,  21
Za'imu'd-Dawla,  143,  148,  i9r-2
Zanjan.  36,  176,  234,  238.  268,  336
Zanwaz  (a  dependency  of  Tabriz),  4
Zarkaran,  196

Zawara  (a  dependency  of  Isfahan),
10


Zaynu'l-Muqarrabin  (Baha'i  copy-

ist),  84
Zillu's-Sultan,   Prince  —  (son  of

Nasiru'd-Din    Shah),    39,    41,

294,  296
Zion,  137.       See  Sion
Ziydrat-ndma,  205,  312
Ziya'u'llah    Efendi    (Baha'u'llah's

son),  63  ;  sickness  and  death,

85-8,  142  ad  calc  ;  230,  231,

235,  321
Zoroaster,  Zoroastrians,   77,    187,

191,  222,  292  adcalc,  334,  335,

336
Zuhiir.     See  Manifestation


CAMBRIDGE:    PRINTED    BY  J.    B.    PEACE,    M.A.,    AT   THE   UNIVERSITY   PRESS


I.     OTHER  WORKS,  INCLUDING  TRANSLA-
TIONS, BY  THE  AUTHOR  OF  THIS  BOOK

A  Traveller's  Narrative  written  to  illustrate  the  Episode

of  the  Bab.  Edited  in  the  original  Persian,  and  translated  into  English,
with  an  Introduction  and  Explanatory  Notes,  in  two  volumes.  Vol.  I,
Persian  Text,  pp.  v\\+iv.  Vol.  ii,  English  Translation  and  Notes,
pp.  lv  +  447.  Price  15J.  net.  Vol.  il,  separately.  10^.  dd.  net.  Cam-
bridge University  Press,  1891.

A  Year  amongst  the  Persians  :  Impressions  as  to  the  Life,

Character  and  Thought  of  the  People  of  Persia,  received  during  twelve
months' residence  in  that  country  in  the  years  1887-8.  Pp  x  +  594.  Pub-
lished at  21J.     London:  A.  and  C  Black,  1893.     [Out  of  print.)

The  Ta'rikh-i-Jadid  or  New  History  of  Mirza  *Alf  Mu-
hammad the  Bab... translated  from  the  Persian,  with  an  Introduction,
Illustrations  and  Appendices.  Pp.  111  +  459+ v";  Price  \os.  6d.  net.
Cambridge  University  Press,  1893.

A  Catalogue  of  the  Persian  Manuscripts  in  the  Library

of  the  University  of  Cambridge.  Pp.  xl  +  472.  Price  15J.  Cam-
bridge University  Press,  1896.

A  Hand-list  of  the  Muhammadan  Manuscripts  in  the

Library  of  the  University  of  Cambridge.  Pp.  xviii  +  440.  Price  le^s.
Cambridge  University  Press,  1900.

A  Literary  History  of  Persia.    Vol  i,  from  the  earliest  times

until  Firdawsf.  Pp.  xiv  +  521.  Vol.  II,  from  Firdawsi  to  Sa'df.  Pp,
xiv  +  568.    Price  12s.  6d.  each.    London  :  T.  Fisher  Unwin,  1902  and  1906.

An  Abridged  Translation  of  the  History  of  Tabaristan...

of  Muhammad  ibn  Hasan  ibn  Isfandiyar,  being  Vol.  II  of  the  '•  E.  J.  W.
Gibb  Memorial  Series."  Pp.  xv  +  356.  Price  8^.  London:  Luzac  and
Co.,  1905.

The    Persian    Revolution   of  1905 -1909.     Pp.   xxvi  +  470.

With  46  illustrations.  Price  ioj-.  net.  Cambridge  University  Press,  1910.
[Out  of  print.)

The  Press  and  Poetry  of  Modern  Persia,  partly  based  on

the  Manuscript  Work  of  Mirza  Muhammad  'AH  "  Tarbiyat "  of  Tabriz.
Pp.  xl  + 357  +  0.     Price  12s.  net.     Cambridge  University  Press,  1914.

II.     THE  PERSIAN  HISTORICAL  TEXT  SERIES

(Five  volumes -printed  by  Messrs  E.  J.  Brill  of  Leyden,  and  published  by
them  and  by  Messrs  Luzac  and  Co.,  London.  The  complete  set  is  obtainable
at  the  reduced  price  of  30J. ;  single  volumes  7^'.  6d.  each.)

(VOL.  L)

The  Tadhkiratu'sh-Shu'ara  ("Memoirs  of  the  Poets")  of

Dawlatshah  of  Samarqand,  1901,  in  one  volume  of  pp.  b  +  ir\  +  i6.
Edited  by  E.  G.  Browne.

{VOLS.  II  AND  IV.)

The  Lubabu'l-Albab  (the  oldest  biography  of  Persian  Poets,

compiled  about  A. D.  i  221)  by  Muhammad 'Awfi.  Edited  by  E.  G.  BkoWNE
and  MfRZA  Muhammad  of  Qazwin,  in  two  volumes,  published  in  1903

and  1906.     Pp.  4^9  +  ivr  +  ii,  and^  +  iYT  +  78-


(VOLS.   Ill  AND  V.)

The  Tadhkiratu'l-Awliya  ("Memoirs  of  the  Saints")  of
Shaykh  Faridu'd-Din  'Att^r.  Edited  by  R.  A.  Nicholson,  in  two
volumes,  published  in  1905  and  1907.     Pp.  t'oY  +  66  and  v"H  +ix+ii9.

III.     PERSIAN  TEXTS  EDITED  FOR  THE
''E.  J.  W.  GIBB  MEMORIAL"   SERIES

By  E.  G.  Browne  and  Mirza  Muhammad  of  Qazwin  conjointly  or
separately,  and  obtainable  from  Messrs  Luzac  and  Co.,  46,  Great  Russell
Street,  London,  W.C.,  the  Publishers  to  the  Trust.

(VOL.  VIIL)
The    Marzuban-nama,  a  book  of  Fables... by  Sa'du'd-Din
Warawini.     Edited   by  Mirza   Muhammad,   and   published   in   one

volume  in  1909.     Pp.  j^  +  r.*^  +  xvi.     Price  8j.

(VOL.  X.)
Al-Mu'jam  fi  Ma'ayiri  Ash'ari'l-'Ajam,  a  rare  and  ancient
treatise  on  the  Prosody  and  Poetic  Art  of  the  Persians  by  Shamsu'd-DIn
Muhammad  ibn  Qays  ar-RAzL     Edited  by  MIrza  Muhammad,  and

published  in  one  volume  in  1909.     Pp.  ^  +  \  v*  +  t"li  +  xx.     Price  8j.

(VOL.  XL)
Chahar  Maqala  ("The  Four  Discourses")  by  NizAnf  AL-'ARi^pf

of  Samarqand.  Edited,  with  Introduction,  Notes  and  Indices,  by  MfRzA
Muhammad,  and  published  in  one  volume  in  1910.  Pp.  4^+  ri.  +  xxiv.
Price  8i-.  (An  English  translation,  by  E.  G.  Browne,  was  published  in
ihe  Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society  (Vol.  xxxij  in  1899,  and  can  be
•  obtained  as  a  separate  reprint  from  the  Secretary  of  the  Society,  22,
Albemarle  Street,  London,  W.,  or  from  Messrs  Luzac  and  Co.,  46,
Great  Russell  Street,  London,  W^.C.)

(VOLS.  XIV,  I  and  2.)
The    Ta'rikh-i-Guzida   ("Select    History")   of   Hamdu'llah

Mustawfi-i-Qazvvini,  compiled  in  a.d.  1330,  reproduced  in  facsimile  from
a  MS.  written  in  a.d.  1453,  with  a  Translation  by  E.  G.  Browne  and
Indices  by  R.  A.  NiCHuLSON.  Vol.  i,  containing  the  facsimile  of  the
text,  1910;  Vol.  II,  containing  the  Translation  and  Indices,  1913.     Pp.

-^ J  4-  A,  ay  +  xiv  and  xxi  +  237  +  rAI.     Price  i^s.  and  lOi".  respectively.

^  (VOL.  XV.)

The  Kitab-i-Nuqtatu'1-Kaf,  being  the  earliest  history  of  the
Babis,  compiled  by  HAjji  MIrza  Jan!  of  Kashan  between  the  years
A.D.  1850  and  1852,  edited  from  the  unique  Paris  MS.  (Suppl.  Pers.  1071)

by  E.  G.  Browne.    One  volume,  1910.    Pp.  ^,^+v^v  +  xcv.    Price  8.f.

(VOLS.  XVI,  I  and  2.)^

The    Ta'rikh-i-Jahan-gusha   of   'Ala'u'd-Din   'Ata   Malik-i-

Juwayni,  composed  in  a.d.  1260,  in  three  volumes.  Vol.  i,  containing
the  history  of  Chingiz  Khan  and  his  successors,  edited  with  an  Introduc-
tion, Notes  and  Indices  from  several  old  MSS.  by  MfRZA  Muhammad

and  published  in  1912.  Pp.  ^,S3+^\i.  +xciv.  Price  8j.  Vol.  ii,  con-
taining the  hi.story  of  the  Khwarazmshahs,  published  in  1916.  Pp.  roA  +
xvi.     Price  8^^.     Vol.  in  in  preparation.


IV.  ARTICLES  CONTRIBUTED  FROM  1889  TO
1908  TO  THE  JOURNAL  OF  THE  ROYAL
ASIATIC  SOCIETY

Separate  reprints  of  the  later  ones  (Nos.  10-20)  can  in  most  cases  be
obtained  from  the  Author,  or  from  the  Secretary  of  the  Society,  22,  Albemarle
Street,  London,  W.,  or  from  Messrs  Luzac  and  Co.

1.  The  Babis  of  Persia.     I.    Sketch  of  their  History,  and

Personal   Experiences  amongst   them.      II.     Their   Literature   and
Doctrines.     [j.R.A.S.,  Vol.  xxi,  1889.)

2.  Some  Remarks  on  the  Babi  Texts,  edited  by  Baron

Victor  Rosen...     {/.R.A.S.,  Vol.  xxiv,  1892.)

3.  Catalogue  and  Description  of  27  Babf  Manuscripts.

[J.R.A.S.,  Vol.  XXIV,  1892.)

4.  Description   of  an    Old  Persian  Commentary  on

the  Qur'dn.     {J.R.A.S.,  Vol.  xxvi,  1894.)

5.  Some  Notes  on  the  Poetry  of  the  Persian  Dialects.

{J.R.A.S.,  Vol.  xxvii,  1895.)

6.  A    Specimen    of   the    Gabri    Dialect    of    Persia.

(J.R.A.S.,  Vol.  XXIX,  1897.)

7.  Personal  Reminiscences  of  the  Babi  Insurrection

at  Zanjan  in  1850... translated  from  the  Persian.     {J.R.A.S.,  Vol.
XXIX,  1897.)

8.  Some  Notes  on  the  Literature  and  Doctrines  of

the  Huriifi  Sect.     {J.R.A.S.,  Vol.  xxx,  1898.)

9.  The  Sources  of  Dawlatshah ;  with  some  Remarks  on

the  Materials  available  for  a  Literary  History  of  Persia,   and  an
Excursus  on  Barbad  and  Rudagi.     {J.R.A.S.,  Vol.  xxxi,  1899.)

10.  Yet  More  Light  on  'Umar-i-Khayyam.     {/.R.A.S.,

Vol.  XXXI,  1899.)

11.  The  Chahar  Maqala  ("Four  Discourses")  of  Nidhami-

i-'Arudi-i-Samarqandf,  translated  into  English.     {J.R.A.S.,  Vol,
XXXI,  1899.)     Price  3^.  paper  covers,  4J-.  cloth.

12.  Some  Account  of  the...Nihayatu'1-irab  fi  akhbari'l-

Furs  wa'l-'Arab,  particularly  of  that  part  which  treats  of  the  Persian
Kings.     {J.R.A.S.,  Vol.  xxxii,  1900.)

13.  Biographies  of  Persian  Poets  contained  in  Ch.  v,  §  6,

of  the   Tdrtkh-i-Guzida,  or  "Select  History"  of  Hamdu'llah  Mus-
tawfi  of  Qazwi'n.     {J.R.A.S.,  Vols,  xxxii-xxxiii,  1900-1901  )

14.  Account  of  a  rare  manuscript  History  of  Isfahan,

presented  to  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society  on  May  19,  1827,  by  Sir  John
Malcolm.     {J.R.A.S.,  Vol.  xxxiii,  1901.)

15.  Account  of  a  rare  manuscript  History  of  the  Seljuqs

in  the  Schefer  Collection  of  MSS.  in  the  Bibliotheque  Nationale  at
Paris.     {J.R.A.S.,  Vol.  xxxiv,  1902.)

16.  Note  on  the  Contents  of  the  Ta'rikh-i-Jahan-gusha

of  *Atd  Malik-i-Juwayn{.     {J.R.A.S.,  Vol,  xxxvi,  1904.)


17-     Nasir-i-Khusraw,    Poet,    Traveller,    and    Propa-
gandist.    (/.R.A.S.,  Vol.  XXXVII,  1905.)

18.  Mas'ud-i-Sa*d-i-Salmdn,   by  iMfRzA   Muhammad   ibn

'Abdu'l-Wahhab  of  Qazwin.     {J.R.A.S.,  Vols,  xxxvii-xxxviii,
1 905- 1 906.)

19.  Further  Notes  on  the  Literature  of  the  Hurufis  and

their   connection   with   the    Bektashi    Order   of    Dervishes.
{/.R.A.S.,  Vol.  xxxix,  1907.)

20.  Suggestions  for  a  complete  edition  of  the   "  Ja-

mi'u't-Tawarikh"    of   Rashidu'd-Dfn-Fadlu'llah.     (/.R.A.S.,
Vol.  XL,  1908.)

21.  The  Persian   Manuscripts  of  the  late   Sir  Albert

Houtum-Schindler,  K.C.I.E.     (/.R.A.S.,  Vol.  xlix,  191 7.)

V.     POLITICAL  PAMPHLETS  ON   PERSIA
A  Brief  Narrative  of  Recent  Events  in  Persia,  followed

by  an  Appendix  on  the  Persian  Constitution.  Pp.  loi.  Luzac  and  Co.,
London,  1909.     Price  is.

The  Persian  Crisis  of  December,  1911,  how  it  arose  and

whither  it  may  lead  us,  compiled  for  the  use  of  the  Persia  Committee,
privately  printed  at  the  University  Press,  Cambridge,  and  published  on
New  Year's  Day,  191 2.     Pp.  18.

The  Reign  of  Terror  at  Tabriz  :  England's  Responsibility :

with  Photographs  and  a  brief  Narrative  of  the  events  of  December,  1911,
and  January,  191  >,  compiled  for  the  use  of  the  Persia  Committee  and
published  in  October,  1912,  by  Messrs  Taylor,  Garnett,  Evans,  and  Co.,
Blackfriars  Street,  Manchester,  and  Messrs  Luzac  and  Co.,  London.
Pp.  15.     With  the  Photographs.     Price  6d.

VI.     PAPERS  READ  TO  AND  PUBLISHED
FOR  THE  PERSIA  SOCIETY,

By  John  Hogg,  13,  Paternoster  Row,  London,  E.C.

The  Literature  of  Persia,  a  Lecture  delivered  to  the  Persia

Society  on  April  26,  1912.     Pp.  43.      Price  is.

The  Persian  Press  and  Persian  Journalism,  a  Lecture

delivered  to  the  Persia  Society  on  May  23,  1913.     Pp.  28.     Price  is.

The  Religious  Influence  of  Persia,  a  paper  read  before  the
Persia  Society  on  May  20,  1914.  Pp.  57-72  of  a  collection  of  four  Papers
published  for  the  Society.

VII.     A  History  of  Ottoman  Poetry,  by  the  late  E.  J.  W.

GiBB,  M.R.A.S.,  in  six  volumes.  Vol.  i,  lyoo;  Vols,  ii-vi,  1902-9,
edited  by  E.  G.  Browne.  Vol.  vi  contains  the  Turkish  originals  of  the
poems  translated  in  the  previous  volumes  A  seventh  volume,  dealing
with  the  most  modern  period,  by  Dr  RizA  Tevfiq,  formerly  Deputy  for
Adrianople  in  the  Ottoman  Parliament,  is  in  course  ot  preparation.  Price
2  IS.  net  each  volume  except  Vol.  v,  which  is  12s.  6d.  net.  Luzac  and
Co.,  London.


f


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY
