A Traveller's Narrative Written to Illustrate the Episode of the Bab (E.G. Browne, 1891)
==========================================================
Browne's 1891 translation of the Persian history of the Babi movement — the foundational Western source on the Bab and the origins of the Baha'i faith. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

:asf 

3 S! 

l 

BP 

•*****•■ 

391 

i.mm* 

§§& 

BBS 

£!£ 

****** 

V.2 


rsn 


iSw5!Sssosr.Sir 

-“**“ 


Sssreasr-tsaw: 

JmhHtl .a.-AWMWW |.n 

SSjjjjjSSa: 

JOsSsis&r;!!?® 

SSSHS&SS: 


i*ja!»waisKas»s , -‘ 


BastasseKssar: 

**..»«««*♦**»*“ •»«*»{*«••►• *~ 

--- 


n nn ti«»t»nt> 
MNIpMi 
irtMnhnu 


SitS 53 ES=S 3 ^ ; < t ' 
. /,««...«»* ***« *—■<■ 

T ' - 1 ****** 


MNn 

'r*W* 


gas sy 

JUJIiUXi2XnCTH ••t* n»**^ 

ttthnn/" ,iviw«u>~h' - 


MIH»«WWHW« »" , l*W t *T J* 


tx^&xtsxsssa 

5 »»na#un^ 2 S£S;» 

MM MM MM MM .'MM WMM H*» ** 

r «>«Mnm*». mmmMmmw - 
MW«»****M m** ********** ******** 

»»*»*» »♦*****»*»** 'ttlTC 

iwwtif- m. <«-»«»' «*;*■."*» » 

imwimiwinn «»«•■“' *•"'*' 


******** ,,**».******•* *•** ******** 


*********.MM •**"*'»***' 

**'-**••'*- 


“fflSSsSssasa; 


t ^n 4 >rtwu«« 


jsKKsszisna:,". 

:~fflKS 3 » 3 Sr£ffiS: 

■ **-*>: *»•**«* **«M*»*m *»♦•*«' 

sj.-nucnsss.'issSS 

rr i,.i^ H« *»»**»»*»««* **»»*«»>>« 

|E£gEjji 

-~>v.n M**»»***»*"'?**!‘*t** 

**«./**► 


>■« »*» «' 

SSSaiSgisKsi^? 

besssebk® 


' i ^ A\ r< f.J 
v >i in; .'r 
;■ rt'^H ) 


ft * 

n n» 


i MM'B’ a. r t v 
ff/f.fcnnv- -v,t' ■{ 

Ot* TfW . 1 * i .-< 


(Enntell Imtiraitij library 

BOUGHT WITH THE IN CO ME OFTHE 

SAGE ENDOWMENT FUND 

THE GIFT OF 

Hctirg 130. Sage 

1891 

4 -.. 


DATE DUE 


The original of this book is in 
the Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924092304512 


A TRAVELLER'S NARRATIVE 


WRITTEN TO ILLUSTRATE 


THE EPISODE OF THE BAB. 


iLtmSon: 0. J. CLAY AND SONS, 
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE, 
Ave Maria Lane. 


llamttitjgc; DEIGHTON, BELL, AND CO. 
3Utp>tfl: F. A. BROCKHAUS. 

Jp.sfa Hurls: MACMILLAN AND CO. 


A TRAVELLER’S NARRATIVE 


WRITTEN TO ILLUSTRATE 

THE EPISODE OE THE BAB, 

?. V 11 

EDITED IN THE ORIGINAL PERSIAN, 

AND TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH, WITH AN INTRODUCTION 
AND EXPLANATORY NOTES, 


BY 

EDWARD G. BROWNE, M.A., M.B., 

FELLOW OF PEMBROKE COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE, AND LECTURER IN PERSIAN 
TO THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE. 


VOLUME II. ENGLISH TRANSLATION AND NOTES. 


edited for tiie syndics of the university press. 


CAMBRIDGE : 

AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS. 
1891 


[All Hi(jhts reserved..] 


GTambtiliflt: 

PUINTKD J»Y 0. J. GIiAY, M.A. AN1> fiONH, 
AT TIITC UNIVKUHITY PRIG HR. 


CONTENTS OF VOLUME II. 


Ivruor renox. 

AiI'EXX'J ........... 

Gobbi uesta. 

TraXSXaTTOX. 

Note A. Persian and European accounts of the Bab and 
his re lithe n ...... 

Note B. The Seven Martyrs ....... 

Note C. Proofs of the Bab'? age from the Persian Beyan 
Note B. The meaning of the title " Bat " . . . . 

Note E. lie Sheyiics. and their doctrine oi the •• Fourth 

Support ”. 

Note F. Supplementary m toe? of certain persons ne.nn; red 

in the test. 

Note G. The Bab's Pilgrimage to Mecca and return t; Shim 
Note IT Seyyiu Yahya of Barab and the N:m Insurree-tien . 
Note I. The Bab's escape from Shim to Isfahan 

Note J. Tue Conference at Isfahan. 

N; IE K. Mui'.a Sidra and his Philosophy . 

Note L. The Bab at Main and Chihnk .... 
Note M. The first examination of the Bah at Tabriz 
Note N. The Bab's claim to be the Imam Mahi . 

N ore O. Certain points of Shi ite 1 citrine reietrred to in the 

text .. 

Note P. The Execution of Mulla Muhammad 'Ah of Bar. 

fnrdsh . 

Note Q. KurraruT-'Ayn. 

Note E. Beiivatrre Attributes ...... 

Note S. The Bab's Iasi moment? ...... 

Note T. The attempt on the Shah's life and the Massacre of 
Teheran. 


raoE 

vii 

1;t 

It 

1 

IT? 

211 

220 

234 


264 

ill 


296 

306 

309 

817 

819 

323 


VI 


C< INTENTS. 


Note U. 
Note V. 

Note W. 
Note X. 

Note Y. 

Note Z. 
Index 


Writings of tho B/ih and Subh-i-Ezel 
Texts from tho Persian Beyful coneerning the higli 
estate of “ Him whom God shall manifest ” 
Mirza YahyA “ Subhi-Ezel ” and tho Cyprus exiles 
Translation of the Superscription and Exordium of 
Beh&’u’llah’s Epistle to tho King of Persia 
Tho Martyrs of Isfah/in, the martyrdom of Aka 
MirzA Ashraf of Abadf, and tho persecutions 
of Si-dili and Najafilbad . 

Zoynu'l-Mukarrabin the Scribe, and the light thrown 
by his colophons on tho Biibi calendar 


i 'auk 


:i3fi 


317 
3 111 

3110 

400 

112 

427 


INTRODUCTION. 


This book is the history of a proscribed and persecuted 
sect written by one of themselves. After suffering in 
silence for nigh upon half a century, they at length find 
voice to tell their tale and offer their apology. Of this 
voice I am the interpreter. 

So many Persian works of universally acknowledged 
and incontrovertible merit remain unpublished, not only 
in Europe but in the East, that one who offers to the 
public as the result of his study and labour the transla¬ 
tion and text of a quite recent compilation, whereof the 
authorship must remain unknown, and which must there¬ 
fore rely solely on whatever intrinsic interest and merit 
it may possess, may reasonably be expected to state the 
considerations which have led him to select for publication 
such a work. 

This book is, as I have said, recent in composition; for, 
as appears from a passage which will be found ou p. 67, 
it was written probably during the ye ar 1S66. It is also 
anonymous. This could not well be otherwise ; for what 
Persian could, with ordinary prudence, acknowledge a work 
written in defence of a faith whereof the name is scarce 
mentioned in Persia without fear and trembling X So that 
these two things, which some might incline to account 
grave defects in the book, and reasons against its publi- 


VU1 


INTRODUCTION. 


cation, are, in truth, inliereut in its very nature ami 
character. It is of quite modern origin, because it treats 
of a recent movement, of which the first beginnings are 
remembered by many still living; it is anonymous, because 
every promoter of that movement is, in the country which 
gave it birth, as a man “sitting beneath a sword suspended 
by a single hair, who knoweth not when it shall descend 
upon him, whether it shall descend instantly or after a 
while 1 .” 

If, then, the subject treated of in this book be of 
sufficient interest and importance to merit careful study, 
and if the book itself, notwithstanding our ignorance of its 
authorship, can be shewn to proceed from a trustworthy 
source, I am sufficiently justified in having decided to edit 
and translate this “Traveller’s Narrative.” 

Now it appears to me that the history of the Bdbf 
movement must be interesting in different ways to others 
besides those who are directly engaged in the study of 
1'ersian. To the student of religious thought it will afford 
no little matter for reflection ; for here he may contemplate 
such personalities as by lapse of time pass into heroes and 
demi-gods still unobscured by myth and fable; he may 
examine by the light of concurrent and independent testi¬ 
mony one of those strange outbursts of enthnsiasm, faith, 
fervent devotion, and indomitable heroism—or fanaticism, if 
you will—which we are accustomed to associate with the 
earlier history of the human race; he may witness, in a 
word, the birth of a faith which may not impossibly win a 
place amidst the great religions of the world. To the 
ethnologist also it may yield food for thought as to the 
character of a people, who, stigmatized as they often have 
been as selfish, mercenary, avaricious, egotistical, sordid 
and cowardly, are yet capable of exhibiting under the 
] See p. 150 infra » 


INTRODUCTION. 


IX 


influence of a strong religious impulse a degree of devotion, 
disinterestedness, generosity, unselfishness, nobility, and 
com-age which may be paralleled in history, but can 
scarcely be surpassed. To the politician, too, the matter 
is not devoid of importance ; for what changes may not be 
effected in a country now reckoned almost as a cypher in 
the balance of national forces by a religion capable of 
evoking so mighty a spirit? Let those who know what 
Muhammad made the Arabs, consider well what the Lab 
may yet make the Persians. 

But to myself, and I believe to most others who have 
been or shall be brought to consider this matter, the 
paramount interest thereof lies in this, that here is some¬ 
thing, whether wise or unwise, whether tending towards 
the amelioration of mankind or the reverse, which seemed 
to many hundreds, if not thousands, of our fellow-creatures 
worth suffering and dying for, and which, on this ground 
alone, must be accounted worthy of our most attentive study. 

I have uow to explain how this book came into my 
hands; what, so far as I have been able to learn, were the 
causes which led to its composition ; and why (with certain 
reservations which will be presently specified) we are 
warranted in regarding it as a true and authentic account 
of the events which it relates. In order to make this 
explanation clear, it is necessary for me to describe briefly 
how my attention was first directed towards this subject; 
how my interest in it was kindled; how the means of 
investigating it were made available to me; and how* the 
investigation, whereof this book is at present the final out¬ 
come, was conducted. 

One day some seven years ago I was searching amongst 
the books in the University Library of Cambridge for fresh 

b 


B. 


X 


INTRODUCTION. 


materials for an essay on the Stiff philosophy, in the study 
of which I was then chiefly engaged, when my eye was 
caught by the title of Count Gobineau’s Religions et 
Philosophies dans I’Asie Centrale. I took down the book, 
glanced through it to discover whether or no it contained 
any account of the Sufis, and, finding that a short chapter 
was devoted to them, brought it back with me to my 
rooms. My first superficial glance had also shewn me that 
a considerable portion of the book was taken up with an 
account of the B&bls, of which sect I had at that time no 
definite knowledge, save a general idea that they had been 
subjected to a most severe persecution. 

The perusal of Gobineau’s chapter on the Sufis caused 
me, I must frankly confess, no small mortification; for I 
was an ardent admirer of these eloquent mystics, whose 
spirit has inspired so much of what is best and finest in 
Persian literature, and a rude shock was inflicted on my 
susceptibilities by such words as these :—“Le quidtisme, le 
beng et l’opium, l’ivrognerie la plus abjecte, voilh surtout 
ce qu’elle [le soufysme] a produit.” 

When, however, I turned from this mournful chapter to 
that portion of the book which treated of the Bhbl move¬ 
ment, the case was altogether different. To anyone who 
has already read this masterpiece of historical composition, 
this most perfect presentation of accurate and critical 
research in the form of a narrative of thrilling and sustained 
interest, such as one may, indeed, hope to find in the 
drama or the romance, but can scarcely expect from the 
historian, it is needless to describe the effect which it 
produced on me. To anyone who has not read it, 1 can 
only say let him do so forthwith, if he is in any way 
interested in the history of the Bhbls. Many new facts 
may be added to those recorded by Gobineau, and the 
history which he carried down to a.d. 1852 needs to be 


INTRODUCTION. 


XI 


supplemented by an appendix detailing the events of the 
last thirty-eight years, but the narrative of the first origin 
of BAblism can hardly be told better than he has told it; 
certainly not in a style more eloquent nor in a manner 
more worthy of the subject. 

Count Gobineau’s book, then, effected in a certain sense' 
a complete revolution in my ideas and projects. I had 
long ardently desired to visit Persia and above all Shfr&z, 
and this desire was now greatly intensified. But whereas I 
had previously wished to see Shfr4z because it was the 
home of HMiz and of Sa'df, I now wished to see it because 
it was the birthplace of MirzA ‘All Muhammad the Bdb. 
And, after Shfrdz, not Tus and Nish&piir, but Zanj&n, 
MdzandarAn, and Tabriz were the objects of my eager 
desire. My impatience, too, was greatly increased ; for 
I reflected that although there must be many still living 
who had witnessed, or even taken part in, the events of 
which I w 7 as so anxious to discover every slightest detail, 
each year that passed would materially lessen their number, 
and render ever fainter the possibility of restoring the 
picture in its entirety. Besides this, I was eager to know 
more of the doctrines -which could inspire such heroism, 
and to gain this knowledge, as I clearly perceived, there 
was but one satisfactory and effectual method. As Anquetil 
du Perron had succeeded in unlocking the secrets of the Zo- 
roastrian religion by going amongst those ivho professed it, 
winning their confidence, and eventually, after infinite 
patience and endeavour, obtaining copies of their sacred 
books and a clue to their contents, so I, if I were to succeed 
in fathoming the mysteries of the Bdbf faith, must go to 
the land of its origin, strive to become intimate with some 
of its votaries, and from these obtain the knowledge which 
I sought. Let no one suppose that I am so presumptuous 
as to institute any comparison between Anquetil du Perron 

b 2 


INTRODUCTION. 


and myself. His task was one which only rare courage, 
perseverance, and genius could bring to a successful issue. 
He had to induce the suspicious, taciturn, and uncommuni¬ 
cative priests of an ancient national religion actuated by 
no desire of making proselytes to impart to him a secret 
doctrine and ritual hitherto most jealously guarded. And 
when at length the sacred books were gained, they were 
books written in a language so long dead that over it had 
formed a deposit of commentaries in a speech which had 
grown, flourished, and died since it had been a spoken 
tongue. Added to this, Anquetil’s investigations were 
conducted amidst hardships, privations, and dangers of an 
exceptional kind. The BAbls, on the contrary, would, I 
was convinced, be eager to impart their doctrines to any 
enquirer on whose discretion and fidelity they could place 
reliance. Their sacred books, moreover, were either in 
Arabic, or in Persian, and, beyond a certain reserve and 
obscurity necessitated by prudential motives, and a peculiar 
terminology such as all sects, whether philosophical or 
religious, possess, I anticipated no particular difficulty 
in understanding them. One special obstacle, it was true, 
did exist in this case to the primary establishment of 
relations of intimacy. The Biibis were a proscribed sect, 
whereof every member was practically liable to outlawry 
and even death should he allow his creed to become known. 
It seemed probable enough, therefore, that I should at first 
have some difficulty in discovering them and putting 
myself into communication with them. Yet, could I but 
find means of spending a few months in Persia, it would be 
hard, I thought, if some lucky chance did not bring me in 
contact with some Bdbl who would venture to take me into 
his confidence. And, if the first step could be won, I relied 
on the fair knowledge of colloquial Persian which I already 
possessed, the general acquaintance with the Biibl doctrines 


INTRODUCTION. 


xiii 

which Gobineau’s work had given me, the genuine admira ¬ 
tion which I felt for the Bab and his apostles, and the 
close brotherhood which, according to all analog}-, nmst 
probably exist w it hin the sect, to effect the 

Meanwhile the first step was to get to Persia, and of 
this there seemed to be but little chance. Anquetil du 
Perron would have gone, chance or no chance, and either 
attained his object or perished in the search. I, not being 
fashioned in so heroic a mould, waited for the means. 
I made several fruitless attempts to obtain some appoint¬ 
ment which would take me to the land of my quest, 
and finally, as a last resource, offered myself as a candidate 
for a medical post in the realms of the Xizdm of Haydar- 
hb&d, on the chance that there I might hud means of 
visiting Persia. Here again I was unsuccessful; and I was 
beginning to despair of attaining my object when suddenly 
and unexpectedly that thing befel me which is, as I believe, 
the greatest good-fortune wliieh can fall to the lot of one 
eager to pursue a scientific enquiry from which he is 
debarred by lack of means. A fellowship became vacant at 
my college, and to this fellowship I was elected. This 
happened on May 30th, 18S7. Five months later I had 
crossed the Tureo-Persian frontier and was within three 
stages of Tabriz. 

Of the disappointments and failures which I at first 
met with in my attempts to discover and communicate 
with the Babfs; of the fortunate chance which at length 
placed the clue in my hand; and of the fulfilment of my 
hopes in a manner surpassing my most sanguine expec¬ 
tations I have already spoken in another placeOf these 
and other things incidental to my journey I may perhaps 
give a fuller account at some future time. Here it is 

1 Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society , for 1889, vol. xxi. (New 
Series), pp. 486—489, 495—±96, 501, &c. 


XIV 


INTRODUCTION. 


sufficient for me to state that I returned to England in 
October 1888, having visited Zanjdn, Tabriz, Shi'rdz, and 
Sheykh Tabarsi, the places most intimately associated with 
B&bi history; having lived on terms of intimacy for periods 
varying from a few days to many weeks with the principal 
Bibis at Isfahan, Shlrfiz, Yezd, and Kirmim; and bringing 
with me a number of Bdbl books and writings, as well as 
journals wherein the gist of every important conversation 
with any member of the sect was carefully recorded. 

So soon as I had established myself once more in 
the college which four years’ absence from Cambridge and 
a year’s travelling in Persia had served to render yet more 
dear to me, I set to work to make a systematic examination 
of the materials collected during my journey. The Persian 
Beydn, the fkdn, the KHdb-i-Akdas, the Epistles to the 
Kings, the Tdnkh-i-Jadid, and a host of more or less 
important letters, memoranda, poems, and abstracts, were 
read, digested, and indexed; and the outcome of this and 
my previous labour, together with a brief account of my 
journey, was laid before the public in two articles, com¬ 
prising in all 170 pages, of which the first appeared in 
July , the second in October 18 89, in the Journal of the 
Royal Asiatic Society. To these articles I shall continually 
have occasion to refer in the course of this work, and, for 
the sake of brevity, I shall henceforth generally denote 
them as “B. i.” and “B. ii.” 

The preparation of these articles, in conjunction with 
other work, kept me occupied till the autumn of 1889, 
when, the main results of my investigations having been 
satisfactorily recorded, I was left at liberty to turn my 
ittention to matters of detail. It appeared to me extremely 
lesirable that texts or translations of the chief B&bl works 
ihould be published in extenso; the only question was 
which to begin with. Inasmuch as it seemed likely that 


INTRODUCTION. 


XV 


the historical aspects of the movement would prove more 
generally interesting than its doctrinal aspects, I finally 
determined to publish first the text and translation of the 
Tartkh-i-Jadid 1 , and this determination was approved by 
several of my friends and correspondents whose knowledge 
entitled them to speak with authority. This text and 
translation I accordingly began to prepare; and the former 
was completely copied out for the printer (awaiting only 
collation with the British Museum text) 2 , while the latter 
was in an advanced stage of progress, when circumstances, 
immediately to. be detailed, occurred, which postponed the 
completion of that work, and substituted for it another, the 
present. 


My researches amongst the Bibfs in Persia had, at a 
comparatively early stage, revealed to me the fact that 
since Count Gobineau composed his work great changes 
had taken place in their organization and attitude. I had 
expected to find Mfrza Yahyi Subk-i-Ezel (“ Hazrat-i- 
Esel” as Gobineau calls him) universally acknowledged by 
them as the Bib’s successor and the sole head to whom 
they confessed allegiance. My surprise was great when 
I discovered that, so far from this being the case, the 


majority of the BihtjL-sppke only of Behd as their chief 
hud prophe t; asserted that the Bib was merely his herald 

1 Concerning the T&rlkh-i-Jadid see Note A ax end, pp. 192—197 


infra. 

- This collation has since been effected, and the variants offered 
by the British Museum ms. proved to be both numerous and im¬ 
portant. Should the publication of the work be proceeded with, 
it would be necessary to collate also the defective ms. recently acquired 
by the St. Petersburg Library, the closing words of which occur on 
p. 235 of my ms. See note 1 at the foot of p. 192 infra, and 
the forthcoming (sixth) vol. of Baron Rosen’s Collections Scientifiques, 
p. 244. 


XVI 


INTRODUCTION. 


and forerunner (those who had read the Gospels, and they 
were many, likened the Bfib to John the Baptist and Beha 
to Christ); and either entirely ignored or strangely dis¬ 
paraged Mfrzd Yahyd. It took me some time fully to 
grasp this new and unexpected position of affairs, and 
perhaps I should not have succeeded in doing so had it not 
been for the knowledge of the former state of things which 
I had obtained from Gobineau’s work, and the acquaintance 
which I subsequently made in Kirm&n with five or six 
persons who adhered to what I may call the “ old dis¬ 
pensation ” and regarded Mlrzd Yahyfi “ Subh-i-Ezel” as 
the legitimate and sole successor of the Bfib. 

To state briefly a long story, the case stands thus :— 

(1) Mlrzfi ‘All Muhammad the Bfib_ during his life 
chose from amongst his most faithful and most gifted 
disciples 1 8 pe rsons called “ Letters of the Living^’ 
(Hurvfdt-i-Hayjj), who, together with himself the j‘ Point ” 
(Nukta), constituted that sacred hierarchy oX 19 called 
the “First Unity” ( Vahi d-i-Avval) . Of these “Letters” 
I have not been able to obtain a complete list, and indeed 
it would appear that the .w hole h ierarchy was never made 
known. Mlrzfi Yahyfi Subh-i-Ezel held the fourth place in 
this hierarchy, and, o n the death of t he “Po int*’ and the 
two first “Letters,” rose, by a natural process of promotion, 
to the position of chief of the sect 1 . Belid, whose - proper 
name is Mlrzfi Huseyn ‘All of Nur, was also, according to 
Gobin eau 2 , included in the “Unity.” Gobineau has, how¬ 
ever, mistakefPEhe relationship which existed between him 
and Mlrzii Yahyd. That the two are brothers (or rather 
half-brothers, born of the same father by different wives) is 
a fact established by convincing testimony 3 . 

1 See note 1 on p. 95 infra. 

2 Religions et Philosophies , p. 277. 

3 Cf. pp. 56, note 2; 63, top ; and 373. 


INTRODUCTION. 


XVII 


(2) Mlrzi ‘All Muhammad t he Bib d eclared explicitly 
aud repeatedly in all his works that the religion established 
by him and the bo oks revealed to him were in no way 
finalthat his followers must continually expect t he advent 
of “ Him whom God shall manifest,” who would perfect and 
complete this religion ; that, though “ He whom God shall 
manifest” would not, it was hoped, delay his appearance 
for more than 1511, or, at most, 2001 years (these numbers 
being represented in cabbalistic fashion by the words 
Ghiycith and Mustaghcitli), h e might appear a t any_tim.ej 
and that, whenever one should appear claiming to be “ He 
whom God shall manifest,” his very being, together with 
his power of revealing verses, would be his sufficient signs. 
All who believed in the Bib were solemnly warned not 
to reject one so characterized and making such a claim, 
and were commanded, in case of doubt, to incline towards 
belief rather than disbelief. 

(3) During the sojourn of the Bibi exiles at Adria- 
nople, Belli, ( accord ingto Habil in a.d. 1866—7) suddenly 
claimed to be “He whom Gud shall lnanitest/ 7 in proof of 
which he revealed sundry “signs” ( dydt) in eloquent 
Arabic and Persian, wherein he summoned all the Bib is to 
acknowledge him as their supreme and sole chief and 
spiritual guide. Most of the Bibis eventually made this 
acknowledgement, vowed allegiance to Belli, and thereby 
became Behais; some few refused to transfer their al¬ 
legiance" Trom Mirzi Yahyi Subh-i-Ezel (who himself 
strenuously resisted Behi’s claims, which he regarded in 
the light of an usurpation and a rebellion), and these were 
thenceforth known as Ez elis. 

Thus did the great schism take place which divided the 
Bibfs into two unequal parties: a large majority, of whose 
unbounded and almost incredible love and reverence the 
object is Behi; a small minority, whose eager gaze is 


xviii INTRODUCTION. 

directed, not to Acre in Syria, but to Famagusta in Cyprus, 
where dwells the exiled chief whom they refuse to disavow. 
Needless is it to say how bitter is the animosity which sub¬ 
sists between the Behd’ls and the Ezells. Amongst both 
factions I have found good men and faithful friends, and 
from the chiefs of both and their sons I have met with 
much kindness; wherefore I would for the present touch as 
lightly as may be on this painful matter, leaving my 
readers to draw their own conclusions from what is herein¬ 
after set forth. The general nature of the arguments for 
and against either side will be found summarized at pp. 514 
and 515 of my first and pp. 997—998 of my second article 
on the Biibis in the J. R. A. S., to which I refer such of my 
readers as are curious to examine the matter more mi¬ 
nutely. Of one thing there can, in my opinion, be but 
little doubt: the future (if Bdblism, as I most firmly be¬ 
lieve, has a future) belongs to Behd and his successors and 
followers. 

With most of the facts summarized above I became 
acquainted during my sojourn in Persia, but I w'as unable 
to learn for certain whether Mlrz4 Yahya Subh-i-Ezel was 
still alive, nor could I ascertain in what part of Cyprus he 
had fixed his residence. A dervish with whom I became 
acquainted in KirmAn told me that he had visited him, but 
could not remember the name of the town wherein he 
dwelt; and none of the Ezells whom I saw could give me 
any more precise information. In my first paper on the 
B&bls in the J.R.A.S. (pp. 516—517) I was therefore 
compelled to confess my failure in all attempts to elucidate 
this point. At the same time I pointed out how much 
precious information might be gained from Subh-i-Ezel if he 
were still alive, and how extremely desirable it was in the 
interests of science that this matter should be cleared up. 


INTRODUCTION. 


XIX 


After the publication of my first, and during the prepa¬ 
ration of my second paper, I began to institute enquiries 
on this point. My sister, who was then travelling in the 
East, succeeded in obtaining the first clue from Mr G. L. 
Houston, who was kind enough to procure for me definite 
proof that Bubh-i-Ezel was still alive and was residing with 
his family at Famagusta. Shortly after this, my friend Dr 
F. H. H. Guillemard, who had spent many months in Cyprus 
and had friends in all parts of the island, very obligingly 
wrote to Mr C. D. Cobham, Commissioner at Larnaca, and to 
Captain Young, Commissioner at Famagusta, asking them 
to obtain for me the fullest information possible relative to 
the Bhbi exiles in Cyprus. I myself wrote at the same 
time, stating the nature of the information which I sought. 
Both Captain Young and Mr Cobham responded to my 
request with a kindness for which 1 cannot sufficiently 
express my gratitude; and so vigorously and energetically 
did they push their enquiries that I was soon iu possession 
of all the chief facts relating to the B&bi exiles. Captain 
Young, indeed, spared no pains to clear up every point 
connected with the enquiry. The day after he received 
my letter he paid a visit to Subh-i-Ezel-, questioned him 
concerning his life, his adventures, and his doctrines; asked 
for information on sundry points mentioned in my paper; 
and forwarded to me a complete account of all that he had 
learned. Nor was this all; for he succeeded so well in 
winning Subh-i-EseVs confidence that with this first letter 
(dated July 28th, 1889) he was able to forward a ms. of 
one of the B4b’s works, whereof, so far as I know, no copy 
had previously reached Europe. Through Captain Young 
I was also able to address directly to Subh-i-Ezel letters 
containing questions on numerous matters connected with 
the history, doctrine, and literature of the Bdfifs, to all of 
which letters I received most full and courteous replies. 


XX 


INTRODUCTION. 


/S' nhh-i-Kzct I further sent mo ut different times several oi lier 
mss., a complete list of snrli of the JMb’s works n.s had 
been in his own possession at Baghdadand a brief history 
of the JBiibf moveinont written by himself, besides numerous 
letters, each one of which contained most precious informa¬ 
tion. 

This correspondence, which opened out so rich a mine 
of new facts, was but in an early stage when my second 
paper on the Biibl.s was published in the J.H.A.S. for 
October IKK!), but I was able to add to it all appendix (pp. 
Dill—!)!I8) embodying the more important results of the 
inquiry undertaken by Captain Young, iVIr (Jobhunt, and 
Mr Houston. A fuller and more accurate account of Sabh- 
i-l'ht'l, and the other Bfibf exiles in Oyprus, based on the 
inquiries of the above-mentioned gentlemen, the examina- 
ion of official documents, and the statements ina.de to me 
ty bis sons, and others, will be found in Note 

W at the end of this book. It is therefore unnecessary 
or me to allude further to this correspondence at present. 

While I was in Persia I bad already formed the in teu¬ 
ton of visiting Acre and learning the doctrine, of Beli.4 
rom the fountain-bead. From the moment when I dis- 
overed that Ntth/i-i-I'Jzrl was still alive 1 further resolved 
o visit him also, for from repeated personal interviews I 
ntic ipated results which could riot be obtained by a enr- 
espondonee, however elaborate. ] was also anxious for my 
wn satisfaction to see those who since the Bftb’s death bad 
'ecu the leaders of the liAbf movement. Without this I 
elt that my researches would lack I hut completeness which 
wished to give them. The motives which impelled me 
owards Acre and Famagusta were equally strong, Iml, 
oinewhat different. At the former plane I expected to see 


1 Hco Note U at end. 


INTRODUCTION. 


XXI 


the mainspring and fulcrum of a mighty force with the 
astonishing results of which I had become practically 
acquainted in Persia, and from which I believed (as I still 
believe) that results yet more wonderful might be expected 
in the future. At the latter place I hoped to converse 
with one whom the Bhb had recognized as his immediate 
successor and vicegerent; one who had been personally 
acquainted with Mu lid Huseyn of Bushraweyh, Mulld 
Sheykh 'Alf, Suleymdn Khdn, Kurratu’ l-'Ayn, and, in 
short, almost all of those whose devoted lives and heroic 
deaths had first inspired my enthusiasm; one, moreover, 
who represented the spirit and tradition of the old Bdbfism, 
which, in the hands of Behd, had already undergone im¬ 
portant modifications, and, indeed, become. ..al most a new 
religion. Various considerations decided me to visit 
Cyprus first, of which two only need be mentioned here:—- 
firstly, it was practically certain that no obstacle to my 
seeing Subh-i-Ezel would arise, while it was by no means 
certain that I should be able to see Behb; secondly, the 
logical order of procedure was to begin with the investiga¬ 
tion of the old order of things, and having completed this, 
to continue the examination of the new. I hoped, how¬ 
ever, to make one journey suffice for the attainment of 
both objects; but, allowing for the time which must be 
consumed in actual travelling, it was clear that at least 
two months would be required for the enterprise. The 
Long Vacation was amply sufficient for the purpose, but 
the summer was the most unsuitable season for such a 
journey, and I therefore determined to petition the 
University for such extension of leave at Easter as would 
enable me to be absent from England for two months. 
The University, ever ready to facilitate research of every 
kind, granted me permission to absent myself from Cam¬ 
bridge from March 4th till May 3rd, 1890, and accordingly, 


XXI1 


INTRODUCTION. 


leaving England on the date first mentioned, I landed at 
Larnaca in Cyprus on March 19th. 

Captain Young and Mr Cobham, on becoming ac¬ 
quainted with my intention of visiting Cyprus, had, with 
that ready kindness and hospitality which, so far as my 
experience goes, are rarely lacking in Englishmen resident 
in the East, written to ask me to be their guest during 
such time as I might desire to remain in Famagusta or 
Larnaca, so that I was entirely relieved of all anxiety as to 
the possibility of finding a base of operations for my re¬ 
searches. Captain Young further counselled me, in case I 
ivished to gain access to the official records of the Island 
Government, to obtain before leaving England such letters 
if recommendation as might ensure the attainment of this 
)bject. I accordingly applied for help in obtaining these 
;o Major-General Sir Frederic Goldsmid, whose long 
■esidence in Persia and intimate knowledge of the Persian 
>eople and language had led him to take some interest in 
ny communications on the subject of the Bdbfs to the 
loyal Asiatic Society. He spared no pains to further 
ny plans, and introduced me to Sir Robert Biddulph, who 
ery kindly gave me a letter to Sir Henry Bulwer, the 
Jovernor-General of Cyprus, asking him to allow me, so 
ir as might be permissible or expedient, to inspect such 
fficial documents as might throw light on the object of 
ly investigations. 

In Larnaca I spent only one day, the shortness of the 
ime at my disposal and my eagerness to see Subh-i-Ezd 
impelling me with great reluctance to forego the pleasure 
hich a more prolonged sojourn under Mr Cobham’s 
ospitable roof would have afforded me. That day passed 
lost pleasantly, for in my host I found not only an ac- 
implished Oriental scholar and a traveller to whom few 
igions of the habitable globe were unknown, but a genial 


INTRODUCTION. xxiii 

friend and a warm sympathizer in my researches. Mr 
Cobham had studied Persian for some time with Mushktn- 
Kalam, one of the Beh&’f exiles sent with Subh-i-Ezel 
to Cyprus 1 , and from him had learned much concerning 
the new religion. Subli-i-Ezel, however, he had not seen; 
for Mushkm-Kalam, as was natural, had spoken only of 
Behk, and had entirely ignored the existence of a chief 
whose authority he disavowed. 

On the following day (Thursday, March 20th, 1890) 
I bade farewell to Mr Cobham, and, after some six hours 
spent in a somewhat antiquated vehicle belonging to a 
loquacious Italian who had fought for Garibaldi, found 
myself at Famagusta, or rather its suburb Varoshia, where I 
met with a most cordial welcome from Captain and Lady 
Evelyn Young. Captain Young at once sent a message to 
Subh-i-Ezel’s son ‘Abdu’l- ! A11 (who keeps a shop in 
Varoshia) requesting him to come to the konak. In a 
short time he appeared; and I was much struck by the 
refinement of his manner, the intelligence revealed by his 
countenance and conversation, and the courteousness of his 
address. Our conversation was conducted in Persian,! 
which, though he had never beeu in Persia, he spoke as his I 
mother-tongue. It was soon arranged that I should visit 
Subh-i-Ezel on the following day at whatever time he 
should appoint. 

Next morning we received a message to the effect that 
Subh-i-Ezel was prepared to receive us as soon as we could 
come. At about 11 a.m., therefore, Captain Young drove 
me into the town, wliich is situated about a mile from the 
suburb of Varoshia. As I had not entered within the 
walls of Famagusta on the preceding day I now saw 
for the first time the massive fortifications, the multitu- 

1 Concerning Mushkln-Kalam see B. i, p. 516; B. ii, pp. 994—995; 
and Note W at end. 


sxiv 


INTRODUCTION. 


dinous churches (whereof the number, as is currently 
reported by the inhabitants, equals the number of days 
in the year), and the desolate neglected streets of that 
most interesting relic of the Middle Ages. After Captain 
Young had transacted some other business we proceeded 
to Subh-i-Ezel’s abode, in the court-yard of which we were 
received by his sons ‘Abdu’l-'Alf, Ilizvhn-'All, ‘Abdu’l- 
Wahfd, and Takfu’d-Dfn, and an old B&hi of Zanjhn who 
had settled in the island so as to be near his master. 
Accompanied by these (with the exception of the last- 
mentioned) we ascended to an upper room, where a vener¬ 
able and benevolent-looking old man of about sixty years 
of age, somewhat below the middle height, -with ample 
forehead on which the traces of care and anxiety were 
apparent, clear searching blue eyes, and long grey beard, 
rose and advanced to meet us. Before that mild and 
dignified countenance I involuntarily bowed myself with 
unfeigned respect; for at length my long-cherished desire 
was fulfilled, and I stood face to face with Mlrz4 Yahy& 
Subk-i-Ezel (“the Morning of Eternity”), the appointed 
successor of the Bab, the fourth “Letter” of the “First 
Unity.” 

This my first interview was necessarily short and some¬ 
what formal, for I had yet to win the confidence of Subh-i- 
Ezel and induce him little by little to speak without 
reserve of those things whereof I so earnestly desired to 
hear. In this, thanks to the confidence with which Captain 
Young’s kindness had already inspired Subk-i-Esel, and the 
very vivid picture of the chief actors in the Bhbl movement, 
which, first derived from the perusal of Count Gobineau’s 
work, had continued to glow and grow in my mind till it 
became almost as a part of my own personal experience, I 
was completely successful. During the fortnight which 
I spent at Famagusta I visited Subh-i-Esel daily, remaining 


INTRODUCTION. 


XXV 


with him as a rule from two or three o’clock in the after¬ 
noon until sunset. Lack of space forbids me from de¬ 
scribing in detail and consecutive order the conversations 
which took place on these occasions. Note-book and pencil 
in hand I sat before him day by day; and every evening I 
returned to Varoshia with a rich store of new facts, most of 
which will be found recorded in the notes wherewith I have 
striven to illustrate or check the statements advanced in 
the following pages. Apart from the delight inseparable 
from successful research my stay at Famagusta was a very 
pleasant one, for from every one with whom I came in 
contact, but most of all from Captain and Lady Evelyn 
Young, I met with a kindness which I can never forget. 
Besides my visits to Subh-i-Ezel in the afternoon I often 
spent some portion of the morning with his son ‘Abdu’- 
l-‘Ah', and we were sometimes joined by Eizv&n ‘All, or by 
one or other of the few Ezelis who have settled in Fama¬ 
gusta. During these conversations I learned many new 
facts of greater or less importance. The reserve which had 
at first been apparent in Subh-i-Ezel gradually disappeared, 
and at each successive interview I found him more com¬ 
municative. Although our conversation was chiefly on 
religious topics, and the history, biography, doctrine, and 
literature of the B&bfs, other matters were occasionally 
discussed. Of the B&b and his first apostles and followers, 
as of his own life and adventures, Subh-i-Ezel would speak 
freely, but concerning the origin of the schism which for 
him had been attended with such disastrous results, and all 
pertaining to Beh& and the Beh&’fs, he was most reticent, 
so that, perceiving this subject to be distasteful, I refrained 
for the most part from alluding to it. During these 
conferences Subh-i-Ezel's sons were always present, though 
they hardly spoke in the presence of their father, towards 
whom they observed the utmost deference and respect. 

B. c 


XXVI 


INTRODUCTION. 


Tea was always served in the Persian fashion, but tobacco 
in all forms was conspicuous by its absence, the Ezelfs, 
unlike the Beliefs, following the injunctions of the Bkb in 
this matter. In the course of each visit, or sometimes 
when I was leaving the house, Subk-i-Ezel’s youngest son 
Takl’u’d-Dm, a pretty, graceful child about thirteen years 
of age, used to present me with a little bunch of roses 
or such other flowers as the modest garden attached to the 
house would afford. On my walk to and from Famagusta 
I was always accompanied by ‘Abdu’l-'All and often by one 
of his brothers. 

A few days after my arrival at Famagusta I wrote to 
Sir Henry Bulwer stating what was my object in desiring 
to examine the official records concerning the exiles which 
might be preserved at Nicosia, asking whether I might be 
permitted to do so, and forwarding the letter of recommen¬ 
dation given me by Sir Robert Biddulph. In response to 
my request Sir Henry Buhver, having learnt that the 
shortness of my stay in the island made it difficult, if not 
impossible, for me to visit Nicosia, was kind enough to 
xirward for my perusal all the more important papers 
learing on the subject. All of these, therefore, I was able 
jo examine at my leisure; and of all of them, with one ex¬ 
ception, I received permission to make use. An abstract 
)f the important facts and dates established by these 
documents will be found in Note W at the end of this 
look. 

The fifth of April, which was the ultimate limit where- 
into my stay in Cyprus could be protracted, unless I were 
prepared to postpone indefinitely my visit to Acre, came at 
.ast. On the morning of that day, therefore, having with 
great reluctance bade farewell to all my kind friends, I left 
Famagusta, and embarked the same afternoon at Larnaca 


INTRODUCTION. 


XXVII 


on the Messageries steamer Gironde. I passed a pleasant 
evening with a Turkish official and a Syrian who were the 
only other passengers besides myself, and early next 
morning awoke to find myself at Beyrout. 

As I had now but two weeks at my disposal ere I must 
again turn my face homewards I was naturally anxious to 
proceed as soon as possible to Acre, especially as I learned 
that should I fail to find a steamer bound directly for that 
port, three days at least would be consumed by the journey 
thither. It was, however, necessary for me first to obtain 
permission from the Bfibi head-quarters; for though I could 
without doubt proceed to Acre if I so pleased without con¬ 
sulting any one’s inclination save my own, it was certain 
that unless my journey had previously received the sanction 
of Behfi it would in all probability result in naught but 
failure and disappointment. Now there reside at Beyrout, 
Port Said, and Alexandria (by one of which places all 
desirous of proceeding to Acre by sea must of necessity 
pass) B&bi's of consequence to whom all desirous of visiting 
Behfi must in the first instance apply. Should such appli¬ 
cation prove successful, the applicant is informed that he 
may proceed on his journey, and receives such instruction, 
advice, and assistance as may be necessary. To the Bfibf 
agent at Beyrout (whose name I do not feel myself at 
liberty to mention) I had a letter of recommendation from 
one of his relatives with whom I had become acquainted in 
Persia. The first thing which I did on my arrival was to 
send a messenger to discover his abode. The messenger 
shortly returned, saying that he had indeed succeeded in 
finding the place indicated, but that the agent was absent 
from Beyrout. This was a most serious blow to my hopes, 
for time was against me, and every day was of vital im¬ 
portance. There was nothing for it, however, but to make 
the best of the matter, and I therefore went in person to 

c 2 


xxviii INTRODUCTION. 

the abode of the absent agent and presented myself to his 
deputy, who opened and attentively perused my letter ol 
recommendation, and then informed me that his master 
was at Acre and was not expected back for ten days or a 
fortnight. In reply to my anxious enquiries as to how I 
had best proceed, he advised me to write a letter to his 
master explaining the state of the ease, which letter, to¬ 
gether with the letter of recommendation, he undertook to 
forward at once, as the post fortunately chanced to be 
leaving for Acre that very evening. I at once wrote as he 
directed, and then returned to my lodging with the de¬ 
pressing consciousness that at least five or six days must 
elapse ere I could receive an answer to my letter or start 
for Acre; that even if permission was granted (as no steamer 
appeared likely to be sailing) three more days would be 
spent in reaching my goal; and that consequently eight or 
nine days out of the fourteen still remaining to me would be 
wasted before I could even set foot in the land of my quest. 
Altogether 1 began to fear that the second part of my 
journey was likely to prove far less successful than the first. 

Fortunately matters turned out much better than I ex¬ 
pected. In the first place I made the acquaintance of Mr 
Eyres, the British Vice-Consul, whose kindness and hospi¬ 
tality did much to render my stay at Beyrout pleasant, and 
who, on learning that I wished to proceed to Acre, told me 
that he himself intended to start for Acre and Haifa on the 
following Friday (April 11th), and that I might if 1 pleased 
accompany him. In the second place it occurred to me 
that I might save two or three’ days’ delay by telegraphing 
to Acre so soon as my letter must, in the natural course of 
things, have reached its destination, and requesting a 
telegram in reply to inform me whether I might proceed 
thither. On Wednesday, April 9th, therefore, I sent a 
telegram to this effect. On Thursday evening, returning 


INTRODUCTION. 


XXIX 


after sunset to my hotel from a ride in the hills, I was met 
with the welcome news that a Persian had called twice to 
see me during the afternoon stating that he had important 
business which would not hrook delay, and that he had left 
a note for me which I should find upstairs. From this 
note, hurriedly scribbled in pencil on a scrap of paper, I 
learned that permission had been granted, and that I was 
free to start as soon as I pleased. 

On receiving this intelligence my first action was to 
verify it beyond all doubt by calling at once on the deputy 
of the absent agent, whom I fortunately found at home. 
He congratulated me warmly on the happy issue of my 
affairs, and handed over to me the original telegram. It 
was laconic in the extreme, containing, besides the address, 
two words only:—“ Yutaicajjahu ’l-musufir” (“Let the 
traveller approach”). He then informed me that as no 
steamer was starting for Acre I must of necessity proceed 
thither by land, and that the reason why he had been so 
anxious to communicate with me earlier was that the post 
left that day at sun-down and I might have accompanied it. 
I then told him of Hr Eyres’ kind offer; which, as we 
agreed, was a most exceptional piece of good-fortune for 
me, inasmuch as he proposed to start on the following 
morning, and expected to reach Acre on April 13th. 

After bidding farewell to the deputy-agent and thanking 
him for the effectual aid which he had rendered me, I 
visited Mr Eyres, and told him that I would accept his 
kind offer if I could obtain a horse and make the necessary 
arrangements for my journey on the following morning. 
He told me that he must start early, but that if I left 
Beyrout by mid-day I could easily overtake him at Sidon, 
where he would halt for the night; and he further placed 
at my disposal the services of one of his h.t wicast g to assist 
me in my preparations. 


XXX 


INTRODUCTION. 


Next morning (Friday, April 11th) I was astir early, 
for there was much to be done. With the help of my 
friend Jemilu’d-Dln Bey of the Imperial Ottoman Bank, 
and the active co-operation of the kawwas of the Consulate, 
all was at length satisfactorily arranged; and shortly after 
midday I found myself on a sturdy, good-looking, but 
somewhat indolent horse, with a khivrjtn (pair of saddle¬ 
bags) containing the most indispensable of my effects 
behind me, plodding along a sandy road bordered with 
cactus in the direction of Sidon, where (the road being 
fortunately easy to follow) I arrived without mishap at 
sun-down. 

To speak of the delights of that three days’ journey, the 
beauty of the scenery, the purity and fragrance of the soft 
spring air, the pleasant mid-day halts by some rippling 
stream or in some balmy grove, and the hospitable recep¬ 
tions accorded to me as Mr Eyres’ travelling companion by 
those in whose houses we alighted at Sidon, Tyre, and 
Acre, would be to wander further than is permissible from 
the subject in hand. Suffice it to say that, thanks to 
Mr Eyres’ kindness in allowing me to accompany him, a 
journey, which, if performed in solitude, would have lost 
more than half its charm, was rendered enjoyable in the 
highest degree. The last day was perhaps the most de¬ 
lightful of all, and I was greatly astonished on entering the 
Acre plain to behold a wealth of beautiful gardens and 
fragrant orange-groves such as I had little expected to find 
in what BeM has stigmatized as “the most desolate of 
countries” (akhrabu’l-bilad). I subsequently mentioned 
this feeling of surprise to the Bibfs at Acre, who replied 
that had I seen it when Behd first came there nearly two 
and twenty years ago I should not have deemed the title 
misapplied, but that since he had dwelt there it had 
assumed this fair and comely aspect. 


INTRODUCTION. 


XXXI 


We entered Acre towards sun-down on April 13th, and, 
wending onr way through the fine bazaars, on the smooth 
stone pavement of which our horses’ hoofs slipped as on ice, 
alighted at the house of a Christian merchant named 
Ibrahim Khuri, who accorded to us the usual hospitable 
reception. That same evening I sent a note to the B&bf 
agent, which was brought back by the messenger unopened, 
with the disagreeable news that my mysterious corre¬ 
spondent had gone to Haifd with Behd’s eldest son ‘Abbds 
Efendi. This was most unwelcome information; for as Mr 
Eyres was leaving the next day for Haifd, and I did not 
wish to trespass further on the hospitality of Ibrahim 
Khuri, it was absolutely essential that I should obtain help 
from the Bdbis in finding other quarters. Evidently there 
was nothing for it but to wait for the morrow and what it 
might bring forth. 

Next morning I enquired if there was any representative 
of the absent agent who might be cognizant of his move¬ 
ments, and was conducted to a shop in the bazaar, where I 
found a tall handsome youth clothed entirely in white save 
for his red fez, from beneath which a mass of glossy black 
hair swept back behind his ears, at the lower level of which 
it terminated 1 . This youth, accosting me in Turkish, 
enquired first somewhat haughtily what might be my 
business. I answered him in Persian, whereat he appeared 
surprised ; and, after hearing what I had to say, bade me 
follow him. He led me to a house situated near the sea¬ 
shore, at the door of which we were met by an old Persian 

1 Concerning the characteristic manner in which the B&bis arrange 
their hair, cf. B. i. pp. 499—500, The wearing of pure white garments 
was from the first another special feature of theirs. Thus we learn 
from the Tarikh-i-Jadid that the defenders of Sheykh Tabarsi used to 
issue forth to attack their foes clad in pure white raiment and crying 
out “ Yd Sdhibu’z-Zaman ” (“ 0 Lord of the Age ! ”). 


xxxii INTRODUCTION. 

with long grizzled hair and beard, whose scrutinizing gaze 
was rendered more rather than less formidable by an 
enormous pair of spectacles. This man, after conversing 
for a few moments with my guide in an under tone, led me 
into a large room devoid of all furniture save a sort of 
bench or divan which ran round its four sides. I had 
scarcely seated myself when another Persian, evidently 
superior in authority to the other two, entered and saluted 
me. He was a man of middle height and middle age, with 
a keen and not unpleasing countenance, whereof the lower 
part was concealed by a short crisp beard. After bidding 
me reseat myself (for I had of course risen on his entrance) 
and ordering his servant (for such, I discovered, was the 
old man who had met me at the door) to give me a cup 
of coffee, lie proceeded to subject me to a most minute 
cross-examination as to my nationality, my occupation, my 
travels in Persia, the objects of my present journey, and 
the like. My answers appeared to satisfy him; and when 
he had finished his questioning he asked me what I pro¬ 
posed to do. I told him that I would be guided entirely 
by his advice. He then asked me whether I would proceed 
to Haifd,, where I was certain to find the agent whom 
I sought with Beh.i’s son ‘Abb&s Efendf. To this I replied 
that as I had but a few days at my disposal, and as Acre 
and not Haif& was the goal of my journey, I would rather 
remain than depart. “In that case,” said he, “I myself 
wiH go to Haifi, this afternoon and bring back word 
tomorrow what you must do. Meanwhile will you remain 
where you stayed last night till I return?” I answered 
that I would rather not trespass further on a hospitality 
extended to me solely as Mr Eyres’ friend, and that if he 
could suggest any other lodging for that night I should be 
glad. I was not, I added, exacting in the matter of 
comfort, and would be quite content with a caravansary. 


INTRODUCTION. 


xxxiii 

He reflected for a few moments and then said, “ Very well. 
If that be your wish you can stay here. I myself shall be 
absent, but I will give instructions that you shall be looked 
after. And after all it is only for one night: tomorrow I 
shall return, and we will, if God please, find you better 
quarters. When the consul departs for Haifii do you also 
leave the house where you are staying and bring your 
effects here.” I then took my leave with many expressions 
of gratitude, and occupied myself during the remainder of 
the morniug in packing my saddle-bags and making arrange¬ 
ments for the stabling of my horse during the time I 
expected to remain at Acre. 

After lunch Mr Eyres departed for Haif&, and I, quitting 
Ibrahim Khuri’s abode, found someone to carry my effects 
to the house which I had visited in the morning. Here I 
was received by a sharp-looking boy of about fourteen, who 
proved to be the son of my interlocutor of the morning, to 
whom also, as I subsequently discovered, the house which 
I had now entered belonged. I had expected to receive 
but the roughest accommodation, the resources of the 
house being in nowise revealed by the room on the ground- 
floor where I had been received in the morning. My 
experience of the hospitali ty of th e P ersians in general and 
the B&bfs in particular, and the deceptive exteriors of 
Or iental house s, might, it is true, have led me to expect 
tolerable comfort, but could hardly have prepared me for 
the positive luxury which the thoughtful kindness of my 
host had provided. During the afternoon I was entertained 
by my host’s son, who showed that admirable courtesy and 
savoir fake with which even quite young Persian hoys are 
capable, in the absence of their elders, of receiving the 
stranger and doing the honours of the house. As it was 
Easter Monday the street outside was filled with Syrian 
Christians, who continued so long as daylight lasted to 


XXXIV 


INTRODUCTION. 


express their joy in howls, gun-shots, and wild dances, at 
which we looked on in amazement from the window. A 
more remarkable and discordant expression of religious 
fervour it has never been my lot to witness. Towards the 
latter part of the afternoon my host’s son, thinking, I 
suppose, that I needed further amusement, took me to see 
an itinerant Greek photographer who was temporarily 
established in a sort of cellar in the basement of the house. 
This Greek spoke French tolerably well, and seemed an 
honest, kindly fellow. He was very anxious to make out 
that I was a free-mason, and importuned me greatly to tell 
him the names of the pillars of Solomon’s temple. Dim 
recollections of some hook purporting to expose the secrets 
of that cult prompted me to seek escape from his pertinacity 
by suggesting “ Boaz,” whereupon nothing would serve him 
but I must tell him the name of the other. As I had 
forgotten this, and begun to weary of the subject, I took my 
leave. 

Towards evening I received another visitor, whose mien 
and bearing alike marked him as a person of consequence. 
He was a man of perhaps thirty or thirty-five years of age, 
with a face which called to one’s mind the finest types of 
Iranian physiognomy preserved to us in the bas-reliefs of 
Persepolis, yet with something in it beyond this, which 
involuntarily called forth in my mind the thought, “ What 
would not an artist desirous of painting a saint or an 
apostle give for such a model! ” My visitor (who, as I 
afterwards discovered, was a son of Beh&’s deceased brother 
Mhsd) was clothed, save for the tall red fez which crowned 
his head, entirely in pure white; and everything about 
him, from his short well-trimmed beard and the masses of 
jet-black hair swept boldly back behind his ears, to the hem 
of his spotless garment, was characterized by the same 
scrupulous neatness. He saluted me very graciously, and 


INTRODUCTION. 


XXXV 


remained conversing with me all the evening. Shortly 
after supper he bade me good-night, saying that I must 
doubtless be fatigued with my journey. I was then con¬ 
ducted by my host’s son and the old servant to the room 
where I had spent the afternoon, where, to my astonish¬ 
ment, I found that a bed provided with the most efficient 
mosquito-curtains and furnished with fair white sheets and 
soft mattress had been prepared for me. The arrangement 
of the mosquito-curtains (called by my new friends namusi) 
was such as I had not previously seen, and, as it appeared 
to me perfect in simplicity and efficiency, I shall describe 
it for the benefit of other travellers. The namusi, then, 
consists of what may most easily be described as a large 
box or small chamber of muslin, rectangular in shape, 
greater in length than in breadth, and furnished with a 
single funnel-shaped aperture in one of its sides. This 
muslin chamber is suspended by its corners by cords 
attached to the wall, and is entered through the funnel- 
shaped aperture, the mouth of which is encircled by a cord. 
The bed is laid inside, its component parts being intro¬ 
duced one by one. The occupant on entering draws tight 
the constricting cord, and is thereby completely cut off 
from the attacks of gnats, mosquitoes, and the like. The 
whole structure can, when not in use, be folded up into a 
very small compass. 

I arose next morning (Tuesday, April 14th) after a most 
refreshing sleep, and was served with tea by the old man 
with the spectacles. Soon after this a sudden stir without 
announced the arrival of fresh visitors, and a moment after 
my companion of the previous evening entered the room 
accompanied by two other persons, one of whom proved to 
be the Bibf agent from Beyrout, while the other, as I guessed 
from the first by the extraordinary deference shewn to him 
by all present, was none other than Beh&’s eldest son ‘Abbds 


XXXVI 


INTRODUCTION. 


Efendl. Seldom have I seen one whose appearance im 
pressed me more. A tall strongly-built man holding himsel: 
straight as an arrow, with white turban and raiment, loiq, 
black locks reaching almost to the shoulder, broad powerfu. 
forehead indicating a strong intellect combined with ar 
unswerving null, eyes keen as a hawk’s, and strongly- 
marked but pleasing features—such was my first impression 
of ‘Abb&s Efendl, “the master” (Aka) as he par excellence 
is called by the Bilbls. Subsequent conversation with him 
served only to heighten the respect with which his appear¬ 
ance had from the first inspired me. One more eloquent 
of speech, more ready of argument, more apt of illustration, 
more intimately acquainted with the sacred books of the 
Jews, the Christians, and the Muhammadans, could, I 
should think, scarcely be found even amongst the eloquent, 
ready, and subtle race to which he belongs. These qualities, 
combined with a bearing at once majestic and genial, made 
me cease to wonder at the influence and esteem which he 
enjoyed even beyond the circle of his father’s followers. 
About the greatness of this man and his power no one who 
had seen him could entertain a doubt. 

In this illustrious company did I partake of the mid-day 
meal. Soon after its conclusion ‘Abbis Efendl and the 
others arose with a prefatory “. Bismi’lldh ,” and signified to 
me that I should accompany them, which I did, without 
having any idea whither we were going. I observed, 
however, that the saddle-bags containing my effects were 
carried after us by one of those present; from which I 
concluded that 1 was not intended to remain in my present 
quarters. We left the house, traversed the bazaars, and 
quitted the town by its solitary gate. Outside this gate 
near the sea is a large shed which serves as a coffee-house, 
and. here we seated ourselves, my companions evidently 
awaiting the arrival of something or somebody from a large 


INTRODUCTION. XXXvii 

mansion half-hidden in a grove of trees situated about 
a mile or a mile and a half inland, towards which they 
continually directed their glances. While we were waiting 
thus, a weird-looking old man, who proved to be none 
other than the famous Mmhkm-Kalarn \ came and seated 
himself beside us. He told me that he had heard all about 
me from a relation of his at Isfahan (that same dalldl who 
had been the means of my first introduction to the B&bi 
community 2 ), and that he had been expecting to see me at 
Acre ever since that time. 

Presently we discerned advancing towards us along the 
road from the mansion above mentioned three animals, one 
of which was ridden by a man. Thereupon we arose and 
went to meet them; and I soon found myself mounted on 
one of those fine white asses which, in my opinion, are 
of all quadrupeds the most comfortable to ride. A quarter 
of an hour later we alighted in front of the large mansion 
aforesaid, whereof the name, Behje (Joy), is said to be a 
corruption (though, as the BAbfs do not fail to point out, a 
very happy corruption) of Bdghcha (which signifies a garden). 
I was almost immediately conducted into a large room on 
the ground-floor, where I was most cordially received by 
several persons whom I had not hitherto seen. Amongst 
these were two of BehAs younger sons, of whom one was 
apparently about twenty-five and the other about twenty- 
one years of age. Both were handsome and distinguished 
enough in appearauce, and the expression of the younger 
was singularly sweet and winning. Besides these a very 
old man with light blue eyes and white heard, whose green 
turban proclaimed him a descendant of the Prophet, ad¬ 
vanced to welcome me, saying, “We know not how we 

1 See B. i, p. 516, B. ii, p. 994, and Note W at the end of this 
book. 

2 See B. i, p. 487 et seq. 


XXXviii INTRODUCTION. 

should greet thee, whether we should salute thee with 
‘as-seblmu ‘aleykum’ or with ‘Allahu ab/id'.’” When I 
discovered that this venerable old man was not only one of 
the original companions of the Bfib but his relative and 
comrade from earliest childhood, it may well be imagined 
with what eagerness I gazed upon him and listened to his 
every utterance. 

So here at Behje was I installed as a guest, in the very 
midst of all that Bfibfism accounts most noble and most 
holy; and here did I spend five most memorable days, 
during which I enjoyed unparalleled and unhoped-for 
opportunities of holding intercourse with those who are the 
very fountain-heads of that mighty and wondrous spirit 
which works with invisible but ever-increasing force for the 
transformation and quickening of a people who slumber in 
a sleep like unto death. It was in truth a strange and 
moving experience, but one whereof I despair of conveying 
any save the feeblest impression. I might, indeed, strive 
to describe in greater detail the faces and forms which 
surrounded me, the conversations to which I was privileged 
to listen, the solemn melodious reading of the sacred books, 
the general sense of harmony and content which pervaded 
the place, and the fragrant shady gardens whither in the 
afternoon we sometimes repaired; but all this was as 
nought in comparison with the spiritual atmosphere with 
which I was encompassed. Persian Muslims will tell you 
often that the Bfibls bewitch or drug their guests so that 
these, impelled by a fascination which they cannot resist, 
become similarly affected with what the aforesaid Muslims 
regard as a strange and incomprehensible madness. Idle 
and absurd as this belief is, it yet rests on a basis of fact 
stronger than that which supports the greater part of what 

1 i.e. with the salutation ordinarily used by the Muhammadans, or 
with that peculiar to the B&bls, 


INTRODUCTION. 


XXXIX 


they allege concerning this people. The spirit which 
pervades the Bfibis is such that it can hardly fail to affect 
most powerfully all subjected to its influence. It may 
appal or attract: it cannot be ignored or disregarded. 
Let those who have not seen disbelieve me if they will; 
but, should that spirit once reveal itself to them, they 
will experience an emotion which they are not likely to 
forget. 

Of the culmiuating event of this my journey some few 
words at least must be said. During the morning of the 
day' after my installation at Behje one of Behfi’s younger 
sons entered the room where I was sitting and beckoned to 
me to follow him. I did so, and was conducted through 
passages and rooms at which I scarcely had time to glance 
to a spacious hall, paved, so far as I remember (for my 
mind was occupied with other thoughts) with a mosaic of 
marble. Before a curtain suspended from the wall of this 
great ante-chamber my conductor paused for a moment 
while I removed my shoes. Then, with a quick movement 
of the hand, he withdrew, and, as I passed, replaced the 
curtain; and I found myself in a large apartment, along the 
upper end of which ran a low divan, while on the side 
opposite to the door were placed two or three chairs. 
Though 1 dimly suspected whither I was going and whom I 
was to behold (for no distinct intimation had been given to 
me), a second or two elapsed ere, with a throb of wonder 
and awe, I became definitely conscious that the room was not 
untenanted. In the corner where the divan met the wall 
sat a wondrous and venerable figure, crowned with a felt 
head-dress of the kind called tcij by dervishes (but of 
unusual height and make), round the base of which was 
wound a small white turban. The face of him on whom I 
gazed I can never forget, though I cannot describe it. 
Those piercing eyes seemed to read one’s very soul; power 


xl 


INTRODUCTION. 


and authority sat on that ample brow; while the deep lines 
on the forehead and face implied an age which the jet- 
black hair and beard flowing down in indistinguishable 
luxuriance almost to the waist seemed to belie. No need 
to ask in whose presence I stood, as I bowed myself before 
one who is the object of a devotion and love which kings 
might envy and emperors sigh for in vain ! 

A mild dignified voice bade me be seated, and then 
continued“Praise be to God that thou hast attained!... 

Thou hast come to see a prisoner and an exile.We 

desire but the good of the world and tlie happiness of the 
nations ; yet they deem us a stirrer up of strife and sedition 
worthy of bondage and banishment. . . . That all nations 
should become one_in faith and all men as brothers; that 
the bonds of affection ancf unity between tbesons of men 
should be strengthened; fKaFUiversity of religion should 
cease, and differences of race he annulled —what harm is 
there in this?... Yet so it shall be; these fruitless strifes, 
these ruinous wars shall pass away, and the ‘ Most Great 
Peace’ shall come .... Do not you in Europe need this also ? 
Is not this that which Christ foretold?. . . Yet do we see 
your kings and rulers lavishing their treasures more freely 
on means for the destruction of tlicThuman raceiEanjhnlhat 
which would co nduce t o the happiness o f mankind... These 
strifes ancfthis bloods hed and discor d must cease, and all 
men be as one kindred and one family .... Let not a man 
glory in this, that he loves his country ; let him rather 
glory IrPEhis, that h e loves his ki nd . . . .” 

Such, so far as I can recall them, were the words which, 
besides many others, I heard from Behd. Let those who 
read them consider well with themselves whether such 
doctrines merit death and bonds, and whether the world 
is more likely to gain or lose by their diffusion. 

My interview lasted altogether about twenty minutes, 


INTRODUCTION. xli 

and during the latter part of it Beh4 read a portion of that 
epistle ( lawk) whereof the translation occupies the last 
paragraph on p. 70 and the greater part of p. 71 of this 
book. 

During the five days spent at Behje (Tuesday, April 15th 
to Sunday, April 20th), I was admitted to Belli’s presence 
four times. These interviews always took place an hour or 
two before noon, and lasted from twenty minutes to half-au- 
hour. One of Behi’s sons always accompanied me, and 
once Ak4 Mi'rz.4 Ak4 J4ri (Jendb-i-Khadimu Hah)' the 
amanuensis ( Jcatib-i-ayat) was also present. In their 
general features these interviews resembled the first, of 
which I have attempted to give a description. Besides 
this, one afternoon I saw Behi walking in one of the 
gardens which belong to him. He was surrounded by a 
little group of Ids chief followers. How the journey to and 
from the garden was accomplished I know not: probably 
under cover of the darkness of night. 

At length the last day to which my departure could 
possibly be deferred if I were to reach Cambridge ere the 
expiration of my leave arrived. Loath as I was to go, 
there was no help for it; and reluctantly enough I declined 
the pressing invitations to prolong my stay which the 
kindness of my friends prompted them to utter. Finding 
that I was bent on departure, and that I could not remain 
longer without running a great risk of breaking my promise, 
they ceased to try to dissuade me from going, and, with 
most considerate kindness, strove to make such arrange¬ 
ments for my return journey as might most conduce to my 
comfort. In spite of all my assurances that I could easily 
return by myself, it was settled that the B&bf agent of 
Beyrout should accompany me thither. I was very un- 


1 See B. i, p. 519 ; and pp. 355, n. 2, 358, and 360—362 infra. 
B. d 


xlii INTRODUCTION. 

willing to put him to such inconvenience, but was finally 
compelled to accede to this arrangement, which, of course, 
made the return journey far pleasanter than it would other¬ 
wise have been. 

In the course of a conversation which took place soon 
after my arrival I had expressed a strong desire to become 
better acquainted with the later history of the BAbf move¬ 
ment, adding that the only history written in a friendly 
and sympathetic spirit which I had seen was the Tdrikh-i- 
Jadid, and that this only carried the narrative down to the 
year a.d. 1850. In reply I was told that a concise and 
authentic history carried down almost to the present day 
had been compiled 1 2 ; and that same day this book, of which 
the text and translation are now published, was placed in 
my hands. I did not at first understand that this was 
a gift, for many books were lent to me to read in my 
room; and consequently I spent much time which, as the 
event turned out, might have been more profitably em¬ 
ployed, in copying out what I deemed the more important 
passages of the work in question. When, at the moment 
of my departure, I offered to return the book, I was told 
that it was a gift which I might take with me in re¬ 
membrance of my visit; whereat I rejoiced greatly. Be¬ 
sides this I received a fine ms. copy of the Ikdn written by 
the same scribe, “the Letter Zd"*\ for I had mentioned 
incidentally that the copy of that work which I had 
obtained in Persia had unfortunately suffered damages 
which rendered many passages almost illegible. 

At length the moment of departure came, and, after 
taking an affectionate farewell of my kind friends, I once 

1 For a fuller account of the circumstances which led to the 
compilation of this history see that portion of Note A which is 
devoted to the Tdrihh-i-Jadid (pp. 194—195 infra). 

2 See Note Z at end. 


INTRODUCTION. 


xliii 


more turned my face towards Beyrout. I was accompanied 
by the Baht agent; and a servant, who, left fatherless in 
childhood by one of the B4b( persecutions in Persia, had 
since remained in the household of Belli, went with us as 
far as Tyre. I have seldom seen one whose countenance 
and conversation revealed a more complete contentment 
with his lot. That night we slept in a caravansaray at 
Tyre. Next day the servant bade us farewell and turned 
back towards Acre, while we continued on our way, and 
shortly after sunset passed through the beautiful gardens 
which surround Sidon, that fairest and most fragrant of 
Syria’s cities. Here we alighted at the house of a Bib! of 
Yezd, whose kindly hospitality formed a pleasant contrast 
to our somewhat dreary lodgings of the previous night. 

On the evening of the following day (Tuesday, April 
22nd) we entered Beyrout, and halted for a while to rest 
and refresh ourselves with tea at the house of a Bib! of 
Baghdad which was situated in the outskirts of the town. 
This man had as a child gone with his father to Persia in 
the hope of seeing the Bib. This he was unable to do, the 
Bib being at that time confined in the fortress of Chihrlk, 
but at Teheran he had seen Mulli Huseyn of Bushraweyh. 
I asked him what manner of man Mulli Huseyn was. 
“ Lean and fragile to look at,” he answered, “ but keen and 
bright as the sword which never left his side. For the rest, 
he was not more than thirty or thirty-five years old, and 
his raiment was white.” 

Next day soon after sun-down, the last farewells said, 
and the precious mss. carefully concealed about me, I was 
borne swiftly out of Beyrout harbour by the Egyptian 
steamer Rahmuniyya. Eight days later, on Thursday, May 
1st, I was back in Cambridge. So ended a most interest¬ 
ing, most successful, and most pleasant journey. 


xliv INTRODUCTION. 

Shortly after my return to Cambridge I addressed a 
note to the Syndicate of the University Press, stating in 
brief outline the course and results of the investigations 
which had occupied me during the last three years, and my 
desire to place before the world some jiortion of these 
results by publishing the text and translation of one or 
other of the two Bhbi histories which I had obtained. Of 
these two histories I briefly discussed the respective merits, 
adding that, although the text of the Tdrikh-i-Jadid only 
awaited collation with the British Museum ms., while the 
translation thereof was far advanced towards completion, 
this newer history, owing to its comparatively small bulk, 
could probably be got ready for publication quite as soon 
as the larger work, while the ms. of it which I had obtained, 
being accurate, well written, and, to the best of my know¬ 
ledge, unique in Europe, might, with perfect propriety, be 
reproduced in facsimile- by some process of photo-litho¬ 
graphy. In reply to my application, I was presently in¬ 
formed that the Syndicate was prepared to accept and 
publish the smaller work so soon as it should be ready, 
while the expediency of publishing the larger Tdrtkh-i- 
Jadfd was deferred for future consideration. On learning 
the favourable result of my application I at once applied 
myself vigorously to the work of translation and annota¬ 
tion, and by the end of July 1890 the first proof-sheets 
were already before me. As it had been decided that the 
text should be reproduced by photo-lithography, I had 
no anxiety on that score; and the excellence of the 
facsimile produced in the workshops of the Cambridge 
Engraving Company under the careful supervision of 
Mr Dew-Smith of Trinity College, will, I am confident, 
more than reconcile the Persian scholar to the necessity of 
dealing with a lithographed instead of a printed text. 


INTRODUCTION. 


xlv 


It remains for me to speak briefly of the peculiarities 
of this history both as regards tone and style. As to the 
former, the chief features which will strike the attentive 
reader are 

(1) The quite secondary importance accorded to the 
Bdb, whose mission is throughout depicted as a mere pre¬ 
paration for the fuller and more perfect dispensation of 
Belri. In like manner the deeds and sufferings of the early 
apostles of Bibfism are passed over very lightly, and many 
of the most remarkable events of the older dispensation 
(such as the deaths of the ‘Seven Martyrs 1 ,’ anc Lthe great 
massacre at Teherin in 1852 which Renan 2 3 calls “un jour 
sans pared peut-etre dans l’histoire du monde”) are almost 
or quite unnoticed. The martyrdoms of Mfrzi Badf 13 and 
the two Seyyids of Isfahan 4 , which belong to the new 
dispensation, are, on the other hand, treated of very fully. 

(2) Mfrzi Yahyi Subh-i-Ezel is throughout depicted as 
a person of no consequence, enjoying for a while a merely 
nominal supremacy, bestowed upon him, not for any special 
merit or capacity, but out of regard for certain considera¬ 
tions of expediency 5 . No opportunity is lost of disparaging 
both his courage and his judgement 6 , and of contrasting him 
in these respects with BeM, who is everywhere described as 


the true and legitimate chief. N 

(3) Towards th e Shall of Persia an extraord inar ily 
temper ate tone isj ibservei l, andTlhhsev efal places apologies 
jrr e put forward f or his j ustification, th eAHainaiIffiOh.e 
cruelties inflicted on the B&bis being thrown either on his 


1 See Note B at end. 

- Leg Apotres, p. 378. See also Note T at end. 

3 See pp. 102—106 infra. 

4 See pp. 167—169 and 400 et seq. infra, and B. i, pp. 489—491. 

5 Cf. pp. 62—63 infra. 

6 Cf. pp. 51—52; 63—64; 89—90; and 93—101 infra. 


xlvi 


INTRODUCTION. 


ministers and courtiers, or on the Muha m madan doctors, 
whF are repeatedly and strongly denounced 1 . 

(4) The resistance opposed to the government by the 
earlier Bhbis is deprecated even when evoked by the most 
wanton acts of aggression and cruelty 2 , the attempt on the 
jShkh’s life in particular being alluded to ivith the utmost 
'■horror 3 ; and it is implied that, although the B4h^j)recep_ts 
were altogether those of_q)eace, the stronger will and in¬ 
fluence of Belli were needed to give them actual currency 4 . 

The chief peculiarities presented by the style of this 
work are as follows :— 

(1) A remarkable terseness and concision rare in 
Persian. 

(2) An unusual preponderance of the Arabic element, 
and the frequent employment of many uncommon Arabic 
words. 

(3) An abundant use of the past participle in place of 
the past tense where we should expect the latter. A good 
instance of this peculiarity occurs in the first five lines of 
p. 3 of the text. Of these three peculiarities the second 
and third are noticed by Gobineau (Religions et Philoso¬ 
phies, p. 312) as characteristic of the B&bl style in general. 
He says:—“ C’est un persan oil il ne paralt presque que 
des mots arabes choisis parrni les plus relev4s et les plus 
rares, et oh se combinent les formes grammaticales des 
deux langues de manibre h exercer singulihrement la 
sagacity et, il faut le dire aussi, la patience des lecteurs 
ddvots et confiants. Suivant un usage, qui est du reste 
assez requ dans les ouvrages philosophiques, les verbes 
persans employes se prbsentent presque toujours sous la 


1 Cf. pp. 20, 32—33, 34—35, 40-41, 52, and 104—106 infra. 
1 Cf. p. 35 infra. 3 See pp. 49—51 infra. 

4 Cf. pp. 65—69 infra. 


INTRODUCTION. 


xlvii 


forme concrete de participes passes, afin de ressembler 
autant que possible h des verbes arabes.” 

(4) A very noticeable tendency to omit the Persian 
auxiliary verb after Arabic participles, whether active or 
passive, and generally speaking to restrict the employment 
of the verb as much as possible. The following instances 
(and the like will be found almost on every page) will 
suffice to illustrate this feature:— 


(On p. 1, last line, and p. 2, first line):—^1 Oy>- 
jJ.) Jo jo I j j> Aab>« 


Sj! Ij§]—“Now since these various accounts [are] re¬ 
corded in other pages, and [since] the setting forth thereof 
[would be] the cause of prolixity, therefore’’...etc. 

(On p. 39, last line, and p. 40, first line):—i_S jl> 
olsU- a_ oLhjj ul I i_5 Lie j o! 


* ji a Li JUae* jyih*—“ Well, Persia [was] in 

this critical state and the learned doctors perplexed aud 
anxious, when the late Prince Muhammad Shlli died.” 

(On p. 43, last line, and p. 44, first three lines):— 

y jlijli j j tljLu j J)L j\jOs jlijlSCsl j 

J jj v_jLj 

# s J, j jjaLA jl A3 —“ Their con¬ 

ceptions and ideas [were] after the former fashion, and 
their conduct and behaviour in correspondence with ancient 
usage. The way of approach to the Bab [was], moreover, 
closed, and the flame of trouble visibly blazing on every 
side.” 


xlviii 


INTRODUCTION. 


(5) Two peculiar idioms common to all Bdbl compo¬ 
sitions remain to be noticed. The first of these is the 

continual use of in the sense of “for,” to the 

V 

almost complete exclusion of I y'j > I y>-, or the simple 

which are commonly employed in other works. The 
second is the combination of the past and the present or 
the past and future tenses in general assertions (an idiom 
which is even more common in the writings of the B&b 
than in those of Belul). Of this usage the following 
instances may be cited from the present work:— 

(At the bottom of p. 141):—^ jLkL jl 

% J&l y>- Jj- jj\ (J!j V 

...“for that Peerless King hath been and will be for ever¬ 
lasting Holy above ascent or descent.” 

(In the sentence at the top of p. 142 which follows the 
above). ^ y ^ ^1 l i ^ ^ » ~ ^ j ..i 

* j ^ds 1) alj>Uca—“Therefore to-day 

victory neither hath been nor will be interference with any 
one, nor strife with any person.” 

The peculiarities of style affected by the Bilb have for 
the most part received the sanction of Behd, and are copied 
with greater or less fidelity by the majority of Bibis, so 
that one familiar with them might often succeed in recog¬ 
nizing a letter or other document as of Bhbf authorship. 

It remains for me to say a few words as to the principles 
which have guided me in my own work, viz. the translation 
and notes. As regards the former, I have taken as my guide 
the canon laid down by the late Dr William Wright, whose 


INTRODUCTION. 


xlix 


death, mourned by all as an irreparable loss, was to such as 
were like myself privileged to listen to his teaching and 
feel the genial influence of his constant and unvarying 
kindness and encouragement, the saddest of bereavements. 
This canon he states as follows (Chronicle of Joshua the 
Stylite, Cambridge, 1882, pp. vi—vii of the Preface):— 
“ In my translation I have striven to be as literal as the 
difference between the two idioms ■null allow. My method 
is first to translate as closely as I can, and then to try if I 
can improve the form of expression in any way without the 
sacrifice of truthfulness to the original. I also endeavour 
to preserve a somewhat antiquated and Biblical style, as 
being peculiarly adapted to the rendering into English of 
Oriental works, whether poetical or historical. The Old 
Testament and the Ko’r&n, which are, of course, in many 
ways strikingly similar in their diction, can both be easily 
made ridiculous by turning them into our modern ver¬ 
nacular, particularly if we vulgarize with malice prepense.” 
Now though I cannot flatter myself that I have succeeded 
in making my translation of this history very eloquent 
English, I can at least conscientiously declare that I have 
spared no pains to reproduce faithfully not only the thought 
but also the style and diction of my author. The desire to 
give a correct impression of the original has even led me to 
preserve the Persian idiom where a slight alteration would 
have improved the English. An instance of this occurs 
in the very first sentence on p. 1, where “on the lips” 
would undoubtedly have been better English than “ on the 
tongues.” Throughout my translation I have unhesitatingly 
preferred fidelity to elegance; and, even if I have gone 
too far in this, I trust that at least the English reader will 
obtain a clearer idea of the peculiarities of the original 
than would otherwise have been possible. Words of 
constant recurrence have been, so far as possible, rendered 


1 


INTRODUCTION. 


by the same English equivalent, which, according to the 
canon above referred to, often bears the meaning which it 
has in the Bible rather than that which is given to it 

in ordinary usage. Thus by “lawyers” ( Lgia) are in¬ 
tended the expounders of the Sacred Books and of the Law 

therein contained, and by “doctors” ( Lie) those learned 
in theology and the kindred sciences. 

As regards the notes with which I have endeavoured to 
elucidate, control, and amplify the text, they are of two 
kinds; foot-notes containing explanations necessary for the 
proper comprehension of the text, references, supplementary 
details or varying traditions of events recorded in the body 
of the work, brief notices of events intentionally or accident¬ 
ally passed over, comments, and the like; and the final 
notes designated by capital letters, to which perhaps the 
term “Excursus” or “Appendix” might more fitly have 
been given. These latter have, I confess, grown to propor¬ 
tions far exceeding what I originally intended, for the 
printing of the translation was finished ere half of them 
was mitten, and ever as I mote fresh scraps of information 
which 1 could not persuade myself to omit kept coming in. 
I cannot but feel that, partly in consequence of this, partly 
because of the very nature of my original plan, portions of 
my work will appear discursive, desultory, and disconnected, 
even if it be free (which I can scarcely hope) from contra¬ 
dictions and repetitions. But my aim and object has been 
chiefly to record, for the benefit of future historians, every 
fact which I have been able to learn, and every varying 
tradition which I have heard in Persia, Turkey, Syria, or 
Cyprus. In the case of divergent traditions I have, so far 
as was consistent with the safety of my informants, given 
the isndd or chain of authorities by which they reached 
me. When this could not be done, I have striven to give 


INTRODUCTION. 


li 


the reader some means of forming an estimate of the 
character of my informant. The office of the chronicler 
and collector of traditions is, in comparison with that of the 
historian, a humble one; yet the labours of the former are 
indispensable to those of the latter, and must precede them. 
The immense superiority of Tabari to all other Oriental 
historians lies, as Professor Noeldeke observes, in this, that 
he was content to record the various traditions of diverse 
events which he learned from this one or that one without 
seeking prematurely to blend them into one harmonious 
narrative. Let the oldest traditions of any historical event 
once be gathered up, the credibility of their narrators being, 
as far as possible, determined, and the chronicle may with¬ 
out prejudice to itself await in patience, for centuries if 
need be, the magic touch of the true historian; but if once 
the old traditions be lost the loss can never be made good. 
Through a fortunate combination of circumstances unlikely 
to repeat itself I was placed in a singularly good position 
for gathering together B4bf traditions from sources many 
of which will in a few years be no longer available, and I 
was impatient to place on record the mass of information 
thus arduously acquired; so that now, as I write the last 
page of this work, I am conscious of a dee]) sense of relief 
and thankfulness that no obstacle has intervened to prevent 
the conclusion of my labours. 

Of the bibliography of Bdbfism a full account will be 
founcTTn NotiTW. at the end of the book, so that I need __ 
add nothing further on this subject. My first and second 
articles on the Bhbfs in the J. i?. A. 8. for 1889 (vol. xxi, 
new series, parts iii and iv) are, as already explained, 
respectively denoted throughout this work as “B. i,” and 
“B. ii.” When Gobineau is quoted, his work Les Religions 
et les Philosophies dans I’Asie Centrals (2nd edition, Paris, 
1866) is referred to, unless otherwise specified. Mirza 


lit INTRODUCTION. 

Kazem-Beg’s five articles on the B&bis in the Journal 
Asiatique, though all published in 1866, extend through two 
volumes of that periodical, each of which volumes has a 
separate pagination. For convenience and brevity, there¬ 
fore, the first and second of these articles, included in vol. 
vii (siccieme serie) of the Journal Asiatique, are together 
denoted as “Kazem-Beg i,” while the third, fourth, and 
fifth, contained in vol. viii, are called “Kazem-Beg ii.” 
Any other works whereof the full titles are not given in the 
notes will be found described in detail in Note A. 

Concerning the facsimile of the text some few words 
are necessary. Thanks to the careful supervision of Mr 
A. G. Dew-Smith of Trinity College, for whose sympathetic 
and cordial co-operation I desire to express my warmest 
gratitude, this leaves little to be desired, reproducing faith¬ 
fully the features of the original ms. In spite of all care, 
however, the reproduction of a letter or word here and 
there would in the first instance prove defective, while now 
and then points and dots not belonging to the original 
would creep in. Most of these defects have, I hope, been 
removed, every page having been subjected two or three 
times to a careful scrutiny. During this revision the 
original ms. was always before me, and only when it ap¬ 
peared that a defect observed in the proof already existed 
there has it been left untouched. In a word, so far as the 
text is concerned the object has been to reproduce, not to 
correct or emend. From this general rule, however, I have 
been compelled to deviate in certain special cases. Through¬ 
out the original ms. a somewhat erratic system of punctua¬ 
tion by means of red dots prevails. These red dots neces¬ 
sarily appeared as black dots in the facsimile. Now and 
then it happened that, owing to their situation, they 
came to simulate diacritical points, thus creating a con¬ 
fusion, ambiguity, or unsightliness which was foreign to the 


INTRODUCTION. liii 

original ms. In such cases I have considered myself justified 
in removing these marks of punctuation, hut so far as pos¬ 
sible they have been allowed to stand. The Persian title- 
page does not belong to the original, but was subsequently 
written at Acre by my request in black, and beautifully 
reproduced in colours by Mr Dew-Smith. 

An investigation such as that whereof the course has 
been above detailed can be brought to a successful issue 
only by the co-operation and assistance of many persons, 
without whose kindly aid the desired information could not 
be obtained. To each and all of those to whose aid I am 
thus indebted I have striven, even at the risk of repetition, 
to express my indebtedness as occasion arose. It only 
remains for me to tender my most sincere thanks to such 
of my friends as have assisted me in the actual preparation 
of the work. In the tedious work of revising the proof- 
sheets I have received most efficient and valuable help 
from Mr It. A. Neil of this College. To the kindness and 
learning of Professor Robertson Smith, of Christ’s College, 
and Mr A. A. Bevan, of Trinity College, I am indebted for 
many suggestions and corrections. To the rare generosity 
of Baron Victor Rosen of St Petersburg in allowing me to 
make full and free use of still unpublished work I have had 
occasion to refer repeatedly in the course of my notes. 
Lastly, I desire to express my gratitude to the Syndics of 
the University Press for that liberal assistance without 
which the publication of this work might have been in¬ 
definitely postponed. 


ADDENDA. 


On p. 132 add the following note to the first sentence of the last 


paragraph:—In K. the word has been inserted above the line 

before the words iujLL> If we accept this reading (which 

is, however, unsupported by Eosen’s as by the present text) the sen¬ 
tence will translate as follows:—“ They have misrepresented matters 
before the presence of the King in such a way that if any ill deed 
proceed from anyone not of this sect they account him as [a follower] 
of the religion of these servants.” 

On p. 138, 1. 5, add the following note after “Book": —K., sup¬ 
ported by Eosen’s text, inserts a sentence whereof this is the transla¬ 
tion:—“ Some men, when they are unable to answer their opponent, 
lay hold of the rope of textual corruption; whereas mention of textual 
corruption occurs [only] in special passages.” This Persian sentence, 
if admitted, would seem to come more naturally at the end of the 
passage in Persian (omitted in the present text, translated in the 
foot-notes on pp. 137—138) than where it stands at present in the 
midst of a piece of Arabic. As regards sequence of ideas, too, it 
would be much more appropriately placed there than in its present 
position, where it has no obvious connection with the context. 

On p. 141,11. 5—6, add the following note :—K., as well as Eosen’s 
text, reads “we have sprinkled" instead of “xoe have made manifest." 

On p. 142, 1. 20, add the following note:—Eosen’s text agrees with 


K. in reading " - ( celebrated , notorious) instead of 

(i apparent , evident). 


NOTA BENE. 

Passages of which the original is in Arabic are printed in italics 
in the translation. Words supplied to complete the sense are enclosed 
in square brackets. 


CORRIGENDA. 


Baron Bosen has kindly called my attention to the following 
errors:— 

On p. 69, n. 1, and again, in a yet more definite manner, on 
pp. 208 and 211, I have committed the inexcusable blunder of con- 
fonnding Beha’u’llah’s earlier Suratu’l-MiMk with his later Alwah-i- 
Saldtin. The former only is described by Baron Bosen in the first 
volume of the Collections Scientifiques, and what is there written 
bears no reference whatever to the Sura-i-Heykal or the Ahodh-i- 
Saldtin comprised in it. The sis. described by Baron Bosen on 
pp. 145—243 of the forthcoming sixth volume of the Collections 
Scientifiques contains a series of Beha’u’llah’s writings. The first of 
these pieces is the Suratu'l-Muluk (previously described in the first 
volume of the Collections Scientifiques) concerning the authorship of 
which I expressed my donbts on pp. 954—8 of my second article in 
the J. R. A. S. for 1889. In reply to my objections Baron Bosen 
proves quite conclusively (Collections Scientifiques, vol. vi, pp. 145—8) 
that the Suratu’l-Muluk was written by Beha’u’llah, and that it was, 
moreover, written at an earlier date than the Alwdl^-i-Saldtin. The 
same ms. contains also the Sdra-i-Heykal (including, of course, the 
Alicah-i-Saldtin), and it is of this that the full text will appear in 
vol. vi of the Collections Scientifiques. The Suratu’l-Muluk appears 
to have been written about the end of the Baghdad period, i.e. 
about a.d. 1864; the Al-wdh-i-Saldtin (or at least the Epistle to the 
King of Persia, which is the longest and most important of them) 
during the latter days of the Adrianople period (cf. pp. 102, and 
119, n. 1 supra), i.e. about July 1868. The reader is therefore 
requested to make the following corrections. On p. 69, n. 1, 1. 4, 
for “ JSA ‘cjj-" read ‘“JaU'l On p. 208, 1. 27, for “a copy 

of Beha’s Sura-i-Heykal" read “a copy of Beha’s Svratu'l-Muluk," 
and delete -what follows down to the end of 1. 2 on p. 209, as well as 
n. 2 on p. 208. On p. 211, 1. 5, for “(or read “and 

the 'a 


A TRAVELLER’S NARRATIVE 


WRITTEN TO ILLUSTRATE 


THE EPISODE OF THE BAB. 


Touching the individual known as the B;ib and p. 1. 
the true nature of this sect diverse tales are on the 
tongues and in the mouths of men, and various ac¬ 
counts are contained in the pages of Persian history 
and the leaves of European chronicles 1 . But because 
of the variety of their assertions and the diversity 
of their narratives not one is as worthy of confidence 
as it should be. Some have loosed their tongues 
in extreme censure and condemnation; some foreign 
chronicles have spoken in a commendatory strain; 
while a certain section have recorded what they 
themselves have heard without addressing themselves 
either to censure or approbation. 

1 See Note A at end. 


B. 


1 


o 


A traveller’s narrative. 


p. 2 . Now since these various accounts are recorded 
in other pages, and since the setting forth thereof 
would lead to prolixity, therefore what relates to the 
history of this matter (sought out with the utmost 
diligence during the time of my travels in all parts 
of Persia, whether far or near, from those without 
and those within, from friends and strangers), and 
that whereon the disputants are agreed, shall be 
briefly set forth in writing, so that a summary of 
the facts of the case may be at the disposal of those 
who are athirst after the fountain of knowledge and 
who seek to become acquainted with all events. 

The Bab was a young merchant of the Pure 
Lineage’. Tie was bom inthe year one thousand two 
hundred and thirty-five [a. h.] on the first day of 
Muharram 1 2 , and when after a few years his father 
Seyyid Muhammad Rizd died, he was brought up in 
P- 3 - Shirdz in the arms of his materna^jn^3Iirad_S.eyyi[i 
‘Ah' 3 the merchant. On attaining maturity he engaged 
in trade in Bushire, first in partnership with his 
maternal uncle and afterwards independently. On 
account of what'was observed in Him he was noted 
for godliness, devoutness, virtue, and piety, and was 
regarded in the sight of men as so characterized. 

1 i.e. a Seyyid, or descendant of the family of the Prophet. 

2 October !20th, 1819 a.d. Cf. B. ii, p. 993; and B. i, 
p. 517-511. 

3 See Note B at end. 


A traveller’s narrative. 


3 


In the year one thousand two hundred and sixty 
[a. ii.], when he was in his twenty-fifth year 1 2 , certain 
signs__b ecame appa rent -in, hi s conduct , behaviour, 
manners, and demeanour whereby it became evident 
in Shiraz that he had some conflict in his mind and 
some other flight beneath his wing. He began to 
speak and to declare the rank of Bab-hood. Now 
what he intended by the term Bab 1 [Gat e] was this, 
that he was the channel of grace from some great 
Person still behind the veil of glory, who was the 
possessor of countless and boundless perfections, by 
whose will lie moved, and to the bond of whose 
love he clung. And in the first book which he wrote 
in explanation of the Sura of Joseph 3 , he addressed 
himself in all passages to that Person unseen from 
whom he received help and grace, sought for aid in 
the arrangement of his preliminaries, and craved the 
sacrifice of life in the way of his love. 

Amongst others is this sentence : ‘ 0 Remnant of 
God*, I am wholly sacrificed to Thee; I am content 

1 Jamddi-ul-Ula 5th, 1260 a.h. (May 23rd, 1841 a.d.) is the 
date given by the B;£b himself in the Persian Hey an as that 
whereon hisjnission commenced. The texts referred to will 
be found quoted in Note C at end. Cf. also B. i, pp, 
507-508. 

2 See Note D at end. 

3 Kur’an xii. See Gobineau, pp. 146-147; Rosen MSS. 
Arabes, pp. 179-191; B. ii, pp. 904-909. 

1 See Kazem-Beg ii, p. 486 and note. 

1—2 


4 


A traveller's narrative. 


with curses in Thy way; I crave nought but to be 
slain in Thy love; and God the Supreme sufficeth as 
an Eternal Protection.’ 

He likewise composed a number of works in 
explanation and elucidation of the verses of the 
p. 5. Knr’&n, of sermons, and of prayers in Arabic; inciting 
and urging men to expect the appearance of that 
Person ; and these books he named ‘Inspired Pages’ 
and ‘Word of Conscience.’ But on investigation it 
was discovered that he laid no claim to revelation 
> from an angel. 

Now since he was noted amongst the people for 
lack of'instruction and education, this circumstance 
appeared in the sight of men supernatural. Some 
men inclined to Him, but the greater part manifested 
strong disapproval; whilst all the learned doctors 
and lawyers of repute who occupied chairs, altars, 
and pulpits were unanimously agreed on eradication 
and suppression, save some divines of the SheykhC 
party who were anchorites and recluses, and who, 
agreeably to their tenets, were over seeking for 
some great, incomparable, and trustworthy person, 
p. 6. whom they accounted, according to their own ter¬ 
minology, as the ‘Fourth Support ’ 3 and the central 


1 See Gobineau, pp. 30-32; Kazem-Beg, pp. 457-464; B. ii, 
pp. 884-885 and pp. 888-892; and Note E at end. 

2 See Note E at end. 


A TRAVELLER $ NARRATIVE. 


0 


manifestation of the truth? of the Perspicuous 
Religion' - . 

Of this number MuRa Huseyn of Bnshraweyh. 
Mtrra Ahmad of Azghand. Mulla Sadik ‘Muiadd-.is' 
'"'the Ho’.y'j. Sheykh Abu Turab of Ashtahard. 
Midi;: Yu?".i of Ardab'J. MuRIa Jahl of Kruinivva. 
Make. Aland: of Rand, Sheykh Sard the Indian. 
MuRa ‘All of Bistam. and the like of these came 
out unto him and spread themselves through ah 
parts of Fersiau 

The Bab himself -et out to perform the circum- 

ambulation of the House of God h On his return, 
when the news. f his arrival at Bushire reached Sharon, 
there was much discussion, and a strange excite¬ 
ment and a-nation became apparent in that city. 
The treat majority of the doctors set themselves top. 
repudiate him. decreeing daughter and destruction, 
and they induced Huseyn Khan A ' 'Yi :- 7 -ishh who 
was the governor of Far?, to indict a bearing on the 
Bab's missionaries, that is on Ms. .?. Sadik d/ 1 - 
X’.i.iS ': then, having burnt his moustaches and 
heard together with those of Muza Muhammad - Ah 
Barfur.sh and MuRa *A1: Akbar of Araistan. 

1 i.t. the reCirion of I shuts. 

- For s further aecotmt of .one of these persons see N::e 
F at enl. 

he. the yi'.rrinisne to Mecca, see Eatetn-Bey i. p. SA4 
nete : s.u.1 s_sc Note u si ereL 


j 


6 a traveller's narrative. 

they put halters on all the three and led them round 
the streets and bazaars. 

Now since the doctors of Persia have no ad¬ 
ministrative capacity, they thought that violence and 
interference would cause extinction and silence and 
lead to suppression and oblivion; whereas interference 
in matters of conscience causes stability and firmness 
and attracts the attention of men’s sight and souls ; 
which fact has received experimental proof many 
times and often. So this punishment caused notoriety, 
and most men fell to making enquiry. 

The governor of Fdrs, acting according to that 
which the doctors deemed expedient, sent several 
horsemen caused the Bdb to be brought before him, 
censured and blamed him in the presence of the 
doctors and scholars, and loosed his tongue in the 
demand for reparation. And when the Biib returned 
his censure and withstood him greatly, at a sign 
from the president they struck him a violent blow, 
insulting and contemning him, in such wise that his 
turban fell from his head and the mark of the blow 
was apparent on his face. At the conclusion of the 
meeting they decided to take counsel, and, on re¬ 
ceiving bail and surety from his maternal uncle 
Hajf Seyyid ‘All, sent him to his house forbidding 
him to hold intercourse with relations or strangers. 

1 See Note G at end, and Kazem-Beg i, pp. 346-348. 


A traveller’s narrative. 


7 


One day they summoned him to the mosque 
urging and constraining him to recant, but he 
discoursed from the pulpit in such wise as to silence 
and subdue those present and to stablish and 
strengthen his followers. It was then supposed that”p^9. 
he claimed to be the medium of grace from His 
Highness the Lord of the Age 1 (upon him be peace); 
but afterwards it became known and evident that his 
meaning was the Gate-hood [Bdbiyyat\ of another 
city and the mediumship of the graces of another 
person whose qualities and attributes were contained 
in his books and treatises. 

At all events, as has been mentioned, by reason 
of the doctors’ lack of experience and skill in ad¬ 
ministrative science, and the continual succession 
of their decisions, comment was rife; and their 
interference with the Bab cast a clamour throughout 
Persia, causing increased ardour in friends and the 
coming forward of the hesitating. For by reason of 
these occurrences men’s interest increased, and in 
all parts of Persia some [of God’s] servants inclined 
toward him, until the matter acquired such import- p. 10. 
ance that the late king Muhammad Sh;ih delegated 
a certain person named Seyyid Yahy& of Uarab 2 , 
who was one of the best known of doctors and 
Seyyids as well as an object of veneration and con- 

1 See Kaaem-Beg i, p. 345 and note. 

2 See Note H at end. 


8 A traveller’s narrative. 

fidence, giving him a horse and money for the journey 
so that he might proceed to Shfrhz and personally 
investigate this matter. 

When the above-mentioned Seyyid arrived at 
Shfrhz he interviewed the Bhb three times. In the 
first and second conferences questioning and an¬ 
swering took place; in the third conference he re¬ 
quested a commentary on the Sura called Kawthar', 
and when the Bdb, without thought or reflection, 
wrote an elaborate commentary on the Kawthar 
in his presence, the above-mentioned Seyyid was 
charmed and enraptured with him, and straightway, 
without consideration for the future or anxiety about 
the results of this affection, hastened to Buri'ijird to 
p. ll. his father Seyyid Ja'far, known as Kas/iji, and ac¬ 
quainted him with the matter. And, although he 
was wise and prudent and was wont to have regard 
to the requirements of the time, he wrote without 
fear or care a detailed account of his observations to 
Mfrzh Luff ‘Alf the chamberlain in order that the 
latter might submit it to the notice of the late king, 
while he himself journeyed to all parts of Persia, and 
in every town and station summoned the people from 
the pulpit-tops in such wise that other learned 
doctors decided that he must be mad, accounting it 
a sure case of bewitchment. 


1 Kur’an, cviii. 


A traveller’s narrative. 


9 


Now when the news of the decisions of the doctors 
and the outcry and clamour of the lawyers reached 
Zanjan, Mull a Muhammad ‘All the divine 1 , who was 
a man of mark possessed of penetrating speech, sent 
one of those on whom he could rely to Shiraz to 
investigate this matter. This person, having ac- p. 12. 
quainted himself with the details of these occurrences 
in such wise as was necessary and proper, returned 
with some [of the Bfib’s] writings. When the divine 
heard how matters were and had made himself ac¬ 
quainted with the writings, notwithstanding that he 
was a man expert in knowledge and noted for pro¬ 
found research, he went mad and became crazed as 
was predestined: he gathered up his hooks in the 
lecture-room saying, “ The season of spring and wine 
has arrived,” and uttered this sentence :— “Search 
for knowledge after reaching the known is culpable.” 

Then from~the~suminit of the pulpit he summoned - " 
and directed all his disciples [to embrace the doc¬ 
trine], and wrote to the Bfib his own declaration and 
confession. 

The B&b in his reply signified to him the obliga¬ 
tion of congregational prayer. 

Although the doctors of Zanj&n arose with heart 
and soul to exhort and admonish the people they p. 13. 
could effect nothing. Finally they were compelled to 

1 Full accounts of this remarkable man will be found in 
Gobineau (pp. 233-252) and Kazem-Beg ii (pp. 198-224). 


10 A traveller’s narrative. 

go to TeherAn and made their complaint before the 
late king Muhammad ShAh, requesting that Mull A 
Muhammad ‘AH might he summoned to Teheran. 
So the royal order went forth that he should appear. 

Now when he came to TeherAn they brought him 
before a conclave of the doctors ; but, so they relate, 
after many controversies and disputations nought 
was effected with him in that assembly. The late 
king therefore bestowed on him a staff and fifty 
tumam for his expenses, and gave him permission to 
return. 

At all events, this news being disseminated through 
all parts and regions of Persia, and several proselytes 
p. 14 . arriving in FArs, the doctors perceived that the matter 
had acquired importance, that the power to deal with 
it had escaped from their hands, and that imprison¬ 
ment, beating, tormenting, and contumely were fruit¬ 
less. So they signified to the governor of FArs, 
Huseyn KhAri, “ If thou desire-t the extinction of 
this fire, or seekest a firm stopper for this rent and 
disruption, an immediate cure arid decisive remedy is 
to kifijthe BAb. And the BAb has assembled a great, 
host and meditates a rising.” 

.So Huseyn KhAn ordered ‘Abdu’l-Hamfd KhAn 
the high con-table to attack the house of the Bab’s 

1 At the present time this would be equivalent to about 
£15, but at the time referred to it would be conniderably more 
—probably more than £'40. 


a traveller’s narrative. 


11 


maternal uncle at midnight on all side*, and to bring 
him and all his followers hand-cuffed. But Abdu’l- 
Hamid Ivhan and his hosts found no one in the house 
save the Bab, his maternal uncle, and Seyyid Kazim 
of Zanjan: and as it ehaneed that on that night the 
sickness of the plague and the extreme heat of the p. 13. 
weather had compelled Huseyn Khan to tlee, he 
released the Bab on condition of his quitting the 
city . 

On the morning after that night the Bab with 
Seyyid Kazim of Zanjan set out from Shiraz for Isfa¬ 
han. Before reaching Isfahan he wrote a letter to the 
M t i 'd-Ptnchi. the governor of the province, 
requesting a lodging in some suitable place with the 
sanction of the government. The governor appointed 
the mansion of the Imam-Jum'a. There he abode 
forty days; and one day. agreeably to the request of 
the Imam, he wrote without refection a commentary 
on [the Sura of] before the company. 

When this news reached the iT’.i'tamaJ he sought an 
interview with him and questioned him concerning 
the ‘ Special Mission.' At that same interview an 
answer pro An g the 1 Special Mission ' was written 3 . 

The Mu'tiimad then gave orders that all the p. IS- 
doctors should assemble and dispute with him in one 

1 See Note I at end. 

: Knr'an, ciii. 

3 See Vote I at end. 


12 a traveller’s narrative. 

conclave, and that the discussion should be faith¬ 
fully recorded without alteration by the instrumen¬ 
tality of his private secretary, in order that it might 
be sent to TeherAn, and that whatever the royal edict 
and decree should ordain might be carried out. 

The doctors, however, considering this arrange¬ 
ment as a weakening of the Law, did not agree, but 
held a conclave and wrote, “ If there be doubt in the 
matter there is need of assembly and discussion, but 
as this person’s disagreement with the most luminous 
Law is clearer than the sun therefore the best possible 
thing is to put in practice the sentence of the Law.” 

The Mu'tarnad then desired to hold the assembled 
conference in his own presence so that the actual 
truth might be disclosed and hearts be at peace, 
but these learned doctors and honourable scholars, 
p. 17. unwilling to bring the Perspicuous Law into con¬ 
tempt, did not approve discussion and controversy 
with a young merchant, with the exception of that 
most erudite sage Akd Muhammad Mahdf, and that 
eminent Platonist Mlrz4 Hasan of Niir 1 . So the 
conference terminated in questionings on certain 
points relating to the science of fundamental dogma, 
and the elucidation and analysis of the doctrines of 
MuM Sadrii 2 . So, as no conclusion was arrived at 

1 See Note J at end. 

2 For some account of this great philosopher see Gobineau, 
pp. 80-90, and Note K at end. 


a traveller’s narrative. 


13 


by the governor from this conference, the severe sen¬ 
tence and harsh decision of the learned doctors was 
not carried out; but, anxious to abate the great 
anxiety quickly and prevent a public tumult effec¬ 
tually, he gave currency to a report that a decree had 
been issued ordering the Bab to be sent to Teherdn 
in order that some decisive settlement might be 
arrived at, or that some courageous divine might be 
able to confute [him]. 

He accordingly sent him forth from Isfahdn with a p. 
company of his own mounted body-guard ; but when 
they reached Murche-Khur 1 he gave secret orders for 
his return to Isfahan, where he afforded him a refuge 
and asylum in his own roofed private quarters 2 ; and 
not a soul save the confidential and trusty dependents 
of the Mu'tamad knew aught of the Bab. 

A period of four months passed in this fashion, 
and the Mu'tamad passed away to the mercy of God. 
Gurgfn Klidn, tire Mu'tamad’s nephew, was aware of 
the Bdb’s being in the private apartments, and repre¬ 
sented the matter to the Prime Minister. Hdjf Mfrza 
Akbsf, that celebrated minister, issued a decisive 

1 Miirche-Khirr is the second stage out from Isfahan on the 
north road, and is distant about 35 miles therefrom. 

2 The building to which the Bab was thus transferred is 
called in the Tarikh-i-Jadid ‘the Royal Building of the Sun’ 
(Jiu xZjjL OjLt). In the Persian Beyan (Vahid ii, ch. 16) 
the Bab alludes to his dwelling-place at Isfahan under the 
name of j 


14 


A traveller’s narrative. 


command and gave instructions that they should 
send the Bilb secretly in disguise under the escort of 
Nuseyri 1 horsemen to the capital. 

When he reached Kin&r-i-gird 2 a fresh order came 
from the Prime Minister appointing the village of 
Kalfn 3 as an abode and dwelling-place. There he 
remained for a period of twenty days. After that, 
the Biib forwarded a letter to the lioyal Presence 
craving audience to set forth the truth of his con¬ 
dition, expecting this to be a means for the attain¬ 
ment of great advantages. The Prime Minister did 
not admit this, and made representation to the Royal 
Presence :—“ The royal cavalcade is on the point of 
starting, and to engage in such matters as the present 

1 The Nuseyri religion is prevalent amongst many of the 
llydt or wandering tribes of Persia. An interesting account of 
the secret doctrines and practices of this sect by one Suleym&u 
Efendi al-Adhani, who had withdrawn himself from it sub¬ 
sequently to his initiation, has been published at Beyrout 

under the title of iUI utf j auUU i'j/'UI 

; , „■! ! A very comprehensive account of this work by E. E. 
Salisbury may be found in the Journal of the American 
Oriental Society for 1866 (vol. viii, pp. 227—308). See also de 
Sacy’s Expose de la Religion des Druzcs, vol. ii, pp. 559—586. 

2 A station on the old Isfahan road (now abandoned for 
one bearing more towards the west) distant about 28 miles 
from Teheran. 

s “Nomdela premiere station que rencontre le voyageur 
en allant de Rey a Khowar.” Barbier de Meynard, Dietion- 
naire GSog. Hist, et Lift, de la Perse (Paris, 1861). 


a traveller's narrative. 15 

will conduce to the disruption of the kingdom. 

Xeither is there any doubt that the most notable 
doctors of the capital also will behave after the 
fashion of the doctors of Isfahan, which thing will be 
the cause of a popular outbreak, or that, according to 
the religion of the immaculate IiMm, they will regard p. 20. 
the blood of this Seyyid as of no account, yea, as 
more lawful than mother’s milk. The imperial train 
is prepared for travel, neither is there hindrance or 
impediment in view. There is no doubt that the 
presence of the B&b will be the cause of the 
gravest trouble and the greatest mischief. There¬ 
fore, on the spur of the moment, the wisest plan 
is this:—to place this person in the Castle of 
Mdkfi during the period of absence of the royal 
train from the seat of the imperial throne, and to 
defer the obtaining of an audience to the time of 
return.” 

Agreeably to this view a letter was issued ad¬ 
dressed to the Bhb in his Majesty’s own writing, and, 
according to the traditional account of the tenour 
of this letter, the epitome thereof is this :— 

(After the titles). “Since the royal train is on 
the verge of departure from Teherdn, to meet in a p. 21. 
befitting manner is impossible. Do you go to M&ktr 
and there abide and rest for a while, engaged in 
praying for our victorious state; and we have ar¬ 
ranged that under all circumstances they shall shew 


10 A traveller’s narrative. 

you attention and respect. When we return from 
travel we will summon you specially.” 

After this they sent him off with several mounted 
guards (amongst them Muhammad Beg, the courier) 
to Tabriz and Maku 1 . 

Besides this the followers of the Bah recount 
certain messages conveyed [from him] by the instru¬ 
mentality of Muhammad Beg (amongst which was 
a promise to heal the foot of the late king, hut on 
condition of an interview, and the suppression of 
the tyranny of the majority), and the Prime Minis¬ 
ter’s prevention of the conveyance of these letters 
to the Itoyal Presence. For he himself laid claim 
to be a spiritual guide and was prepared to perform 
p. 22. the functions of religious directorship. But others 
deny these accounts. 

At all events in the course of the journey he 
wrote a letter to ti n; Prime Minister saying, “You 
summoned me from Isfahan to meet the doctors and 
for the attainment of a decisive settlement. What 
has happened now that this excellent intention has 
been changed for Milled and Tabriz?” 

Although he remained forty days in the city of 
Tabriz the learned doctors did not condescend to 
approach him and did not deem it right to meet him. 
Then they sent him oft' to the Castle of Miikii, and 
for nine months lodged him in the inaccessible castle 
1 Note L at end. 


a traveller’s narrative. 17 

which is situated on the summit of that lofty moun¬ 
tain. And ‘All Kh&n of M&ku because of his ex- 
essive love for the family of the Prophet, paid him 
uch attention as was possible, and gave permission 
[to some persons] to converse with him. 

Now when the accomplished divines of Azar- 
baij&n perceived that _in all the parts round about 
Tabriz it was as though the last day had come by 
reason of the excessive clamour, they requested the 
government to punish the [Bib’s] followers, and to 
remove the Bib to the Castle of Chihrik. So they 
sent him to that castle and consigned him to the 
keeping of Yahyi Khan the Kurd'. 

Glory be to God! Notwithstanding these deci¬ 
sions of great doctors and reverend lawyers, and 
severe punishments and reprimands—beatings, ban¬ 
ishments, and imprisonments—on the part of gover¬ 
nors, this sect was daily on the increase, and the 
discussion and disputation was such that in meetings 
and assemblies in all parts of Persia there was no, con- 
' versation but on this topic. Great was the commotion 
which arose : the doctors of the Perspicuous Religion 
were lamenting, the common folk clamorous and 
agitated, and the Friends rejoicing and applauding. 

But the BAb himself attached no importance to 
this uproar and tumult, and, alike on the road and 
in the castles of MAku and Chihrik, evening and 
1 See Note L at end. 


B. 


2 


18 


A traveller’s narrative. 


morning, nay, day and night, in extremest rapture 
and amazement, he would restrict himself to repeat¬ 
ing and meditating on the qualities and attributes 
of that absent-yet-present, regarded-and-regarding 
Person of his 1 . Thus he makes a mention of him 
whereof this is the purport:— 

“ Though the ocean of woe rageth on every side, 
and the bolts of fate follow in quick succession, and 
the darknesses of griefs and afflictions invade soul 
and body, yet is my heart brightened by the remem¬ 
brance of Thy countenance and my soul is as a rose- 
garden from the perfume of Thy nature.” 

In short, after he had remained for three months, 
in the Castle of Chihrik, the eminent doctors of 
p. 25. Tabriz and scholars of Azerbaijan wrote to Teher&n 
and demanded a severe punishment in regard to the 
Bab for the intimidation and frightening of the people. 
When the Prime Minister Hajl Mirzft Akasl beheld 
the ferment and clamour of the learned doctors in all 
districts of Persia, he perforce became their accomplice 
and ordered him to be brought from Chihrik to 

1 As I have pointed out in another place (B. ii, pp. 924-927), 
one of the most striking features of the Persian Beyan, com¬ 
posed by the Bab during his imprisonment at Makii (which he 
repeatedly alludes to as ‘the Mountain of M’ ^ j^.), is the 
continual reference to ‘ Him whom God shall manifest' 

whose precursor the Bab considered himself to be. The 
work translated by Gobineau (op. cit. p. 4CI et seq.) under the 
title of Livre des Preceptes also affords ample evidence of this. 


a traveller’s narrative. 


1 


Tabriz. In the course of his transit by Unimiyj 
the governor of the district Kdsim Mlrzd treated hi 
with extraordinary deference, and a strange flockh 
together of high and low was apparent. These co 
ducted themselves with the utmost respectfulness 1 . 

When the Bab reached Tabriz they brought hi 
after so m e days before th e gove rnment tribunal, t 
the learned doctors the Ni^dmu ’l-‘Ulamd, Mul 
Muhammad Mdrnhk 4 .nl, Mlrzd Ahmad the Imdr 


1 Dr Wright of the American Mission at Urumiyya wrotf 
brief account of the Bah and his sect which was commui 
cated by Mr Perkins to the German Oriental Society and pc 
fished in their transactions for the year 1851. This accoui 
dated March 31st, 1851, fully confirms the statement h< 
made. After describing briefly the rise of the sect, the arri 
of the Bab, his imprisonment at Maku (...“a remote distr. 
six days’ journey from Urumiyya situated on the Turki 
frontier”), his transference to Chihrik (...“near Salmis, or 
two days’ journey from Urumiyya”), and the conflicts betwe 
the Babis and the orthodox party, especially in Mazandars 
he says:—“Die Sache wurde so ernsthaft, dass die Regieru 
den Befehl erliess, den Sectenstifter nach Tabriz zu bring 
und ihm die Bastonade zu geben, seine Schuler aber iihers 
wo man sie fande, aufzugreifen und mit Geld- und Korpi 
strafen zu belegen. Auf dem Wege nach Tabriz wurde B 
nach Orumia gebracht, wo ihn der Statthalter mit besondei 
Aufmerksamkeit behandelte und viele Personen die Erlaubn: 
erhielten, ihn zu besuchen. Bei einer Gelegenheit war ei 
Menge Leute bei ihm, und wie der Statthalter nachher 1 
merkte, waren dicse alle geheimnissvoll bewegt und brach 
in Thranen aus.” (Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenldndisch 
Gesellsckaft, vol. v, pp. 384-385.) 


9 _ 9 


20 A THAVKM.Kit'S NARUATIVE. 

p. 26. Jura‘a, Mfrz/t ‘AH Asghar tlie Sheykhu '1-IsIAm, ami 
several other divines were present'. I'liey asked 
concerning the claims of the Bill), lie. advanced the 
claim of Mahdf-hood ; whereon a mighty tumult arose. 
Eminent doctors in ovcrwhehiiingmight compassed him. 
on all sides, and such was the onset of orthodoxy that 
it had been no great wonder if a mere youth had not 
withstood the mountain of Elburz. They demanded, 
proof. Without hesitation lie recited texts, saying, 
“Thi s is the permanent and most mighty proof.” 
They criticised his grammar, lie adduced arguments 
from the KurVm, setting forth therefrom instances of 
similar infractions of the rules of grammar. So I lie 
assembly broke up and the BAb returned to his own 
dwelling. 

The heaven-cradled Crown-]Vince' was at that 
p. 27. time governor of Azarbaijan. lie pronounced no 
sentence with regard to the Bab, nor did he desire to 
interfere with him. The doctors, however, considered 
it advisable at least to indict a severe chastisement, 
and beating was decided on. But none of the corps 
of famishes'' would agree to become the instruments 
of the infliction of this punishment. So Mfrz!i 'AH 
/ Asghar the Sbeykhu '1-Jslam, who was one of the 

1 Bee Note M at end. 

2 NAsiru'd-Jiin, the pioaent kinp; of Peisia. 

3 The fnmruh (literally rariirl-nprcnilrr) is the lid,or of Hu- 
East. 


A TRAVELLER S NARRATIVE. 


■21 


noble Seyyids. brought liiin to Ms own hor.se and 
applied the rods with his own hand. After this they 
>ait the Bab back to Ckilm'k and subjected him to a 
'trie: confinement. 

Xc>w when the news of this beating, chastisement, 
imprisonment, and rigour reached all parts of Persia, 
learned divines and esteemed lawyers who were pos¬ 
sessed of power and influence girt np the Idus of 
endeavour for the eradication and suppression of this 
sect, exerting their utmost efforts therefor. And 
they wrote notice of their decision, to wit '* that 
tins person and his followers are in absolute error 
and are hur tful to Chur ch and State." And since 
the governors in Persia enjoyed the fullest au¬ 
thority. in some provinces they followed th is decision 
and united, in uprooting and dispersing the Bahts. 
But the late King Muhammad Shah acted with deli¬ 
beration in this matter, reflecting. "This youth is of 
the Pure Lineage and of the family of him addressed 
with 'troy i: hot for th, s .' So long as no offen- 

1 For an admirable sketch of the characters of this monarch 
and his minister Hag Mere a Ak.su see Gobineau. pp. IttC'-lbb. 
Concerning the latter see also Watson's Hiftorii of Ferda. 
p. 2 nS. 

2 bee note 1 at foot of r. A In a very weU-known tradi¬ 
tion God is said to have addressed the Prophet Muhammad as 
follows:—tthV' --L1 g *’V . ;)V a ‘Were it not icr thee I 

not created the heavens.' Hence “the family of him 
addressed with *irerf not for r means simply the 


22 


A traveller’s narrative. 


sive actions which are incompatible with the public 
peace and well-being proceed from him, the govern¬ 
ment should not interfere with him.” And whenever 
the learned doctors appealed to him from the sur¬ 
rounding districts, he either gave no answer, or else 
commanded them to act w r ith deliberation. 

Notwithstanding this, between eminent doctors 

29. and illustrious scholars and those learned persons who 
were followers of the Bab opposition, discussion, and 
strife did so increase that in some provinces they 
desired [to resort to] mutual imprecation ; and for 
the governors of the provinces, too, jT"rneans of ac¬ 
quiring gain was produced, so that great tumult'and 
disturbance arose. And since' the malady of the 
gout had violently attacked the king’s foot and 
occupied his world-ordering thought, the good judge¬ 
ment of the Chief Minister, the famous H&ji Mfrza 
Akasf, became the pivot of the conduct of affairs, 
and his incapacity and lack of resource became ap¬ 
parent as the sun. For every hour he formed a new 
opinion and gave a new order : at one moment he 
would seek to support the decision of the doctors, ac¬ 
counting the eradication and suppression of the Bdbfs 
as necessary: at a nother time he would charge the 

30. d octors with aggr essive ness , regarding undue inter- 

descendants of the Prophet, amongst whom the Bab, in his 
capacity of Seyyid, must be reckoned. 

1 See note 1 at foot of preceding page. 


A traveller’s narrative. 


23 


ference as contrary to justice: at another time he 
wouIcTbecome a mystic and say, 'All these voices are 
from the King 1 ,' or repeat with his tongue, ‘Moses is 
at war with Moses V or recite, ‘ This is nought hut Thy 

1 The distich of which this is the first hemistich is a great 
favourite with the Stiffs. It occurs in the first hook of the 
Mag navi of Jalalu’d-Din Rami in the 8th story (Story of the 
Harper). Different editions present considerable variants in 
the first hemistich, and in no one of the four which I have 
consulted does it stand as here quoted. In the Bombay 
edition of A. H. 1290 (p. 50,1. 20), the Teheran edition of A. H. 
1299 known as ‘Ala’ud-Dawla’s (p. 51, 1. 4), and a Constanti¬ 
nople edition of the first book published in A.H. 1288 (p. 77, 
1. 20) the entire couplet stands as follows: 

jj, oil oy ^ ^a!> jl f “ y si g 01 

“Indeed that voice is really from the King 
Although [apparently] it is from the throat of ‘Abdu 'Unit." 

The English reader may consult Redhouse’s versified trans¬ 
lation of Book i of the Masnavi, p. 141, first two lines. 

- This quotation is also from the Masnavi [Teheran edition 
of ‘Ala’ud-Dawla, p. 65, 1. 27; Bombay edition, p. 63, 1. 16]. 
The couplet stands in both as follows:— 

Ji tX*’ ji I* y* Oi £J* j y>- 

“When Colourlessness became the captive of colour 
A Moses is at war with a Moses." 

Redhouse’s version will be found on p. 180 of his work 
above quoted, first two lines. A complete treatise on the 
mysticism of the Stiffs might be written on this text, which is 
pretty fully discussed in Haji Mulla Hadi’s excellent com¬ 
mentary on the Masnavi (Teheran edition of A.H. 1285, p. 68 
and also in a marginal note in ‘Ala’ud-Dawla’s Teheran edition 
(loc.cit.). In brief the meaning is this:—that strife and contest 


24 


A traveller’s narrative. 


trial'.’ I n short this changeable minister, by reason of 
his mismanagement of important matters and failure 
to control and order the affai rs of the community, so 
; acted that distu rbance and clamour a rose from all 
| qu arters and dire ctions : the most notable and in¬ 
fluential of the doctors ordered the common folk to 
iholest theT followers of the Bib, “and a general on- 
J slaught took place. More especially when the claim 
of Mahdf-hood 2 reached the hearing of eminent 
divines and profound doctors they began to make 
lamentation and to cry and complain from their 
. 31. pulpits, saying, “ one of the essentials of religion and 
of the authentic traditions transmitted from the holy 
Im4ms, nay, the chief basis of the foundations of the 
church of Ilis Highness Ja'far 3 , is the Occultation 

arise from the imprisonment of the One Absolute Undifferen¬ 
tiated Being (‘ Colourlessness ’) in the phantasmal appearances 
(‘ colours’) of the World of Plurality. So Jam! says at the close 
of a very beautiful passage:— 

•0. .—- f —c jl l.' Ji Itf yC y 

# oL j g;l ? f** caS* 

“All this tumult and. strife in the world are from love of Him; 

It hath become known at this time that the source of the strife 
is One.” 

1 Kur’an vii, 154. 

2 See note N at end, and p. 20 supra. 

3 The Imam Ja‘far-i-Sadik, as he is commonly called, was, 
according to the Shi'ite faith, the sixth of the twelve Imams, 


A traveller’s narrative. 


25 


of the immaculate twelfth Imhm (upon both of them 
be peace). What has happened to Jdbulkfi 1 ? Where 
has Jhbulsh gone? What was the Minor Occupa¬ 
tion ? What has become of the Major Occupation ? 
What are the sayings of Huseyn ibn Huh, and what 

and succeeded his father, the Imam Muhammad Bakir, who 
was the fifth Imam. Why the Shi’ites should speak of him as 
in some sort the founder of their church is explained thus in a 
work called jllip (Tenets of the Shi'ites) published in 

Teheran:—“Since His Holiness [the Imam .la'farj lived at 
the end of the Omayyad and the beginning of the ‘Abbasid 
dynasty and these two families were in conflict with one 
another, he tranquilly engaged in expounding the ordinances of 
God; therefore do men refer the religion to him, since he gave 
currency to the true doctrines.” 

1 For the explanation of this and the subsequent points 
of Shi’ite belief alluded to in this passage see Note 0 at end. 
The general tenour of the argument here put in the mouths of 
the Shi’ite doctors is this:—“That certain prodigies and 
marvellous signs shall usher in the advent of the Imam Mahdi 
is an essential doctrine of our faith sufficiently confirmed and 
established by authentic traditions. If we helieve this, then 
we must reject the Bab’s claim to be the promised Mahdi, 
since these signs have not been witnessed: in which case it 
behoves us to inflict on him the severest punishment. If, on 
the other hand, we admit the Bab’s claim, we thereby renounce 
our religion and become neither Sunnis nor Shi’as; unless, 
indeed, we take the view of the Babis that these signs are to be 
understood metaphorically, that no literal fulfilment of them 
is to be looked for, and that to substantiate a claim to Mahdi- 
hood only two things are necessary—that the claimant should 
belong to the family of the Prophet, and that he should be able 
to produce revealed verses similar to those in the Kur’an.” 
Concerning this view of the Babis see B. ii, pp. 915—918. 


26 A traveller’s narrative. 

the tradition of Ibn Mihriy&r ? What shall we make 
of the flight of the Guardians and the Helpers? How 
shall we deal with the conquest of the East and the 
West ? Where is the Ass of Antichrist ? When will 
the appearance of Sofy&n be ? Where are the signs 
which are in the traditions of the Holy Family ? 
Where is that whereon the Victorious Church is 
agreed? The matter is not outside one of two alter¬ 
atives :—either we must repudiate the traditions of 
p. 32. the Holy Iin&ms, grow wearied of the Church of Ja'far, 
and account the clear indications of the Irndm as dis¬ 
turbed dreams; or, in accordance with the primary and 
subsidiary doctrines of the Faith and the essential 
and explicit declarations of the most luminous Law, 
we must consider the repudiation, nay, the destruc¬ 
tion of this person as our chief duty. If so be 
that we shut our eyes to these authentic traditions 
and obvious doctrines universally admitted, no rem¬ 
nant will endure of the fundamental basis of the 
Church of the immaculate Im&m : we shall neither 
be Sunnites, nor shall we be of the prevalent sect' to 
continue awaiting the promised Saint and believing 
in the begotten Mahdf. Otherwise we must regard 
as admissible the opening of the Gate of Saintship, 
and consider that He who is to arise 2 of the family of 
Muhammad possesses two signs:—the first condition, 

1 i.e. of the Shi‘ite church dominant in Persia. 

2 i.e. the Imam-Mahdi. See Note 0 at end. 


a traveller’s narrative. 27 

Holy Lineage; the second, [that he is divinely] forti¬ 
fied with brilliant verses. What can we do with these 
thousand-year-old beliefs of the delivered band of 
the Shi'ites, or what shall we say concerning their p. 33. 
profound doctors and pre-eminent divines? "Were all 
these in error ? Did they journey in the vale of 
transgression ? What an evidently false assertion is 
this! By God , this is a thing to break the back! 

0 people, extinguish this fire and forget these words ! 

Alas! woe to our Faith, woe to our Law ! ” 

Thus did they make complaint in mosques and 
chapels, in pulpits and congregations. 

But the B&bf chiefs composed treatises against 
them, and set in order replies according to their own 
thought 1 . Were these to be discussed in detail it 
would conduce to prolixity, and our object is the 
statement of history, not of arguments for believing 
or rejecting; but of some of the replies the gist is 
this :—that they held the Proof as supreme, and the 
evidence as outweighing traditions, considering the p- 34. 

1 Amongst the controversial works of the Babis may be 
mentioned especially the ^ jJV, (Seven Proofs) composed 
by the Bab himself about the year a.h. 1264-5 (a.d. 1848-49) 
during his impris onment at Mak fi, and the (Assurance) 
composed by Beha’u’llah in Baghdad in the year a.h. 1278 
(a.d. 1861-62). For a hrief ahstract of the former see B. ii, 
pp. 912—918: for specimens of the latter carefully and 
judiciously selected see Rosen’s MSS. Persans, pp. 32—51, 
and for some account of the work see B. ii, pp. 944—948. 


28 A traveller’s narrative. 

former as the root and the latter as the branch, and 
saying, “ If the branch agree not with the root it 
serves not as an argument and is unworthy of re¬ 
liance ; for the reported consequence has no right to 
oppose itself to the established principle, and cannot 
argue against it.” Indeed in such cases they regarded 
interpretation as the truth of revelation and the 
essence of true exegesis 1 : thus, for instance, they 
interpreted the sovereignty of the Ka hn as a mystical 
sovereignty, and his conquests as conquests of the 
cities of hearts, adducing in support of this the meek¬ 
ness and defeat of the Chief of Martyrs 2 (may the life 
of all being be a sacrifice for him). For he was the 
true manifestation of the blessed verse ‘And verily 
our host shall overcome for them V yet, notwithstand¬ 
ing this, he quaffed the cup of martyrdom with perfect 
p. 35. meekness, and, at the very moment of uttermost 
defeat, triumphed over his enemies and became the 
most mighty of the troops of the Supreme Host. 
Similarly they regarded the numerous writings which, 
in spite of his lack of education, the Bab had com¬ 
posed, as due to the promptings of the Holy Spirit; 
extracted from books contrary sayings handed down 
by men of mark; adduced traditions apparently 
agreeing with their objects; and clung to the an- 

1 See Rosen’s MSS. Persons, p. 36, and E. ii, pp. 915—916. 

2 Huseyn, son of ‘All, the third Imam. 

3 Kur’an xxxvii, 173. 


a traveller’s narrative. 29 

nouncements of certain notables of yore. They also 
considered the conversion of austere and recluse doc¬ 
tors and eminent votaries of the Perspicuous Religion 
[of Islhm] as a valid proof 1 , deemed the steadfast¬ 
ness and constancy of the Bab a most mighty sign 3 , 
and related miracles and the like; which things, 
being altogether foreign to our purpose, we have 
passed by with brevity, and will now proceed with p. 36. 
our original topic. 

At the time of these events certain persons 
appeared amongst the Bhbfs who had a strange 
ascendancy and appearance in the eyes of this sect. 
Amongst these was Mtrza Muhammad ‘Ah of Mdzan- 
dar&n, who was the disciple of the illustrious Seyyid 
(may God exalt his station) Hdjf Seyyid Kdzim of 
Resht, and who was the associate and companion of 
the Bdb in his pilgrimage journey. After a while 
certain manners and states issued from him such 
that all, acting with absolute confidence, considered 
obedience to him as an impregnable stronghold, so 
that even Mulld Huseyn of Bushraweyh, who was the 
leader of all and the arbiter appealed to alike by the 
noble and the humble of this sect, used to behave in 
his presence with great humility and with the self- 
abasement of a lowly servant 3 . 

1 See Rosen’s JISS. Persans, p. 41. 

2 Ibid, p. 43. 

3 This statement is confirmed by the Tarikh-i-Jadid. 


30 


A TRAVELLER’S narrative. 


This personage set himself to exalt the word of 
p. 37. the Bhb with the utmost steadfastness, and the Bab 
did full justice to speech in praising and glorifying 
him, accounting his uprising as an assistance from 
the Unseen. In delivery and style 1 he was ‘evident 
magic’ and in firmness and constancy superior to all. 
At length in the year [a.h.] 1265 at the sentence of 
the chief of lawyers the Sa'fdu ’l-‘Ulam& the chief 
divine of B&rfurtish, he yielded his head and surren¬ 
dered his life amidst extremest clamour and outcry 2 . 

And amongst them was she who was entitled 
Kurratu ’l-‘Ayn the daughter of HAjf Mull a Salih, 
the sage of Kazvfn, the erudite doctor. She, accord¬ 
ing to what is related, was skilled in diverse arts, 
amazed the understandings and thoughts of the 
most eminent masters by her eloquent dissertations 
on the exegesis and tradition of the Perspicuous 
Book 3 , and was a mighty sign in the doctrines of the 
glorious Sheykh of Ahsd 4 . At the Supreme Shrines 5 
p. 38. she borrowed light on matters divine from the lamp 

1 Of the writings of Mull& Muhammad ‘Ali (called jitl 

from the title—borne by their author 
amongst his co-religionists) six pieces occupying in all 39 
pages are contained in a ms. in my possession. 

2 See Note 1“ at end. 

3 The Kur’an. 

4 Sheykh Ahmad Ahsa’i the founder of the Sheykhi school 
of theology, concerning which see Note E at end. 

5 Kerbela and Nejef. 


a traveller’s narrative. 


31 


of Kdzirn 1 , and freely sacrifice d her life in the way of 
the Bdb , She discussed and disputed with the doctors 
and sages, loosing her tongue to establish her doctrine. 

Such fame did she acquire that most people who were 
scholars or mystics sought to hear her speech and 
were eager to become acquainted with her powers of 
speculation and deduction. She had a brain full of 
tumultuous ideas,anjithoughtsyehemeiit and restless. 

In many places she triumphed over the contentious, 
expounding the most subtle questions. When she 
was imprisoned in the house of [Mahmud] the Kaldn- 
tar of Teherdn 2 , and the festivities and rejoicings of 
a wedding were going on, the wives of the city mag¬ 
nates who were present as guests were so charmed 
with the beauty of her speech that, forgetting the p. 39. 
festivities, they gathered round her, diverted by 
listening to her words from listening to the melodies, 
and rendered indifferent by witnessing her marvels 
to the contemplation of the pleasant and novel 
sights which are incidental to a wedding. In short 
in elocution she was the calamity of the age, and 
in ratiocination the trouble of The] world. Of fear^ 
or timidity there was no trace in her heart, nor had 
the admonitions of the kindly-disposed any profit 

1 Haji Seyyid Kazim of Resht, the pupil and successor of 
Sheykh Ahmad and the Teacher of the Bab. See Note E at end. 

- See Gobineau, pp. 292—295; Kazem-Beg i, p. 522 and 
note, and ii, p. 249; and Eastwick’s Diplomate’s Residence in 
Persia, vol. i, p. 288—290. 


32 


A traveller's narrative. 


or fruit for her. Although she was of [such as are] 
damsels [meet] for the bridal bower, yet she wrested 
pre-eminence from stalwart men, and continued to 
strain the feet of steadfastness until she yielded up 
her life at the sentence of the mighty doctors in 
Teher&n. But were we to occupy ourselves with 
these details the matter would end in prolixity 1 . 

Well, Persia was in this critical state and the 
learned doctors perplexed and anxious, when the 
p. 40. late Prince Muhammad Sh&h died*, and the throne 
' of sovereignty was adorned with the person of the 
new monarch. Mi'rza Takf Klein Amir-Nizam, who 
was Prime Minister and Chief Regent, seized in 
the grasp of his despotic power the reins of the 
affairs of the commonwealth, and urged the steed of 
Ins ambition into the arena of wilfulness and sole 
possession. This minister was a person devoid jo f 
experience and wanting in consideration for the con¬ 
sequences of actions; bloodthirsty and shamelessj. 
and swift and ready to shed blood 3 . Severity in 

1 For some further account of Kurratu’l-‘Ayn see Note 
Q at end. 

2 September 4th, 1848. See Watson’s History, p. 354. 

3 This is by no means the light in which Mirz4 Taki Khan 
is regarded by most historians. See especially the encomiums 
bestowed on him by Watson ( Histoi-y of Persia from the 
beginning of the Nineteenth Century, &ct. p. 364 and p. 404). 
Compare also Lady Shell’s Diary, pp. 248—253. Yet his cruelty 
towards the Bab and Eig followers goes far to justify their 
opinion of him, and at least fully explains the fact that they 


a traveller’s narrative. 


33 


punishing he regarded as wise administration, and 
harshly entreating, distressing, intimidating, and 
frightening the people he considered as a fulcrum for 
the advancement of the monarchy. And as His 
Majesty the King was in the prime of youthful years 
the minister fell into strange fancies and sounded the p. 41. 
drum of absolutism in [the conduct of] affairs : on his 
own decisive resolution, without seeking permission 
from the Royal Presence or taking counsel with 
prudent statesmen, h e issued orders to persecute 
the Bfibfs, imagining that by overweening force he 
could eradicate and suppress matters of this nature, 
and that harshness would bear good fruit; whereas 
[in fact] to interfere with matters of conscience is 
simply to give them greater currency and strength; 
the more you strive to extinguish the more will the 
flame be kindled, more especially in matters of faith 
and religion, which spread and acquire influence so 
soon as blood is shed, and strongly affect men’s 
hearts. These things have been put to the proof, 
and the greatest proof is this very transaction. Thus 
they relate that t he possessio ns of a c ert ain Bib! in p. 42. 
Kfishfin were plu ndered, and his household scatter ed 
and dispersed. They stripped him naked and scourged 
him, defiled his beard, mounted him face backwards 

regard the cruel fate which befel him at the hands of the king 
as a signal instance of Divine vengeance. See Gobineau, p. 
253—254. 


B. 


3 


34 A traveller’s narrative. 

on an ass, and p arade d him through the streets and 
bazaars with the utmost cruelty, to the sound of 
drums, trumpets, guitars, and tambourines. A certain 
guebre 1 who knew absolutely nought of the world or 
its denizens chanced to be seated apart in a corner 
of a caravansaray. When the clamour of the people 
rose high he hastened into the street, and, becoming 
cognizant of the offence and the offender, and the 
cause of his public disgrace and punishment in 
full detail, he fell to making search, and that very 
day entered the society of the Bitbis, saying, “ This 
very ill-usage and public humiliatiou is a proof of 
43. truth and the very best of arguments. Had it 
not been thus it . might have been that a thousand 
years would have passed ere one like me became 
informed.” 

At all events the mini ster with the utmost arbi¬ 
trariness, without receiving any instructions or asking 
permission, sent forth commands in all directions to 
punish and chastise the Bhbfs. Governors and ma¬ 
gistrates sought a pretext for amassing wealth, and 
officials a_means of [acquiring] profits; celebrated 
doctors from the summits of their pulpits incited 
men to make a general onslaught; the powers of the 

1 It is almost unnecessary to remark that the word guebre 
(more correctly gabr) is always used in a contemptuous if not 
in an offensive sense. It is never used by the Zoroastrians in 
speaking of themselves. 


a traveller’s narrative. 


35 


religious and the civil law linked hands and strov e 
to eradi cate and d estroy this peopl e. 

Now this people had not yet acquired such know¬ 
ledge as was right and needful of the fundamental 
principles and hidden doctrines of the Bdb’s teachings, 
and did not recognise their duties. Their concep¬ 
tions and ideas were after the former fashion, and 
their conduct and behaviour in correspondence with p. 41. 
ancient usage. The way of approach to the B&b was, 
moreover, closed, and the flame of trouble visibly 
blazing on every side. At the decree of th e most 
celebrated of the doctors, the government, and indeed 
the common people, had, wltF Irresistible power, in¬ 
augurated rapine and plunder on all sides, and were 
engaged in punishing and torturing, killing and 
despoiling, in order that they might quench this fire 
and wither these’ [poorj’souls. In towns where these 
were but a limited number all of them with bound 
hands became food for the sword, while in,..cities 
where they were numerous they arose in self-defence 
agreeably to their former beliefs, since it was im¬ 
possible for them to make enquiry as to their duty, 
and all doors were closed. 

In M&zandardn amongst other places the people of p. 45. 
the city of B^rfurush at the command of the chief of 
lawyers the Sa'kluTTTlamA made a general attack on 
MuM Huseyn of Bushraweyh and his followers, and 
slew six or seven persons. They were busy compassing 

3—2 


36 A traveller’s narrative. 

the destruction of the rest also when MuM Huseyn 
ordered the azdn 1 to be sounded and stretched forth 
his hand to the sword, whereupon all sought flight, 
and the nobles and lords coming before him with 
the utmost penitence and deference agreed that he 
should be permitted In depart. They further sent 
with them as a guard Khusraw of KMl-kald with 
horsemen and footmen, so that, according to the 
terms of agreement, they might go forth safe and 
protected from the territory of M&zandar&n. When 
they, being ignorant of the fords and paths, had 
emerged from the city, Khusraw dispersed his horse¬ 
men and footmen and set them in ambush in the 
p. 46. forest of TSKzMuTar&n, scattered and separated the 
Bibfs in that forest on the road and off the road, 
and began to hunt them down singly. When the 
reports of muskets arose on every side the hidden 
secret became manifest, and several wanderers and 
other persons were suddenly slain with bullets. 
Mulld Huseyn ordered the azan' to boso n ruled to 
assemble his scattered followers, while Mirz£ Lutf- 
‘Alf the secretary drew his dagger and ripped open 
Khusraw’s vitals. Of Khusraw’s host s ome were 
slain and others wandered distractedly over the field 

1 The call to prayer. 

Accoi cling to the loiikh-i--ladid it was a Babl named 
Mlrza Muhammad Take who, exasperated by Khusraw’s in¬ 
solences towards Mulla Huseyn slew the treacherous guide. 


A traveller’s narrative. 


37 


of battle. Mu 11,4 Huseyn quartered his host in a 
fort near the burial-place of Sheykh Tabarsl 1 , and, 
being aware of the wishes of the community, relaxed 
and interrupted the march. This detachment was p. 47. 
subsequently further reinforced by Mirzfi Muhammad 
‘All of M&zandar&n with a number of other persons, 
so that the garrison of the jbrt numbered thre e 
hundred and thirteen souls. Of these, however, all 
were not capable of fighting, only one hundred and 
ten persons being prepared for war. Most of them 
were doctors or students whose companions had been 
during their whole life books and treatises; yet, in 
spite of the fact that they were unaccustomed to war 
or to the blows of shot and sword, four times were 
camps and armies arrayed against them and they were 
attacked and hemmed in with cannons, muskets, and 
bomb-shells, and on all four occ asions they inflicted 
defeat , while the army w as completely routed and 
dispersed 2 . On the occasion of the fourth defeat 

1 The tomb of Sheykh Tabarsi—ever memorable for the 
gallant defence of the B&bis—is situated about fourteen miles 
SE. of Barfurfish and can only be reached by traversing 
swampy rice-fields and dense forests which in wet weather 
must be almost impassable. I visited the spot on September 
26th 1888, and could perceive no trace of the strong ramparts 
described by the Musulman historians and by Gobineau as 
having been erected by the Babis. 

2 Kazem-Beg enumerates four sorties made by the Babis, of 
which the first three were successful, although in the second 
Mulla Huseyn was killed. Kazem-Beg’s second sortie there- 


38 


A traveller’s narrative. 


‘Abb&s-Kull KMn of Ldrfjdn was captain of the forces 
and Prince Mahdi'-KuH Mfrzd commander in the camp, 
p. 48. The KMn above mentioned nsed at nights to con¬ 
ceal and hide himself in disguise amongst the trees 
of the forest outside the camp, while during the day 
he was present in the encampment. The last battle 
took place at night and the army was routed. The 
BAbis fired the tents and huts, and night became 
bright as day. The foot of MuM Huseyn’s horse 
caught in a noose, for he was riding, the others being 
on foot. ‘Abbds-Kulf Kh&n recognised him from the 
top of a tree afar off, and with his own hand dis¬ 
charged several bullets. At the third shot he 
threw him from his feet. He was borne by his 
followers to the fort, and there they buried him. 
Notwithstanding this event [the troops] could not 


fore corresponds to the fourth Babi victory mentioned above. 
Considerable confusion exists as to the successive incidents of 
the siege, but after comparing the different accounts and 
especially that of the Tcirikli-i-Jadld I should suppose the four 
succes ses here alluded to to be as follows:—(1) Rout of some of 
the comrades of the deceased Khusraw who attacked the Babis 
some three weeks after they had taken up their quarters at 
Sheykh Tabarsi. (2^ Repulse of a larger force of local volun¬ 
teers and sack of Farahil (Kazem-Beg i, p. 491—492; Gobineau, 
p. 197—199). (3) S urprise of Mahdi-Kuli Mirza and rout of his 
troops with great loss (Kazem-Beg i, p. 495—499 ; Gobiueau, 
p. 201—206). (4) The successful sortio wherein Jlulla Huseyn’s 
gallant career was brought to a close in the very hour of 
victory (Kazem-Beg i, p. 499—504; Gobineau, p. 210—215). 


A traveller's narrative. 


39 


prevail by superior force. At lengt h the Prince 
made a treaty and covenant, and sware by the Holy 
Tmfims, confirming his oath by vows plighted on the p. 49. 
glorious Kur’4n, to this effect: “You shall not be 
molested; return to your own places.” Since their 
provisions had for some time been exhausted, so that 
even of the skins and bones of horses nought re¬ 
gained, and they had subsisted for several daysjm 
pure water, they agreed. When they arrived at the 
army food was prepared for them in a place outside 
the camp. They were engaged in eati ng, havi ng 
laid aside their weapons and armour, when the soldiers 
f ell o n them on all sides and slew them all^ Some 
have accounted this valour displayed by these people 
as a thing miraculous, but when a band of men are 
besieged in some place where all avenues and roads 
are stopped and all hope of deliverance is cut off 
they will assuredly defend themselves desperately 
and display bravery and courage. p. 50. 

In Zanj&n and Nfrfz likewise at the decree of 
erudite doctors and notable lawyers a bloodthirsty 
military force attacked and besieged. In ZanpLa the 
chief was MuM Muhammad ‘Alf the mujtahid, while in 
Nfrfz Seyyid Yahy& of D&r&b was the leader and 
arbiter 1 . At first they^sought to bring about a 

1 For full accounts of the siege of Zanjan see Gobineau, 
p. 233—254; Kazem-Beg ii, p. 196—224; and compare Watson, 
p. 387—392; Lady Shell’s Diary, p. 181. Kazem-Beg alone of 


40 A traveller’s narrative. 

reconciliation, but, meeting with cruel ferocity, they 
reached the pitch of desperation; and, the over¬ 
powering force of the victorious troops having cut off 
every passage of flight, they unclosed their hands in 
resistance. But although they were very strong in 
battle and amazed the chiefs of the army by their 
steadfastness and endurance, the overwhelming 
military force closed the passage of flight and broke 
. 51. their wings and feathers. After numerous battles 
they too at last yielded to covenants and compacts, 
oaths and promises, vows registered on the Kur’dn, 
ancL the wonderful stratagems of the officers, and 
were all put to the edge of the sword. 

Were we to occupy ourselves in detail with the 
wars of Nfrfz and Zanj.tn, or to set forth these events 
from beginning to end, this epitome, would become a 
bulky volume. So, since this would be of no ad¬ 
vantage to history, we have passed them over briefly. 

During the course of the events which took place 
at Zanj&n the Prime Minister devised a final and 
trenchant remedy. Without the royal command, 
without consulting with the ministers of the subject- 

these four authorities gives an account of tho events at Niriz 
(ii, p. 224—239), but, as it appears to me, he deals very 
unjustly with the character of Seyyid Yahy& of Diiri'ib. This 
much at least is certain, that the Babis still regard him as ono 
of their saints, which at any rate shews that they entertain 
no doubts either of his sincerity or his loyalty. See Note 
H at end. 


A traveller’s narrative. 


41 


protecting court, he, acting with arbitrary disposition, 
fixed determination, and entirely on his own authority, 
issued commands to put the B4b to death. This 
befel in brief as follows. The governor of Azar- p- 52 
baij&n, Prince Hamzd Mfrzd, was unwilling that the 
execution of this sentence should be at his hands', 
and said to the brother of the Amfr, MfrzA Hasan 
Khiln, “This is a vile business and an easy one ; any¬ 
one is capable and competent. I had imagined that 
His Excellency the Regent would commission me 
to make war on the Afghans or Uzbegs or appoint 
me to attack and invade the territory of Russia or 
Turkey.” So Mfrzi Hasan Kh&n wrote his excuse 
in detail to the Amfr. 

Now the Seyyid Bdh had disposed all his affairs 
before setting out from Chihrfk towards Tabriz, had 
placed his writings and even his ring and pen-case 
in a specially prepared box, put the key of the box 
in an envelope, and sent it by means of Mulld Bfikir, 
who was one of his first associates, to Mulla ‘Abdu’l- p. 53 
Karim of Kazvfn 1 2 . This trust Mulld Bftkir delivered 

1 According to Gobineau (p. 259 et seq.), however, Hamz£ 

Mirza took the leading part in the examination and condem¬ 
nation of the Bab. 

2 Mulla ‘Abdu’l-Karim was also known amongst the B&bis 
by the name of Mirza Ahmad-i -Kdtib (the Scribe), inasmuch 
as he acted as amanuensis to the Bab and later to Mirza 
Yahya, Subh-i-Ezel. He was one of the twenty-eight victims 
put to death in August 1852 in Teheran, and fell by the hands 


42 A traveller’s narrative. 

over to MuM ‘Abdu’l-Karfrn at Klim in presence of 
a numerous company. At the solicitations of those 
present he opened the lid of the box and said, ‘I am 
commanded to convey this trust to Beh&’u llAh : 
more than this ask not of me, for I cannot tell you. 
Importuned by the company, he produced a long 
epistle in blue, penned in the most graceful manner 
with the utmost delicacy and firmness in a beautiful 
minute shikasta hand, written in the shape of a man 
so closely that it would have been imagined that it 
was a single wash of ink on the paper 1 . When they 
had read this epistle [they perceived that] he had 
produced three hundred and sixty derivatives from 
the word Bella. Then Mulld ‘Abdu’l-Karfm con- 
p. 54. veyed the trust to its destination. 

Well, we must return to our original narrative. 
The Prime Minister issued a second order to his 
brother Mlrzti Hasan Khfin, the gist of which order 
was this :—“Obtain a formal and explicit sentence 
from the learned doctors of Tabriz who are the firm 
support of the Church of Ja'far (upon him be peace) 

of the artillerymen, apparently without having undergone 
previous torture which he had much feared and wherefrom he 
had prayed frequently to be delivered. 

1 An epistle of this sort written by the BAb I have seen. It 
was in the form of a pentacle, and most beautifully executed 
as above described. Cf. Kazem-Beg ii, p. 498. For a specimen 
of the ‘derivatives’ produced by the Bab from the word Befid 
see Note R at end. 


A traveller’s narrative. 


4.3 


and the impregnable stronghold of the Shi'ite faith ; 
summon the Christian regiment of Urumiyya; sus¬ 
pend the Bdb before all the people ; and give orders 
for the regiment to fire a volley.” 

Mfrzd Hasan Kirin summoned his chief of the 
farrdshes, and gave him his instructions. They re¬ 
moved the Bdb’s turban and sash which were the 
signs of his Seyyid-hood, brought him with four of 
his followers 1 to the barrack square of Tabriz, con¬ 
fined him in a cell, and appointed forty of the 
Christian soldiers of Tabriz to guard him. P- 

Next day the chief of the farrdshes delivered over 
the B4b and a young man named Akd Muhammad 
‘All who was of a noble family of Tabriz to Sdm 
Kirin, colonel of the Christian regiment of Urumiyya, 
at the sentences of the learned divine Mulld Mu¬ 
hammad of Mdm4.kri.il, of the second ecclesiastical 
authority Mfrzd B&kir, and of the third ecclesiastical 
authority Mulld Murtazd-Kulf and others. An iron 
nail was hammered into the middle of the staircase 
of the very cell wherein they were imprisoned, and 
two ropes were hung down. By one rope the B4b 
was suspended and by the other rope Akd Muhammad 
‘All, both being firmly bound in such wise that the 

1 These four would seem to have been—(1) Aka Muhammad 
‘All of Tabriz; (2) Aka Seyyid Huseyn of Yezd, the Bab’s 
amanuensis; (3) Aka Seyyid Hasan of Yezd, his brother; 

(4) Aka Seyyid Ahmad of Tabriz. See Note S at end. 


44 


a traveller's narrative. 


liead of that young man was on the B4b’s breast. 
The surrounding house-tops billowed with teeming 
crowds. A regiment of soldiers ranged itself in three 
files. The first file fired; then the second file, and 
p. 56. then the third file discharged volleys. From the fire 
! of these volleys a mighty smoke was produced. 
When the smoke cleared away they saw that young 
man standing and the Bib seated by the side of his 
amanuensis Aki Seyyid Huseyn in the very cell from 
the staircase of which they had suspended them. To 
neither one of them had the slightest injury resulted. 

Silm Khin the Christian asked to be excused ; 
the turn of service came to another regiment, and 
the chief of the farrdshes withheld his hand. Aki 
JAn Beg of Khamsa, colonel of the hody-guard, 
advanced ; and they again bound the Bib together 
with that young man to the same nail. The Bib 
uttered certain words which those few who knew 
Persian understood 1 , while the rest heard but the 
sound of his voice. 

p. 57 . The colonel of the regiment appeared in person : 
and it was before noon on the twenty-eighth of 
Sha'bin in the year [a.h.] one thousand two hundred 

1 The Azarbaijftn dialect of Turkish is the language gener¬ 
ally spoken in Tabriz, and only persons who have either 
received some education or travelled in other parts of Persia 
understand Persian. Indeed Turkish prevails as far east 
a3 Kazvin, is widely spoken in Teheran, and is understood by 
many even as far south as Kum. 


A TRAVELLER S NARRATIVE. 


45 


and sixty-six 1 . Suddenly he gave orders to fire. At 
this volley the bullets produced such an effect that 
the breasts [of the victims] were riddled, aud their 
limbs were completely dissected, except their faces, 
which were but little marred. 

Then they removed those two bodies from the 
square to the edge of the moat outside the city, and 
that night they remained by the edge of the moat. 
Next day the Russian consul came with an artist and 
took a picture of those two bodies in the posture 
wherein they had fallen at the edge of the moat. 

On the second night at midnight the B&bis carried 
away the two bodies. 

On the third day the people did not find the 
bodies, and some supposed that the wild beasts had p. 
devoured them, so that the doctors proclaimed from 
the summits of their pulpits saying, “The holy body 
of the immaculate Imdm and that of the true Shi‘ite 
are preserved from the encroachments of beasts of 
prey and creeping things and wounds, but the body 
of this person have the wild beasts torn in pieces.” 
But after the fullest investigation and enquiry it hath 

1 July 9th 18 50. I have already pointed out (B. i, p. 512) 
that Kazem-Beg is in error in placing the Bab’s death in 1849. 

As to the events contemporary with the Founder’s martyrdom, 
the siege of Zanjan was in progress, while the NMz insurrec¬ 
tion had just been quelled. Indeed Aka Seyyid Yahya of 
Darab according to reliable tradition suffered martyrdom on 
the same day as the Bab. 


46 


A traveller’s narrative. 


been proved that when the BAb had dispersed all his 
writings and personal properties and it had become 
clear and evident from various signs that these events 
would shortly take place 1 , therefore, on the second 
day of these events, SuleymAn KhAn 2 the son of 
YahyA KhAn, one of the nobles of AzarbaijAn devoted 
to the BAb, arrived, and proceeded straightway to 
the house of the mayor of Tabriz. And since the 
mayor was an old friend, associate, and confidant of 
59. his; since, moreover, he was of the mystic tem¬ 
perament and did not entertain aversion or dislike 
for any sect, SuleymAn KhAn divulged this secret to 

1 There is no doubt that, as Gohiueau states (p. 258), the 
Bah fully expe cted to s uffer martyrdom. He even issued 
instructions as to the disposal of his remains, which he 
desired should be placed near the shrine of Shah ‘Abdu’l- 
‘Azim some five miles to the south of Teheran. “ The place 
of Shdh-‘Ahdu’l-‘Azim,” he wrote, " is a good land, by reason 
of the proximity of Wahid” (i.e. Subh-i-Ezel, whose name, 
Yahya, is equivalent numerically to Wahid, cf. B. ii, 997) 
“for beeping; and God is the Best of Keepers." The body', as 
here stated, was presently sent along with that of Aka 
Muhammad ‘All, the Bab's fellow-sufferer, from Tabriz to 
Teheran. It was committed to the care of Aka Mahdi of 
Kashin, who deposited it in a little shrine called Imam-zddi-i- 
Ma'stim situated near the Jliuhii-zdde-i-IIasan on the road from 
Teherdn to Ribat-ICarim. Here it remained in charge of the 
custodian of the shrine (who was paid to keep watch over it) 
till about the year 1867, when it was removed elsewhere by 
command of BehA’u’llah. 

2 Concerning Suleyman Khan’s martyrdom in August 1852 
at Teheran see Note T at end. 


A traveller's narrative. 


47 


him .saying, “To-night I, with several others, will 
endeavour by every means and artifice to rescue the 
bod} - . Even though it be not possible, come what 
may we will make an attack, and either attain our 
object or pour out our lives freely in this way.” 
“Such troubles,” answered the mayor, “are in no 
wise necessary.” He then sent one of his private ser¬ 
vants named Hajl AlMh-ydr, who, by whatever means 
and proceedings it was, obtained the body without 
trouble or difficulty and handed it over to 
Suleymdn KMn. And when it was morning the 
sentinels, to excuse themselves, said that the wild 
beasts had devoured it. That night they sheltered 
the body in the workshop of a Bdbi of Mil&n: next P 
day they manufactured a box, placed it in the box, 
and left it as a trust. Afterwards, in accordance 
with instructions which arrived from Teherin, they 
^ent it away from Azarbaijdn. And this transaction 
remained absolutely secret. 

Aow in these years [ah. one thousand two 
hundred and | sixty- six and >ixty-seven t hroughout 
a_ll Pe rsia fir e fell on _lhaJiousehol ds of the_ Bdbls, 
and each one o f them, in whatever hamlet he | 
might be, wa s, on the slightest suspicion arising, put I 
to the sword. More than four thousand souls were 
slainand a great multitude of women and children, 1 

1 T he mo st notabl e ma ssacres du ring this period were at 
Zanjan and Xiriz. Concerning the martyrdom oF~tHe “ Seven 


48 


A traveller’s narrative. 


left without protector or helper, distracted and con¬ 
founded, were trodden down and destroyed. And all 
these occurrences were brought about solely by the 
arbitrary decision and command of Mfrzft Takf Ivh&n, 
p. 61 . who imagined that by the enactment of a crushing 
punishment this sect would he dispersed and dis¬ 
appear in such wise that all sign and knowledge of 
them would be cut off. Ere long had passed the 
contrary of his imagination appeared, and it b ecame 
certain that [the Bftbfs] were increasing. The flame 
rose higher and the contagion became swifter : the 
affair waxed grave and the report thereof reached 
other climes. At first it was confined to Persia : 
later it spread to the rest of the world. Quaking 
and affliction resulted in constancy and stability, 
and grievous pains and punishment caused acceptance 
and attraction. The very events produced an im¬ 
pression ; impression led to investigation; and in¬ 
vestigation resulted in increase. Through the ill- 
considered policy of the Minister this edifice became 
fortified and strengthened, and these foundations 
firm and solid. Previously the matter used to be 
p. 62. regarded as commonplace : subsequently it acquired 
a grave importance in men’s eyes. Many persons 
from all parts of the world set out for Persia, and 

Martyrs ” at Teheran (amongst whom was the Bab’s maternal 
uncle Mirza Seyyid ‘All) which likewise took place at this time 
some information will be found in Note B at end. 


A traveller’s narrative. 49 

began to seek with their whole hearts. For it hath 
been proved by experience in the world that in the 
case of such matters of conscience laceration causeth 
healing ; censure produceth increased diligence ; pro¬ 
hibition induceth eagerness; and intimidation createth 
avidity. The root is hidden in the very heart, while 
the branch is apparent and evident. When one 
branch is cut off other branches grow. Thus it is 
observed that when such matters occur in other 
countries they become extinct spontaneously through 
lack of attention and exiguity of interest. For up 
to the present moment of movements pertaining to 
religion many have appeared in the countries of 
Europe, but, non-interference and absence of bigotry p. 
having deprived them of importance, in a little while 
they became effaced and dispelled. 

After this event there was wrought by a certain 
B&bf a great error and a grave presumption and crime, 
which has blackened the page of the history of this 
sect and given it an ill name throughout the civilized 
world. Of this event the marrow is this, that during 
the time when the B&b was residing in Azarbaij^tn a 
youth, Sddik by name, became affected with the . 
utmost devotion to the B&b, night and day was busy 
in serving him, and became bereft of thought and 
reason. Now when that which befel the B&b in 
Tabriz took place, this servant, actuated by his own 
fond fancies, fell into thoughts of seeking blood- 

4 


B. 


50 A traveller’s narrative. 

revenge. And since he knew naught of the details 
of the events, the absolute autocracy of the Amfr- 
Nizdm, his unbridled power, and sole authority; nor 
p. 64. [was aware] that this sentence had been promul¬ 
gated absolutely without the cognizance of the Royal 
Court, and that the Prime Minister had presump¬ 
tuously issued the order on his own sole responsi¬ 
bility; since, on the contrary, he supposed that 
agreeably to ordinary custom and usage the atten¬ 
dants of the court had had a share in, and a know¬ 
ledge of this sentence, therefore, [impelled] by folly, 
frenzy, and his evil star, nay, by sheer madness, 
he rose up from Tabriz and came straight to Teheran, 
one other person being his accomplice. Then, since 
the Royal Train had its abode in Shimr&n, he thither 
directed his steps. God is our refuge! By him was 
wrought a deed so presumptuous that the tongue is 
unable to declare and the pen loath to describe it. 
Yet to God be praise and thankfulness that this 
madman had charged his pistol with shot, imagining 
this to be preferable and superior to all projectiles 1 , 
p. 65. Then all at once commotion arose, and this sect 
■ became of such ill repute that still, strive and struggle 
as they may to escape from the curse and disgrace 

1 Of the attempt on the Shah’s life a very graphic account 
is given by Gobineau (chapter xi). See also Watson’s History 
of Persia, die. pp. 407—410, Lady Sheil’s Diary, pp. 273—282, 
and Note T at end. 


A traveller’s narrative. 51 

and dishonour of this deed, they are unable to do -o. 

They will recount from the first manifestation of the 
Bib until the present time; but when the thread of 
the discourse reaches this event they are abashed and 
hang their heads in shame, repudiating the presump¬ 
tuous actor and accounting him the destroyer of the 
edifice and the cause of shame to mankind. 

Xow after the occurrence of this grave matter all 
of this sect were suspected. At first there was 
neither investigation nor enquiry 1 , but afterwards in 
mere justice it was decided that there should be 
investigation, enquiry, and examination. All who 
were known to be of this sect fell under suspicion. 
Behfi’u’llfih was passing the summer in the village of p. 66 . 
Afcha situated one stage from Teheran. When this 
news was spread abroad and punishment began, every 
one who was able hid himself in some retreat or tied 
the country. Amongst these IMirzd Yahyi 2 , the 
brother of Beha’u’llih, concealed himself, and, a 
bewildered fugitive, in the guise of a dervish, with 
fcashkul 3 in hand, wandered in mountains and plains 

1 i.e. at first everyone who was suspected of belonging to 
the Babi community was put to death without enquiring as to 
whether he had any share in the conspiracy against the king. 

- See Gohineau, pp. 277—279, and Note TV at end. 

3 A hollow receptacle of about the size and shape of a 
cocoa-nut, round the orifice of which two chains are attached 
at four points to serve as a handle. It is used by dervishes as 
an alms-basket. 


4—2 


52 


A traveller’s narrative. 


on the road to Resht. But Beh&’u’llfLh rode forth 
with perfect composure and calmness from Afcha, and 
came to Niy^varfin, which was the abode of the 
Royal Train and the station of the imperial camp. 
Immediately on his arrival he was placed under 
arrest, and a whole regiment guarded him closely, 
p. 67. After several days of interrogation they sent him in 
chains and fetters from Shimr&n to the gaol of 
Teheran. And this harshness and punishment was 
due to the immoderate importunity of HAjf ‘All Kh&n, 
the Hdjibu’d-Dawla 1 , n or did there seem any hope of 
deliverance, until His Majesty the King, moved by 
his own kindly spirit, commanded circumspection, 
and ordered this occurrence to be investigated and 
examined particularly and generally by means of the 
ministers of the imperial court. 

Now when Beha’u’lMh was interrogated on this 
matter he answered in reply, “ The event itself indi¬ 
cates the truth of the affair and testifies that this is 
the action of a thoughtless, unreasoning, and igno- 


1 Concerning this infamous monster who, amongst in¬ 
numerable other wickednesses and cruelties, volunteered to 
carry out the sentence of death on his fallen benefactor, 

Mirza Taki KMn, see Watson's History of Persia, &e. pp. 403_ 

404. Dr Polak ( Persicn; das Land und seine Bewohner, 
Leipsic, 1865, vol. 1, p. 352) describes him as “ ein Mann olme 
Here und auf Commando zu jeder Grausamkeit bereit," and 
then proceeds to enumerate the ghastly tortures which he 
devised for the Babis. 


A TRAVELLERS NARRATIVE. 


53 


rant man. For no reasonable person would charge 
his pistol with shot when embarking on so grave an 
enterprise. At least he would so arrange and plan 
it that the deed should be orderly and systematic. 

From the very nature of the event it is clear and p. 68. 
evident as the sun that it is not the act of such as 
myself.” 

So it was established and proven that the assassin 
had on his own responsibility engaged in this grievous 
action and monstrous deed with the idea and design 
of taking blood revenge for his Master, and that it 
concerned no one else \ And when the truth of the 
matter became evident the innocence of Beh&’u’llhh 
from this suspicion was established in such wise that 
no doubt remained for anyone; the decision of the 
court declared his purity and freedom from this 
charge; and it became apparent and clear that what 
had been done with regard to him was due to the 

1 According to G-obineau (p. 280) three Babis actually took 
part in the attempt on the Shah’s life and others were con¬ 
cerned in the plot. According to the Ndsikhu’t-Tawdnkh, 
which gives the most circumstantial account of the occurrence* 

Mulla Sheykh ‘Ali (called by the Babis Jendb-i-‘Azim) first' 
proposed the attempt, for the carrying out of which twelve ' 
persons volunteered. Of these twelve, however, there were 
but three—Sadik of Zanjan (or Milan), Mulla Fathu’llah of 
Kum, and Mirza Muhammad of Nirfz—whose hearts did not 
fail them at the last. Of these three the first was killed on 
the spot, the other two were put to death afterwards. See 
Note T at end. 


54 A teavellee’s narbative. 

efforts of his foes and the hasty folly of the Hfijibu’d- 
Dawla. Therefore did the government of eternal 
p. 69. duration desire to restore certain properties and 
estates which had been confiscated, that thereby 
it might pacify him. But since the chief part of 
these was lost and only an inconsiderable portion was 
forthcoming, none came forward to claim them. In¬ 
deed BeM’u’llfih requested permission to withdraw 
to the Supreme Shrines [of Kerbelfi and Nejef] and, 
after some months 1 , by the royal permission and with 
the leave of the Prime Minister, set out accompanied 
by one of the King’s messengers for the Shrines. 

Let us return, however, to our original subject. 
Of the Bfib’s writings many remained in men’s hands. 
Some of these were commentaries on, and interpreta¬ 
tions of the verses of the Kur’fin; some were prayers, 
homilies, and hints of [the true significance of certain] 
passages; others were exhortations,admonitions,disser¬ 
tations on the different branches of the doctrine of the 
Divine Unity, demonstrations of the special prophetic 
mission of the Lord of existing things [Muhammad], 
and (as hath been understood) encouragements to 
amendment of character, severance from worldly states, 
p. 70. and dependence on the inspirations of God 2 . But 

1 According to Nabil’s chronological poem (B. ii, p. 983 
987) Beha’u’llah was imprisoned in Teheran for four months. 

2 For an enumeration of the B&b’s writings see Note U at 
end. 


A traveller's narrative. 


55 


the essence and purport of his compositions were the 
praises and descriptions of that Reality soon to appear 
which was his only object and aim, his darling, and 
his desire. For he regarded his own appearance as 
that of a harbinger of good tidings, and considered 
his own real nature merely as a means for the mani¬ 
festation of the greater perfections of that One. 
And indeed he ceased not from celebrating Him by 
night or day for a single instant, but used to signify 
to all liis followers that they should expect His 
arising: in such wise that he declares in his writings, 

"I am a letter out of that most mighty book and a 
dew-drop from that limitless ocean, and, when He 
shall appear, my true nature, my mysteries, riddles, 
and intimations will become evident, and the embryo 
of this religion shall develop through the grades of 
its being and ascent, attain to the station of 'the 
most comely or forms',’ and become adorned with the p. 
robe of ‘blessed be God, the Best of Creators’.’ And 
this event will disclose itself in the year [a.h. one 
thousand two hundred and] sixty-nine, which corre¬ 
sponds to the number of the year of 'after a while 3 ,’ 

1 Kuran, xcv. 4. 

5 Kur’an, xxiii 14. For texts from Beyan illustrating this 
passage, see Note V at end. 

3 The rear of ‘a while' is 68 (^=S. ^ = 10, 

— 50), and the year of ‘ a fter a while ’ therefore corresponds 
to 69. which is the number after 68. It was not, however, till 
A.H. 1283 (a.d. I860 —67) that, according to Nabil (B. ii. pp. 9S4. 


56 a traveller’s narrative. 

and 'thou shalt see the mountains which thou thin best 
so solid jiassing away like the passing of the clouds' 
shall he fulfilled.” In short he so described Him 
that, in his own expression, he regarded approach to 
the divine bounty and attainment of the highest 
degrees of perfection in the worlds of humanity as 
dependent on love for Him, and so inflamed was he 
with His flame that commemoration of Him was the 
bright candle of his dark nights in the fortress of 
Mhku, and remembrance of Him was the best of com¬ 
panions in the straits of the prison of Ghihrfk. There¬ 
by he obtained spiritual enlargements; with His 
wine was he inebriated ; and at remembrance of Him 
did he rejoice. All of his followers too were in 
p. 72 . expectation of the appearance of these signs, and 
each one of his intimates was seeking after the fulfil¬ 
ment of these forecasts. 

Now from the beginning of the manifestation of 
the Bhb there was in Teherhn (which the Bhb called 
the Holy Land ) a youth of the family of one of the 
ministers and of noble lineage 2 , gifted in every way, 

988), Beha openly declared himself as ‘He whom God shall 
manifest.’ 

1 Kur’an, xxvii. 90. 

2 Beha’u’Uah (Mirza Huseyn ‘All) and Subh-i-Ezel (Mirza 
Yahya) were both sons of Mirza ‘Abbas (better known as 
Mirza Buzurg) but by different mothers. This is confirmed 
beyond all doubt by Subh-i-Ezel and others who have the best 
means of knowing, though Gobineau (p. 277) gives a different 


a traveller’s narrative. 


57 


and adorned with purity and nobility. Although he 
combined lofty lineage with high connection, and 
although his ancestors were men of note in Persia 
and universally sought after \ yet he was not of a race 
of doctors or a family of scholars. Now this youth was 
from his earliest adolescence celebrated amongst those 
of the ministerial class, both relatives and strangers, 
for single-mindedness, and was from childhood pointed 
out as remarkable for sagacity, and held in regard in 
the eyes of the wise. He did not, however, after the 
fashion of his ancestors, desire elevation to lofty ranks 
nor seek advancement to splendid but transient posi¬ 
tions. His extreme aptitude was nevertheless admit- P- 
ted by all, and his excessive acuteness and intelligence 
were universally avowed. In the eyes of the common 
folk he enjoyed a wonderful esteem, and in all gather¬ 
ings and assemblies he had a marvellous speech and 
delivery. Notwithstanding lack of instruction and 
education 2 such was the keenness of his penetration 

account. There was another brother called Musa, now deceased, 
one of whose sons is at present residing at Acre. 

1 Lit. “ the place where the camels’ saddles are put down,” 
i.e. people whose houses are frequented by guests and visitors. 
See Lane’s Lexicon, Book l. Part in. p. 1053. 

2 Beha himself says in the earlier portion of his Epistle to 
the King of Persia not included in the extract therefrom given 

further on:—oh-j h } ,> ^,01 ox 1* op L 

* OjRXJI ,> OJ Aai" ^Jl ijJI jLo “I have 

not studied the sciences which men have, neither have I entered 


58 


a traveller’s narrative. 


and the readiness of his apprehension that when 
during his youthful prime he appeared in assemblies 
where questions of divinity and points of inetaphysic 
were being discussed, and, in presence of a great 
concourse of doctors and scholars loosed his tongue, 
all those present were amazed, accounting this as a 
sort of prodigy beyond the discernment natural to 
the human race. From his early years he was the 
hope of his kindred and the unique one of his family 
and race, nay, their refuge and shelter. 

However, in spite of these conditions and circum- 
. 74 . stances, as he wore a kulak 1 on his head and locks 
flowing over his shoulder, no one imagined that he 
would become the source of such matters, or that the 
waves of his flood would reach the zenith of this 
firmament. 

When the question of the B4b was noised abroad 
signs of partiality appeared in him. At the first 
he apprized his relatives and connections, and the 
children and dependents of his own circle ; subse¬ 
quently he occupied his energies by day and night in 

the colleges: ask the city wherein I teas that thou mayest he sure 
that I am not of those who lie.” 

1 The Persian lamb-skin hat worn by Government employes 
and civilians. The words 4 C (hatted) and ^ (turbaned) 
are commonly used to distinguish the laity or civilian class 
from the clergy or learned class. The latter usually shave 
the head, while the former wear their hair in zulf descending 
below the level of the ears. 


A traveller’s narrative. 59 

inviting friends and strangers [to embrace the new 
faith]. He arose with mighty resolution, engaged 
with the utmost constancy in systematizing the prin¬ 
ciples and consolidating the ethical canons of that 
society in every way, and strove by all means to 
protect and guard these people. 

When he had [thus] established the foundations 
in Teheran he hastened to Mdzandardn, where he 
displayed in assemblies, meetings, conferences, inns, p. 75. 
mosques, and colleges a mighty power of utterance 
and exposition. AVhoever beheld his open brow or 
heard his vivid eulogies perceived him with the 
eye of actual vision to be a patent demonstration, a 
latent magnetic force, and a pervading influence. A 
great number both of rich and poor and of erudite 
doctors were attracted by his preaching and washed 
their hands of heart and life, being so enkindled that 
they laid down their lives under the sword dancing 
[with joy]. 

Thus, amongst many instances, one day four 
learned and accomplished scholars of the divines of 
Nur were present in his company, and in such wise 
did he expound that all four were involuntarily con¬ 
strained to entreat him to accept them for his service. 

For by dint of his eloquence, which was like ‘evi¬ 
dent sorcery,’ he satisfied these eminent doctors P- 76. 
that they were in reality children engaged in the 
rudiments of study and the merest tyros, and that 


60 


A traveller's narrative. 


therefore they must read the alphabet from the be¬ 
ginning. Several protracted conferences were passed 
in expounding and elucidating the Point' and the 
Alif of the Absolute, wherein the doctors present 
were astounded, and filled with amazement and aston¬ 
ishment at the seething and roaring of the ocean of 
his utterance. The report of this occurrence reached 
the hearing of far and near, and deep despondency 
fell on the adversaries. The regions of Nfir were 
filled with excitement and commotion at these events, 
and the noise of this mischief and trouble smote the 
ears of the citizens of B&rfurAsh. The chief divine 
of Nfir, MuM Muhammad, was in Kishldk 1 2 . When 

1 The ‘Point’ (ahi), ‘ Point of Revelation' (OL ‘«Li), and 

‘First Point’ (Jf • «Li) were the titles assumed by the Bab 
during the latter part of his mission, and it is by one of these 
titles, or by the phrases j^\ (‘Iiis Highness the Supreme’), 

jKt\ jrj (‘His Highness my Lord the Supreme’), that 

he is mentioned amongst the Babis. (See Gobineau, p. 156.) 
The Alif, in the phraseology of the mystics, indicates the un- 
manifested Essence of God. 

2 Kishldk is a word of Turkish origin (from winter) 
applied generally to the warmer low-lying districts where the 
winter is passed, the highlands where the summer is spent 
being called Yildk or Yildr/h. It is also applied as a proper 
name to several places in the north of Persia. Kishldk of Ndr 
is, as appears from the Shith’s Diary of his journey through 
Mazandariin, a district bordering on the coast, of which the 
chief town is Khurramabad. Nur itself is situated in the 
mountains. 


A traveller’s narrative. 01 

he heard of these occurrences he sent two of the most 
distinguished and profound of the doctors, who were 
possessed of wondrous eloquence, effective oratorical P- 77 - 
talent, conclusiveness of argument, and brilliant 
powers of demonstration, to quench this fire, and to 
subdue and overcome this young man by force of 
argument, either reducing him to penitence, or causing 
him to despair of the successful issue of his projects. 
Glory be to God for His wondrous decrees ! When 
those two doctors entered the presence of that young 
man, saw the waves of his utterance, and heard the 
force of his arguments, they unfolded like the rose and 
were stirred like the multitude, and, abandoning altar 
and chair, pulpit and preferment, wealth and luxury, 
and evening and morning congregations, they applied 
themselves to the furtherance of the objects of this 
person, even inviting the chief divine to tender his 
allegiance. So when this young man with a faculty p. 78. 
of speech like a rushing torrent set out for Amul and 
Shrf he met with that experienced doctor and that 
illustrious divine in KishHk of Nur. And the people 
assembled from all quarters awaiting the result. His 
accomplished reverence the divine, although he was 
of universally acknowledged excellence, and in science 
the most learned of his contemporaries, nevertheless 
decided to have recourse to augury as to [whether he 
should engage in] discussion and disputation. This 
did not prove favourable and he therefore excused 


62 A traveller’s narrative. 

himself, deferring [the discussion] until some other 
time. His incompetency and shortcoming thereby 
became known and suspected, and this caused the 
adherence, confirmation, and edification of many. 

In brief outline the narrative is this. For some 
while he wandered about in those districts. After 
the death of the late prince Muhammad ShAh he 
returned to TeherAn, having in his mind [the inten¬ 
tion of] corresponding and entering into relations 
p. 79. with the BAb. The medium of this correspondence 
was the celebrated MullA ‘Abdu’l-Karfm of Kazvfn 1 , 
who was the BAb’s mainstay and trusted intimate. 
Now since a great celebrity had been attained 
for BehA’u’llAh in Teller An, and the hearts of men 
were disposed towards him, he, together with MullA 
‘Abdu’l-Karfm, considered it as expedient that, in 
face of the agitation amongst the doctors, the ag¬ 
gressiveness of the greater part of [the people of] 
Persia, and the irresistible power of the Amir-Ni- 
sam, whereby both the BAb and BehA’u’llAh were in 
great danger aud liable to incur severe punishment, 
some measure should be adopted to direct the thoughts 
of men towards some absent person, by which means 
BehA’u’llAh would remain protected from the inter¬ 
ference of all men. And since further, having regard 
to sundry considerations, they did not consider an 
outsider as suitable, they cast the lot of this 
1 See above, p. 41 and note. 


A traveller’s narrative. 63 

augury to the name of Belli’u’llih’s brother Mfrzi 
Yahyi 1 . 

By the assistance and instruction of Behi’u’llih, p- 80. 
therefore, they made him notorious and famous on 
the tongues of friends and foes, and wrote letters, 
ostensibly at his dictation, to the Bib. And since 
secret correspondences were in process the Bib highly 
approved of this scheme. So Mirzi Yahyi was con¬ 
cealed and hidden while mention of him was on the 
tongues and in the mouths of men. And this mighty 
plan was of wondrous efficacy, for Belii’u’llih, though 
he was known and seen, remained safe and secure, 
and this veil was the cause that no one outside [the 
sect] fathomed the matter or fell into the idea of 
molestation, until Belli’u’llih quitted Teherin at the 
permission of the King and was permitted to withdraw 
to the Supreme Shrines. 

When he reached Baghdad and the crescent moon 
of the month of Muharram of the year [a. h. one p. 81. 
thousand two hundred and] sixty-nine (which was 
termed in the books of the Bib “ the year of ‘ after a 
while 2 ’ ” and wherein he had promised the disclosure 
of the true nature of his religion and its mysteries) 
shone forth from the horizon of the world, this covert 
secret, as is related, became apparent amongst all 
within and without [the society], Behi’u’llih with 
mighty steadfastness became a target for the arrows 
1 See Note W at end. 2 See note 3 at foot of p. 55. 


64 


A traveller’s narrative. 


of all amongst mankind, while Mirz4 Yahyii in dis¬ 
guise passed his time, now in the environs and vicinity 
of Baghdad engaged for better concealment in various 
trades, now in Baghdad itself in the garb of the 
Arabs. 

Now BeM’u’Mh so acted that the hearts of this 
sect were drawn towards him, while most of the 
inhabitants of ‘IrAk* were reduced to silence and 
speechlessness, some being amazed and others an- 
. 82. gered. After remaining there for one year he with¬ 
drew his hand from all things, abandoned relatives 
and connections, and, without the knowledge of his 
followers, quitted ‘Ir&k 1 alone and solitary, without 
companion, supporter, associate, or comrade. For 
nigh upon two years he dwelt in Turkish Ivurdistdn, 
generally in a place named Sarkalti, situated in the 
mountains, and far removed from human habitations. 
Sometimes on rare occasions he used to frequent 
Suleynffiniyyd Ere long had elapsed the most emi¬ 
nent doctors of those regions got some inkling of his 
circumstances and conditions, and conversed with 
him on the solution of certain difficult questions 
connected with the most abstruse points of theology. 
Having witnessed on his part ample signs and satis¬ 
factory explanations they observed towards him the 

1 Here and in subsequent passages where ‘Irak is mentioned 
‘lrnk-i-‘Arab (especially Baghdad) is iutended, not Irdk-i- 
* Ajam. 


A traveller’s narrative. 


65 


utmost respectfulness and deference. In consequence 
of this he acquired a great fame and wonderful p. 83. 
reputation in those regions, and fragmentary accounts 
of him were circulated in all quarters and directions, 
to wit that a stranger, a Persian, had appeared in the 
district of Suleyminiyy^ (which hath been, from of 
old, the place whence the most expert doctors of the 
Sunnites have arisen), and that the people of that 
country had loosed their tongues in praise of him. 

From the rumour thus heard it was known that that 
person -was none other than Beh&’u’ll&h. Several 
persons, therefore, hastened thither, and began to 
entreat and implore, and the urgent entreaty of all 
brought about his return. 

Now although this sect had uot been affected 
with quaking or consternation at these grievous 
events, such as the slaughter of their chief and the 
rest, but did rather increase and multiply; still, 
since the B&b was but beginning to lay the founda- p. 84. 
tions when he was slain, therefore was this community 
ignorant concerning its proper conduct, action, beha¬ 
viour, and duty, their sole guiding principle being love 
for the Bdb. This ignorance was the reason that in 
some parts disturbances occurred; for, experiencing 
violent molestation, they unclosed their hands in 
self-defence. But after his return Beh&’u’Mh made 
such strenuous efforts in educating, teaching, 
training, regulating, and reconstructing this com- 
B. 5 


66 A traveller’s narrative. 

munity tliat in a short while all these troubles and 
mischiefs were quenched, and the utmost tranquillity 
and repose reigned in men’s hearts; so that, ac¬ 
cording to what hath been heard, it became clear 
p. 85. and obvious even to statesmen that the fundamental 
intentions and ideas of this sect were things spiritual, 
and such as are connected with pure hearts; that 
their true and essential principles were to reform the 
morals and beautify the conduct of the human 
race, and that with things material they had abso¬ 
lutely no concern. 

When these principles, then, were established in 
the hearts of this sect they so acted in all lands that 
they became celebrated amongst statesmen for gentle¬ 
ness of spirit, steadfastness of heart, right intent, good 
deeds, and excellence of conduct. For this people 
are most well-disposed towards obedience and sub¬ 
missiveness, and, on receiving such instruction, they 
conformed their conduct and behaviour thereto. For¬ 
merly exception was taken to the words, deeds, de- 
p. 86. meanour, morals, and conduct of this sect: now objec¬ 
tion is made in Persia to their tenets and spiritual 
state. Now this is beyond the power of man, that 
he should be able by interference or objection to 
change the heart and conscience, or meddle with the 
convictions of any one. For in the realm of con¬ 
science nought but the ray of God’s light can 
command, and on the throne of the heart none 


A traveller's narrative. 67 

but the pervading power of the King of Kings should 
rule. Thus it is that one can arrest and suspend 
[the action of] every faculty except thought and 
reflection ; for a man cannot even by his own volition 
withhold himself from reflection or thought, nor keep 
back his musings and imaginings. 

At all events the undeniable truth is this, that 
for nigh upon thirty-five years 1 no action opposed 
to the government or prejudicial to the nation has p. 87. 
emanated from this sect or been witnessed [on their 
part], and that during this long period, notwithstand¬ 
ing the fact that their numbers and strength are 
double what they were formerly, no sound has arisen 
from any place, except that every now and then 
learned doctors and eminent scholars (really for the 
extension of this report through the world and the 
awakening of men) sentence some few to death. For 
such interference is not destruction but edification 
when thou regardest the truth, which will not 
thereby become quenched and forgotten, but rather 
stimulated and advertised. 

I will at least relate one short anecdote of what 

1 This passage clearly shews that our history was composed 
not more than four or five years ago, probably during the 
year 1886. For since the attempt on the Shah’s life in the 
month of Shawwal, A.n. 1268 (August 1852), the Babis have 
taken no action hostile to the Persian government, and the 
month of Shawwal, a.h. 1303 (35 years from this date) began 
in July, 1886. 


5—2 


68 


A traveller’s narrative. 


actually took place. A certain person violently 
molested and grievously injured a certain B&bf. 
p. 88. The victim unclosed his hand in retaliation and arose 
to take vengeance, unsheathing his weapon against 
the aggressor. Becoming the object of the censure 
and reprimand of this sect, however, he took refuge 
in flight. When he reached Hamad&n his character 
became known, and, as he was of the clerical class, the 
doctors vehemently pursued him, handed him over to 
the government, and ordered chastisement to be 
inflicted. By chance there fell out from the fold of 
his collar a document written by Behd’u’lUh, the 
subject of which was reproof of attempts at retalia¬ 
tion, censure and reprobation of the search after 
vengeance, and prohibition from following after lusts. 
Amongst other matters they found these expressions 
contained in it“ Verily God is quit of the sedi- 
p. 89. turns’’ aud likewise :—“ If ye be slain it is better for 
you than that ye should slay. And when ye are tor¬ 
mented have recourse to the controllers of affairs and 
the ref uge of the people *; and if ye be neglected then 
entrust your affairs to the Jealous Lord. This is the 
mark of the sincere, and the characteristic of the 

1 i.e. “ If you be wronged or persecuted, appeal for pro¬ 
tection and redress to the legally constituted authorities ; and 
if they will not help you, then be patient and put your trust in 
God, but do not attempt by force to obtain redress for your¬ 
selves.” 


A TRAVELLER S NARRATIVE. 


6i» 

asiund.” When the governor became cognizant of 
this -writing he addressed that person saving. By 
the decree of that chief whom you yourself obey 
correction is necessary and qmnishment and chastise¬ 
ment obligatory.” " If,” replied that person, "you 
will carry out all his precepts I shall have the utmost 
pleasure in [submitting to] punishment and death.” 
The governor smiled and let the man go. 

So Bella n’llali made the utmost efforts to edu¬ 
cate [his people] and incite [them] to morality, the 
acquisition of the sciences and arts of all countries, 
kindly dealing with all the nations of the earth, 
desire for the welfare of all peoples, sociability, con¬ 
cord, obedience, submissiveness, instruction of [their] p. 
children, production of what is needful for the human 
nice, and inauguration of true happiness for mankind: 
and he continually kept sehding tracts of admonition 
to all parts, whereby a wonderful effect was produced. 
Some of these epistles have, after extreme search and 
enquiry, been examined, and some portions of them 
shall now be set down in writing 3 . 

- For some account of Bella's various writings see B. ii. 
pp. 942—991. A specimen of the vial in the original may he 
found in Rosen’s 2USS. Persnr.s. pp. S2—51. and a part of the 
Jj . 4 , in his 15>. Arabes. pp. 191—212. Baron Rosen 
intends shortly to publish the whole of the 
including the Epistles to ths Kings (and he 
has been kind enough to send me the p>roof-sheets of this 


70 a traveller's narrative. 

All these epiHtles consisted of [exhortations to] 
purity of morals, encouragement to poind conduct, re¬ 
probation of certain individuals, and complaints of the 
seditious. AmongstotliersthisHcnloiioe was recorded: 

“ My captivity is not my abasement: by my life, it os' 
indeedagkrry onto me! Hat the abasement is the ac- 
p. 01. tin/i of my friends who cowed, themselves with as a,yd, 
follow the, devil in, their net,ions. A moni/sl them is he 
who taketh lust and tiiruelh aside from what is com¬ 
manded ; and amongst them is he who followeth the 
truth in right, guidance. . U for Hum who commit sin 
and cling to the world they are, assuredly not of the, 
people of liehd.” 

So again:— 

“ Well is it, with him who is adorned, with the 
decoration of manners and morals: verily he is oj 
those who help their Lord, with clear perspicuous ac¬ 
tion!’ 

“ He is God, exalted is His stale, wisdom and, 
utterance. The True One (glorious is His glory) for 
the shewing forth of the gems of ideals from the mine 
of man, hath, in every age, sent a trusted one. The 
primary foundation of the faith of (led arid the 
religion of God is this, that they should not make 
diverse sects and various paths the cause and reason of 
hatred. These principles and laws arid firm sure roads 

important work an they are printed off. Further information 
will be found in a nubnequent foot-note. 


A traveller’s narrative. 


71 


appear from one dawning-place and shine from one 
dayspring, and these diversities were out of regard for 
the requirements of the time, season, ages, and epochs, p- 
0 Unitarians, make firm the girdle of endeavour, that 
perchance religious strife and conflict may be removed 
from amongst the people of the world and be an¬ 
nulled. For love of God and His servants engage in 
this great and mighty matter. Religious hatred and 
rancour is a world-consuming fire, and the quenching 
thereof most arduous, unless the hand of Divine 
Might give men deliverance from this unfruitful 
calamity. Consider a war which happeneth between 
two states : both sides have foregone wealth and life: 
how many villages were beheld as though they were 
not! This precept is in the position of the light in 
the lamp of utterance.” 

“ 0 people of the world, ye are all the fruit of one 
tree and the leaves of one branch. Walk with perfect 
charity, concord, affection, and agreement. I swear p. 
by the Sun of Truth, the light of agreement shall 
brighten and illumine the horizons. The all-knowing 
Truth hath been and is the witness to this saying. 
Endeavour to attain to this high supreme station 
which is the station of protection and preservation of 
mankind. This is the intent of the King of inten¬ 
tions, and this the hope of the Lord of hopes.” 

“We trust that God will assist the kings of the 
earth to illuminate and adorn the earth with the 


72 


A traveller’s narrative. 


p. 94. 


refulgent light of the Sun of Justice. At one 
time we spoke in the language of the Law, at 
another time in the language of the Truth and the 
Way; and the ultimate object and remote aim was 
the shewing forth of this high supreme station. And 
God sufficeth for witness." 

“0 friends, consort with all the people of the 
world with joy and fragrance. If there be to you 
a word or essence whereof others than you are devoid, 
communicate it and shew it forth in the language of 
affection and kindness: if it be received and be effec¬ 
tive the object is attained, and if not leave it to 
him, and with regard to him deal not harshly but 
pray 1 . The language of kindness is the lodestone of 
hearts and the food of the soul; it stands in the re¬ 
lation of ideas to words, and is as an horizon for 
the shining of the Sun of Wisdom and Knowledge.” 

“ If the Unitarians had in the latter times acted 
according to the glorious Law [which came] after 
His Highness the Seal [of the Prophets 2 ] (may the 
life of all beside him be his sacrifice!), and had clung 
to its skirt, the foundation of the fortress of religion 

1 i.e. “ If you have a message or gospel wherein others are 
not partakers, then convey it to those about you in kind and 
gentle words. If they accept it you have gained your object; 
if not, leave it to ripen and bear fruit, and pray that it may do 
so, but on no account strive to force its acceptance on any 
one.” 

2 Muhammad. 


A TRAVELLER 5 V APOR A TTVT. 


“ r> 

< O 

would not have been shaken, and populous cities 
would not have been ruined, but rather cities and p. 95. 
villages would have acquired and been adorned with 
the decoration of peace and serenity.” 

"Through the heeulessuees and discordance of 
the favoured people and the smoke of wicked souls 
the Fair Nation is seen to he darkened and enfeebled. 

Had they acted [according to what they knew] they 
would not have been heedless of the light of the Sun 
of Justice.” 

“ This victim hath from earliest clays until now 
been afflicted at the hands of the heedless. They 
exiled us without cause at one time to Irak 1 , at 
another time to Adrianople, and thence to Acre, 
which was a place of exile for murderers and robbers: 
neither is it known where and in what spot we shall 
take up our abode after this greatest prison-house. 
Knowledge U with God, the Lord of the Throne and 
of the dv.it and the Lord of the lofty seat. In what¬ 
ever place we may he, and whatever feral us, the 
saints must gaze with perfect steadfastness and confi¬ 
dence towards the Supreme Horizon and occupy p. 96. 
themselves in the reformation of the world and the 
education of the nations. What hath befallen and 
shall befal hath been and is an instrument and means 
for the furtherance of the Word of Unity. Take 


1 note on p. 64. 


74 a traveller's narrative. 

hold of the command of God and cling thereto: 
verily it hath been sent down from beside a wise 
Ordainer.” 

“With perfect compassion and mercy have we 
guided and directed the people of the world to that 
whereby their souls shall be profited. I swear by 
the Sun of Truth which hath shone forth from the 
liighest horizons of the world that the people of Belrt 
had not and have not any aim save the prosperity 
and reformation of the world and the purifying 
of the nations. With all men they have been in 
sincerity and charity. Their outward [appearance] is 
one with their inward [heart], and their inward [heart] 
identical with their outward [appearance]. The truth 
p. 97. of the matter is not hidden or concealed, but plain 
and evident before [men’s] faces. Their very deeds are 
the witness of this assertion. To-day let every one 
endowed with vision win his way from deeds and signs 
to the object of the people of Belrt and from their 
speech and conduct gain knowledge of their intent. 
The waves of the ocean of divine mercy appear at 
the utmost height, and the showers of the clouds 
of His grace and favour descend every moment. 
During the days of sojourn in Trhk 1 this oppressed 
one sat down and consorted with all classes without 
veil or disguise. How many of the denizens of the 


1 See note on p. 64. 


a traveller's narrative. “o 

horizons entered in enmity and went forth in sym¬ 
pathy ! The door of grace was open before the faces 
of all With rebellious and obedient did we out¬ 
wardly converse after one fashion, that peivhanee 
the evil-doers might win their way to the ocean of 
boundless forgiveness. The splendours of the Xante 
of the Concealer 1 were in such wise manifested that 
the evil-doer imagined that he was accounted of the p- ?s. 
good. Xo messenger was disappointed and no en¬ 
quirer was ranted bach. The causes of the aversion 
and avoidance of men were certain of the doctors 
of Persia and the unseemly deeds of the ignorant. 

By the Term] 'doctors' in these passages are signiried 
those persons who have withheld mankind from the 
shore of the Ocean of Unity; but as for the learned who 
practise [their knowledge] and the wise who act justly, 
they are as the spirit unto the body of the world. Well 
is it with that learned man whose head is adorned 
with the crown of justice, and whose body glorieth 
in the ornament of honesty. The Pen of Admonition 

- if. Tbe people c: all lasde. 

1 -The Concealer' (j-„i ) i? cue oi tie Names of Goi (see 

Kedbonae'e CojmCj X.:.*tee. r. So. No. 2SS . oi ibieb 

Nausea tbe Fropbeis are tbe nirrore or places oi maub'estaiion 
' In ibdr sobor- tbe Irvine Attrtbutee ■sbetber 
■ t ^ or ' te—bl-e' ( \ are diep lap-ad. So 

3S=ba'e asaa aalm ent oi bie ieebnps ie bere desorbed as a 
tnariieetsaon ef tbe ■ Name oi tbe Concealer.' 


76 


A traveller’s narrative. 


exhorteth the friends and enjoineth on them charity, 
pity, wisdom, and gentleness. The oppressed one 1 
is this day a prisoner; his allies are the hosts of good 
deeds and virtues; not ranks, and hosts, and guns, 

. 99. and cannons. One holy action maketh the world of 
earth highest paradise. 

“ 0 friends, help the oppressed one with well- 
pleasing virtues and good deeds! To-day let every 
soul desire to attain the highest station. He must 
not regard what is in him, hut what is in God. It is 
not for him to regard u'hat shall advantage h itnself, but 
that whereby the Word of God which must be obeyed 
shall be upraised. The heart must be sanctified from 
every form of selfishness and lust, for the weapons 
of the Unitarians and the saints were and are the 
fear of God. That is the buckler wliich guardeth 
man from the arrows of hatred and abomination. 
Unceasingly hath the standard of piety been vic¬ 
torious, and accounted amongst the most puissant 
hosts of the world. Thereby do the saints subdue the 
100 . cities of [men’s] hearts by the permission of God , the 
Lord of hosts. Darkness hath encompassed the earth: 
the lamp which giveth light was and is wisdom. The 
dictates thereof must be observed under all circum¬ 
stances. And of wisdom is the regard of place and 
the utterance of discourse according to measure and 

1 Throughout his writings by the terms 1 the oppressed one,’ 
‘ this oppressed one,’ ‘ this servant,’ &c., Beha intends himself. 


a traveller’s narrative. 77 

state. And of wisdom is decision; for man should 
not accept whatsoever anyone sayeth 1 . 

“ Under all circumstances desire of the True One 
(glorious is His glory) that He will not deprive His 
servants of the sealed wine 2 and the lights of the 
Name of the Self-subsistent. 

“ 0 friends of God, verily the Pen of Sincerity en- 
joinetk on you the greatest faithfulness. By the Life 
of God, its light is mare evident than the light of the 
sun ! In its light and its brightness and its radiance 
every light is eclipsed. We desire of God that He p. 101. 
will not withhold from His cities and lands the radiant 
effulgence of the Sun of Faithfulness. We have 
directed all in the nights and in the days to faithful¬ 
ness, chastity, purity, and constancy; and have en¬ 
joined good deeds and ivell-pleasing qualities. In 

1 i.e. Of the dictates of wisdom one is this, that the believer 
should in speaking have regard to fitness of time and place and 
not with undiscriminating zeal lay bare his convictions to all 
persons or in all companies; and another is this, that he 
should be firmly established in his belief and not be ‘ tossed to 
and fro and carried about with every wind of doctrine.’ 

2 By the 1 sealed wine ’ are meant the ordinances of God. 

Thus in the '■Most Holy Book ’ (^jJ) v li5^ rather than 

by which name I formerly described it, B. ii. 972—981) it is 

written t p^ pl^^Vl Ul V 

^ j £,Ul “Do not consider that we have re¬ 

vealed unto you ordinances , but rather that we have opened the 
seal of the sealed wine with the fingers of might and power." 


78 


A traveller's narrative. 


the nights and in the days the shriek of the pen 
ariseth and the tongue speaketh, that against the 
sword the word may arise, and against fierceness 
patience, and in place of oppression submission, and 
at the time of martyrdom resignation. For thirty 
years and more, in all that hath befallen this 
oppressed community they have been patient, re¬ 
ferring it to God. Every one endowed with justice 
and fairness hath testified and doth testify to that 
which hath been said. During this period this 
oppressed one was engaged in good exhortations and 
efficacious and sufficient admonitions, till it became 
. 102. established and obvious before all that this victim had 
made himself a target for the arrows of calamity 
unto the shewing forth of the treasures deposited in 
[men’s] souls. Strife and contest were and are seemly 
in the beasts of prey of the earth, [but] laudable 
actions are seemly in man. 

“ Blessed is the Merciful One: Who created man: 
and taught him utterance. After all these troubles, 
neither are the ministers of state content, nor 
the doctors of the church. Not one soul was 
found to utter a word for God before the court 
of His Majesty the King {may God perpetuate 
his kingdom). There shall not befal us aught 
save that which God hath decreed unto us. They 
acted not kindly, nor was there any shortcoming 
in the display of evil. Justice became like the 


A traveller’s narrative. 


79 


phoenix 1 , and faithfulness like the philosopher’s 
stone: none spake for the right. It would seem 
that justice had become hateful to men and cast p. 103. 
forth from all lands like the people of God. Glory 
be to God! In the episode of the land of TV not 
one spoke for that which God had commanded. 
Having regard to the display of power and parade 
of service in the presence of the King (may God 
perpetuate his kingdom) they have called good evil 
and the reformer a sedition-monger. The like of 
these persons would depict the drop as an ocean, 
and the mote as a sun. They call the house at 
Kalin 3 ‘the strong fortress/ and close their eyes 
to the perspicuous truth. They have attacked a 
number of reformers of the world with the charge 

1 The ‘Anjfd (in Persian Simurgh), a mythical bird dwelling 
in the mountains of Kdf, which bound the world according to 
the old Arabian cosmography. Hence anything very rare or 
hard to find or of which the name is heard but the form is not 
seen j_j!A p-'Vl * s compared to it. 

- ‘ The land of Ta ’ (u, means Teheran. So in the 

Kitdb-i-Akdas Khur&san is called £|Zji and Kirman 

t| j\ j i_abCj| J,Ji ; while in the Persian Beyan we find 
mention of the laml of Allf (Azarbaijan), the land of ‘Ayn 
(‘Irak), the land ofFd (Pars), and the land of Mini (Mazandaran). 

This use of the letters of the alphabet to designate places 
and people is very common amongst the Babis. See the note 
on the colophon at the end of the book. 

3 Concerning Kalin (less correctly Kuleyn) see p. 14 supra 
and note 3 thereon. 


80 


A traveller’s narrative. 


of seditiousness. As God liveth, tliese persons had 
and have no intent nor hope save the glory of the 
state and service to their nation! For God they 
spoke and for God they speak, and in the way of 
God do they journey. 

p. 104. “ 0 friends, ask of Him who is the Desire of the 

denizens of earth that He will succour His Majesty 
the King ( may God perpetuate his kingdom) so that 
all the dominions of Persia may by the light of the 
Sun of Justice become adorned with the decoration 
of tranquillity and security. According to state¬ 
ments made, he, at the promptings of his blessed 
nature, loosed those who were in bonds, and bestowed 
freedom on the captives. The representation of 
certain matters before the faces of [God’s] servants 
is obligatory, and natural to the pious, so that 
the good may be aware and become cognizant 
[thereof]. Verily He inspireth whom He pleaseth 
with what He desireth, and He is the Powerful, the 
Ordainer, the Knowing , the Wise. 

“A word from that land hath reached the oppressed 
one which in truth was the cause of wonder. His 
Highness the Mu'tamadu 'd-Dawla, Farhdd Mfrzd 1 , 
said concerning the imprisoned one that whereof the 

p. 105. repetition is not pleasing. This victim consorted 
very little with him or the like of him. So far as is 

1 Farhad MirzA was the uncle of the Shah. He died in 
1888. 


A traveller’s narrative. 


81 


recollected on [only]' two occasions did he visit 
Murgh-Mahalla in Shimfr&n 1 where was the abode of 
the oppressed one. On the first occasion he came 
one day in the afternoon, and on the second one 
Friday morning, returning nigh unto sundown. He 
knows and is conscious that he should not speak 
contrary to the truth. If one enter his presence let 
him repeat these words before him on behalf of the 
oppressed one:— ‘0 Prince! I ask justice and 
fairness from, your Highness concerning that which 
hath befallen this poor victim.’ Well is it for that 
soul whom the doubts of the perverse withhold not 
from the display of justice, and deprive not of the 
lights of the luminary of equity. 0 saints of God! p. 
at the end of our discourse voe enjoin on you once 
again chastity, faithfulness, godliness, sincerity, and 
purity. Lay aside the evil and adopt the good. This 
is that whereunto ye are commanded in the Book of 
God, the Knowing, the Wise. Well is it with those 
who practise [this injunction]. At this moment the 
pen crieth out, saying, ‘ 0 saints of God, regard the 
horizon of uprightness, and be quit, severed, and free 
from what is beside this. There is no strength and 
no power save in God.’” 

1 Sbimiran or Shimr£n (sometimes used in the plural, 
Shimranat) is the name applied generally to the villages and 
mansions situated on the lower slopes descending from Elburz 
which serve as summer residences to the wealthier inhabitants 
of Teheran. 

B. 


6 


82 A traveller’s narrative. 

In short, formerly in all provinces in Persia 
accounts and stories concerning this sect diverse 
and discordant, yea, incompatible with the character 
of the human race and opposed to the divine endow¬ 
ment, passed on the tongues and in the mouths of 
men and obtained notoriety. But when their prin- 
p. 107 . ciples acquired fixity and stability and their conduct 
and behaviour were known and appreciated, the veil 
of doubt and suspicion fell, the true character of this 
sect became clear and evident, and it reached the 
degree of certainty that their principles were unlike 
men’s fancies, and that their foundation differed from 
[the popular] opinion and estimate. In their conduct, 
action, morality, and demeanour was no place for 
objection ; the objection in Persia is to certain of the 
ideas and tenets of this sect. And from the indica¬ 
tions of various circumstances it hath been observed 
that the people have acquired belief and confidence 
in the trustworthiness, faithfulness, and godliness of 
this sect in all transactions. 

Let us return to our original topic. During the 
period of their sojourn in ‘Irfik these persons became 
notorious throughout the world. For exile resulted 
p. 108. in fame, in such wise that a great number of other 
parties sought alliance and union, and devised means 
of [acquiring] intimacy [with them]. But the chief 
of this sect, discovering the aims of each faction, acted 
with the utmost consistency, circumspection, and 


A TRAVELLERS xarrative. S3 

firmness. Reposing confidence in none, lie applied 
himself as far as possible to the admonition of each, 
inciting and urging them to good resolutions and 
aims beneficial to the state and the nation. And 
this conduct and behaviour of the chief acquired 
notoriety in 'Irak. 

So likewise during the period of their sojourn in 
Irak certain functionaries of foreign governments 
were desirous of intimacy, and sought friendly rela¬ 
tions [with them]: but the chief would not agree. 
Amongst other strange haps was this, that in Irak p. 109. 
certain of the Royal Family came to an understanding 
with these [foreign] governments, and. [induced] by 
promises and threats, conspired with them. But this 
sect unloosed their tongues in reproach and began to 
admonish them, saying. "What meanness is this, and 
what evident treason: that man should, for worldly 
advantages, personal profit, easy circumstances, or 
protection of life and property, cast himself into this 
great detriment and evident loss, and embark in a 
course of action which will conduce to the greatest 
abasement and involve the utmost infamy and dis¬ 
grace both here and hereafter! One can support any 
baseness save treason to one's country, and every sin 
admits of pardon and forgiveness save [that of] dis¬ 
honouring ones government and injuring one’s 
nation.' 5 And they imagined that they were acting 
patriotically, displaying sincerity and loyalty, and p. U0. 

6—2 


84 


A traveller’s narrative. 


accounting sacred the duties of fidelity; which noble 
aim they regarded as a moral obligation. So rumours 
of this were spread abroad through ‘Irdk-i-'Arab, and 
such as wished well to their country loosed their 
tongues in uttering thanks, expressing approval and 
respect. And it was supposed that these events would 
be represented in the Royal Presence; but after a 
while it became known that certain of the Sheykhs at 
the Supreme Shrines' who were in correspondence 
with the court, yea, even with the King, were in 
secret continually attributing to this sect strange 
affinities and relations, imagining that such attempts 
would conduce to favour at the Court and cause 


p. ill. advancement of [their] condition and rank. And 
since no one could speak freely on this matter at that 
court which is the pivot of justice, whilst just 
ministers aware [of the true state of the case] also 
regarded silence as their best policy, the ‘lhfAdenes- 


tion, through these misrepresentations anfdliness 
assumed gravity in Teher&n, and was £ lu , ^ 


exaggerated. But the consuls-general, being Cogni¬ 
zant of the truth, continued to act with moderation, 


until Mfrzd, Buzurg Khan of Kazvftr became consul- 


1 Kerbeli and Nejef. 

2 According to Subh-i-Ezel’s statement, Mirza Buzurg 
Khan became incensed against the Babis, partly because they 
would not consent to secure his goodwill by a bribe, partly 
because Beh&’u’ll&h took to wife the daughter of a merchant 
whom he wished to marry. At all events his enmity was such 


A traveller’s narrative. 


85 


general in Baghdad. Now since this person was 
wont to pass the greater portion of his time in a state 
of intoxication and was devoid of foresight, he be¬ 
came the accomplice and confederate of those Sheykhs 
in ‘Irdk, and girded up his loins stoutly to destroj' 
and demolish. Such power of description and 
[strength] of fingers as he possessed he employed in p.112. 
making representations and statements. Each day 
he secretly wrote a dispatch to Teher&n, made vows 
and compacts with the Sheykhs, and sent diplomatic 
notes to His Excellency the Ambassador-in-chief 1 [at 
Constantinople]. But since these statements and 
depositions had no basis or foundation, they were all 
postponed and adjourned; until at length these 
Sheykhs convened a meeting to consult with the 
[Consul-] General, assembled a number of learned 
doctors and great divines in the [mosque of the] ‘two 
Kdzims’ 2 (upon them be peace), and, having come to 

that he strove to incite the ‘Ulamd of Baghdad to declare a 
jihad or religious war against the Babis, and this, according to 
Subh-i-Ezel, they would have done, had not Namik Pasha, 
then governor of Baghdad, prevented them, saying, 1 These are 
not rebels, and you shall not kill them ’. 

1 Mirza Huseyn Khan was at this time Persian ambassador 
at Constantinople. 

2 ‘ The tombs of the ‘ two Kazinis ' (i.e. the seventh Imam, 

Mfisa Kazim, and the ninth Imam, Muhammad Taki) are 
situated about 3 miles N. of Baghdad, and constitute one of 
the principal places of pilgrimage of the Shi‘ites. Around them 
has grown up a considerable town, chiefly inhabited by Per¬ 
sians, known as Kdzimeyn.’ 


86 


A traveller’s narrative. 


an unanimous agreement, wrote to the divines of 
Kerbeld the exalted and Nejef the most noble, con¬ 
voking them all. They came, some knowing, others 
not knowing. Amongst the latter the illustrious and 
expert doctor, the noble and celebrated scholar, the 
113. seal of seekers after truth, Sheykh Murtazd', now 
departed and assoiled, who was the admitted chief of 
all, arrived without knowledge [of the matter in 
hand]. But, so soon as he was informed of their 
actual designs, he said, “I am not properly acquainted 
with the essential character of this sect, nor with the 

1 In the Epistle to the King of Persia (ulLL» ) Sheykh 
Murta?a is especially exempted from the condemnation pro¬ 
nounced against the majority of the Shi‘ite doctors, and held 
up as an example of a truly pious and God-fearing divine (see 
p. 129 infra). I was informed by Subh-i-Ezel that he not 
only refused to pronounce sentence against the Bahis or sanc¬ 
tion a jihad ’against them, but that he also withheld the Shah 
from persecuting the Sheykhis (concerning whom see Note E 
at end) saying, “ May it not become like the affair of the 

Babis!” The book called .UWI (Stories of Divines), 

published at Teher4n A.H. 1304, gives a brief account of 
Sheykh Murtaza, whose lectures, as it appears, the author of 
the work in question attended for a while. According to this 
account Sheykh Murtaza was a native of Shushtar, but spent 
the greater part of his life at Nejef, where, at the age of 80, he 
died and was buried. Neither the date of his birth nor that 

of his death is given. His works—not very numerous_ 

are mentioned, and his remarkable piety and learning highly 
praised. Indeed it is stated that after Sheykh Muhammad 
Hasan he was the most eminent of all the Shi‘ite doctors. 


A traveller’s narrative. 


87 


secret tenets and hidden theological doctrines of this 
community; neither have I hitherto witnessed or 
perceived in their demeanour or conduct anything at 
variance with the Perspicuous Book which would 
lead me to pronounce them infidels. Therefore hold 
me excused in this matter, and let him who regards 
it as his duty take action.” Now the design of the 
Sheykhs and the Consul was a sudden and general 
attack, but, by reason of the non-compliance of the 
departed Sheykli, this scheme proved abortive, re¬ 
sulting, indeed, only in shame and disappointment. 

So that concourse of Sheykhs, doctors, and common 
folk which had come from Kerbehi dispersed. P- Un¬ 

just at this time mischievous persons—[including] 
even certain dismissed ministers—endeavoured on all 
sides so to influence this sect that they might per¬ 
chance alter their course and conduct. From every 
quarter lying messages and disquieting reports con¬ 
tinually followed one another in uninterrupted and 
constant succession to the effect that the deliberate 
intention of the court of Persia was the eradication, 
suppression, annihilation, and destruction of this 
sect; that correspondence was continually being 
carried on with the local authorities; and that all 
[the Babis] in ‘Irak would shortly be delivered over 
with bound hands to Persia. But the Bfibis passed 
the time in calmness and silence, without in any way 
altering their behaviour and conduct. 


88 A traveller’s narrative. 

So when Mirzfi Bnzurg Khdn failed to effect and 
accomplish the designs of his heart by such actions 
also, he ili-advisedly fell to reflecting how he might 
p. 115. grieve and humiliate [the Bfibis]. Every day he 
sought some pretext for offering insult, aroused 
some disturbance and tumult, and raised up the 
banner of mischief, until the matter came nigh to 
culminating in the sudden outbreak of a riot, the 
lapse of the reins of control from the hand, and the 
precipitation of [men’s] hearts iuto disquietude 
and perturbation and [their] minds into anguish and 
agony. 

Now when [the Biibis] found themselves unable to 
treat this humour by any means (for, strive as they 
would, they were foiled and frustrated), and when 
they failed to find any remedy for this disorder or 
any fairness in this flower, they deliberated and hesi¬ 
tated for nine months, and at length a certain number 
of them, to stop further mischief, enrolled themselves 
as subjects of the Sublime Ottoman Government, that 
[thereby] they might assuage this tumult. By means 
p. 116 . of this device the mischief was allayed, and the consul 
withdrew his hand from molesting them; but he 
notified this occurrence to the Royal Court in a 
manner at variance with the facts and contrary to the 
truth, and, together with the confederate Sheykhs, 
applied himself in every way to devices for distracting 
the senses [of the Bdbts]. Finally, however, being 


A traveller’s narrative. 89 

dismissed, and overwhelmed with disaster, he became 
penitent and sorry. 

Let us proceed with our original topic. For 
eleven years and somewhat over, Beha’u’Mh abode 
in Trfik-i-‘Arab. The behaviour and conduct of the 
sect were such that [his] fame and renown increased. 

For he was manifest and apparent amongst men, 
consorted and associated with all parties, and would 
converse familiarly with doctors and scholars con¬ 
cerning the solution of difficult theological questions 
and the verification of the true sense of abstruse 
points of divinity. As is currently reported by p. 117. 
persons of every class, he used to please all, whether 
inhabitants or visitors, by his kindly intercourse and 
courteous address; and this sort of demeanour and 
conduct on his part led them to suspect sorcery and 
account him an adept in the occult sciences. 

During this period Mirzh Yahyfi remained con¬ 
cealed and hidden, continuing and abiding in his 
former conduct and behaviour, until, when the edict 
for the removal of Behfi’u’llfih from Baghdad 1 was 
issued by His Majesty the Ottoman monarch, Mirzfi 
Yahyd would neither quit nor accompany [him]: at 
one time he meditated setting out for India, at 
another, settling in Turkistfin 2 ; but, being unable to 

1 It would seem that the departure of the Babis from 
Baghdad took place during the summer of 1804. 

- PerhapB Turkistan is here intended to signify, not the 


90 


A traveller’s narrative. 


decide on either of these two plans, he finally, at his 
p. 118. own wish, set out before all in the garb of a dervish, 
in disguise and change of raiment, for Ivarkuk and 
Arbfl. Thence, by continuous advance, he reached 
Mosul, where, on the arrival of the main body, he took 
up his abode and station alongside their caravan 1 . 
And although throughout this journey the governors 
and officials observed the utmost consideration and 
respectfulness, while march and halt were alike 
dignified and honourable, nevertheless was he always 
concealed in change of raiment, and acted cautiously, 
on the idea that some act of aggression was likely to 
occur. 

In this fashion did they reach Constantinople, 
where they were appointed quarters in a guest-house 
on the part of the glorious Ottoman monarchy. And 
at first the utmost attention was paid to them in 
p. 119. every w T ay. On the third day, because of the strait- 
ness of their quarters and the greatness of their 

country properly so called, but merely the country of the 
Turks, in which case we should rather translate 1 remaining in 
Turkey.’ 

1 Mirza Yahya, according to his own account, went from 
Baghdad to Karkdk in 8 days; thence to Mosul in 4 days; thence 
to Diydr Bekr in 20 days ; thence to Kharpfit in 7 or 8 days. 
From Kharpfit he went to Sivfis, thence to Samsfin, and thence 
by sea to Constantinople. The whole journey from Baghdad 
to Constantinople, including halts, occupied between three and 
four months. By Nabil also the duration of this exodus is 
stated as four months (B. ii. pp. 984, 987. v. 8). 


a traveller’s narrative. 91 

numbers, they migrated and moved to another house. 
Certain of the nobles came to see and converse with 
them, and these, as is related, behaved with modera¬ 
tion. Notwithstanding that many in their assemblies 
and gatherings continued to condemn and vilify 
them, saying, “ This sect are a mischief to all the 
world and destructive of treaties and covenants; they 
are a source of trouble and baleful to all lands ; they 
have kindled a fire and consumed the earth; and 
though they be outwardly fair-seeming yet are they 
deserving of every chastisement and punishment,” 
yet still the Bhbfs continued to conduct themselves 
with patience, calmness, deliberation, and constancy, 
so that they did not, even in self-defence, importune 
[the occupants of] high places or frequent the houses 
of any of the magnates of that kingdom. Whomso¬ 
ever amongst the great he [Beha] interviewed on his p. 120. 
own account, they met, and no word save of sciences 
and arts passed between them; until certain noble¬ 
men sought to guide him, and loosed their tongues 
in friendly counsel, saying, “ To appeal, to state your 
case, and to demand justice is a measure demanded 
by custom.” He replied in answer, “Pursuing the 
path of obedience to the King’s command we have 
come to this country. Beyond this we neither had 
nor have any aim or desire that we should appeal and 
cause trouble. What is [now] hidden behind the 
veil of destiny will in the future become manifest. 


92 A traveller's narrative. 

There neither has been nor is any necessity for 
supplication and importunity. If the enlightened- 
minded leaders [of your nation] be wise and diligent, 
they will certainly make enquiry, and acquaint them¬ 
selves with the true state of the case; if not, then 
p. 121. [their] attainment of the truth is impracticable and 
impossible. Under these circumstances what need is 
there for importuning statesmen and supplicating 
ministers of the Court? We are free from every 
anxiety, and ready and prepared for the things 
predestined to us. ‘Say, all is from God 11 is a sound 
and sufficient argument, and ‘ If God touchetli thee 
with a hurt there is no dispeller thereof save Him 2 ’ is 
a healing medicine.” 

After some months a royal edict was promulgated 
appointing Adrianople in the district of Roumelia as 
their place of abode and residence. To that city the 
Bdbfs, accompanied by [Turkish] officers, proceeded 
all together, and there they made their home and 
habitation. According to statements heard from 
sundry travellers and from certain great and learned 
men of that city, they behaved and conducted them¬ 
selves there also in such wise that the inhabitants of 
the district and the government officials used to 
p. 122 . eulogize them, and all used to shew them respect 
and deference. In short, since Beha u’lhlh was wont 

1 Kur’an, iv, 80. 

2 Kur’an, vi, 17; x, 107. 


A traveller’s narrative. 


93 


to hold intercourse with the doctors, scholars, mag¬ 
nates, and nobles, [thereby] obtaining fame and 
celebrity throughout Roumelia, the materials of 
comfort were gathered together, neither fear nor 
dread remained, they reposed on the couch of ease, 
and passed their time in quietude, when one Seyyid 
Muhammad’ by name, of Isfahan, one of the followers 

1 Hajf Seyyid Muhammad Isfahan! was, together with his 
nephew Mirza Itiza-Kuli, amongst the EzelU (followers of 
Mirzd Y'ahya, Subh-i-Ezel) killed at Acre by some of Beha’s 
followers. (See B. i. p. 517). His death is evidently alluded to 
in a passage of the u-oll addressed to Mirza Yahyi which 

runs as follows:—dfA u»tAYl £_•> jLlu. t Js 

^1 tJljl Lw ^ il) 09 OH jJfLsdl Op. 

JU'I j iJL, j jl i)Y^« jAs 01 ) illL- 0^ ) 

^ *ool j-a ,y-fUI 0“ cf J ^ JP o^Yl ^tYl $ 

,5ol Lfli j! jl <01 0^ < — f*- £i-<c< ^ 4-LA ,_)& 13 j *I 

<po9cll 01 till ^<oUI j' U fl ol l I <u)l <_iU 0 s Ulnfl 1° < ^ j 

,Llj 0* jB * 1 *»l tllUpl ubv V J <01 <^-^J <Io»-Yl jlaZ 

2 *<■<'! ooi 01 *01 &>■ iin^<3—■ toil j II ys> Yi <*JI Y oxc ^ 

0° 01 Oa-I 09 Op* f* a y. <o)l ^ ilo It j 01 A* *? ^ol 01 

^I iXj 01 O"0— tip ^e5v” ail htoA UAU. <aJI ja- jb Ijl yijil 

^ j^yi ^,^*ii v 1 / 11 

“ Say, ‘ 0 Source of Perversion, cease closing thy eyes; then 


94 


A traveller’s narrative. 


[of the B&b], laid the foundations of intimacy and 
familiarity with Mi'rzd Yahy. 4 , and [thereby] became 
the cause of vexation and trouble. In other 
words, he commenced a secret intrigue and fell to 
tempting Mirz 4 Yahyd, saying, “The fame of this 
sect hath risen high in the world, and their name 
hath become noble: neither dread nor danger re- 
maineth, nor is there any fear or [need for] caution 
123. before you. Cease, then, to follow, that thou mayest 
be followed by the world; and come out from amongst 
adherents, that thou mayest become celebrated 

confess to the truth amongst mankind. By God, my tears 
have flowed over my cheeks for that I behold thee advancing 
toward thy lust and turning aside from Him who created thee 
and fashioned thee. Remember the favour of thy master when 
we brought thee up during the nights and days for the service 
of the Religion. Fear God, and be of those who repent. Grant 
that thine affair is dubious unto men: is it dubious unto thy¬ 
self ? Fear God: then remember when thou didst stand before 
the Throne and write what we did propose to thee of the verses 
of God, the Protecting, the Powerful, the Mighty. Beware lest 
jealousy withhold thee from the shore of [the Divine] Unity: 
turn unto Him, and fear not because of thy deeds: verily He 
pardoneth whom He pleaseth by a favour on His part: there is 
no God but Him, the Forgiving, the Kind. Verily we do but 
advise thee for the sake of God: if thou advancest, it is for 
thyself; and if thou turnest aside, verily thy Lord needeth not 
thee, nor such as follow thee in evident error. God hath taken 
away him who led thee astray : return theu unto Him humble 
contrite, abased: verily He will put away from thee thy sins : 
verily thy Lord He is the Repenter, the Mighty, the Mer¬ 
ciful.”’ 


A traveller’s narrative. 


95 


throughout the horizons.” Mfrza Yahyd, too, through 
lack of reflection and thought as to consequences, and 
want of experience, became enamoured of his words 
and befooled by his conduct. This one was [like] 
the sucking child, and that one became as the much- 
prized breast. At all events, how much soever some 
of the chiefs of the sect wrote admonitions and 
pointed out to him the path of discretion saying, 
“ For many a year hast thou been nurtured in thy 
brother’s arms and hast reposed on the pillow of 
ease and gladness; what thoughts are these which 
are the results of madness ? Be not beguiled by this 
empty name, 1 which, out of regard for certain con- 

1 The name alluded to is of course that of Ezel (the Eternal) 
bestowed on Mirza Yahya by the B&b. Gohineau (p. 277) calls 
him Hazrat-i-Ezel (‘ l’Altesse Eternelle ’), but his correct desig¬ 
nation, that which he himself adopts, and that whereby he is 
everywhere known, is Snbh-i-Ezel (‘the Morning of Eternity’). 
The epistles addressed to him by the Bab (of some of which 
copies are in my possession) invoke him either as ‘Ismu’l- 
Ezel’ (‘Name of the Eternal’) or ‘ Ismu’l-Wahid’ (‘Name of 
the One ’)—for the latter and the reason of its employment, see 
B. ii. 996-997. According to his own statement he was the 
fourth in the Babi hierarchy (oe-lj) of 19. The first was of 
course the Bah himself; next in rank was Mulla Muhammad 
‘All Barfurushi (Jendb-i-Kuddus) ; then Mulla Huseyn of Bush- 
raweyh (Jendb-i-Bdbu'l-Bdb)-, then Mirza Yahya (Subh-i-Ezel). 
After the fall of Sheykh Tabarsi and the death of the two 
‘Letters’ who intervened betw’een him and the Bab, he attained 
the second place in the hierarchy, and, on the Bab’s death, 
became the recognized chief of the sect. The ‘ considerations ’ 


96 


A traveller’s narrative. 


siderations and as a matter of expediency, was 
bestowed [upon thee]; neither seek to be censured by 
the community. Thy rank and worth depend on a 
124. word 1 , and thine exaltation and elevation were for a 


which, according to the somewhat different account of our his¬ 
torian, rendered the recognition ‘ expedient ’ will be seen on 
pp. 62—63 above. 

1 A passage in the Z. 3 1 illustrates this expression. It 
runs as follows:—jl j\ p-sl? jCbS jT I 

i ijl—J ^ J ^ J 3 df’J 0 d>J >A! ^ 

*£Ll l» ^*>3 tj* &J 9 *-'. 3 dr* ^ jPp. I* 3 
2 tU*J Jujloj pJdb $ C ^' { j9 jy U I 

(jT y Jl> J Jllj SCS uif<« £11» £>l jLil 


^Ja*> jp dr* Cjy’S^A t a j9k 3> ji' o^hU jl»o-l Jjl jljfla a>- ctJJLi Lc5"** 
ji)Lo*vl jl l) i_aj Lji^" dri' 4 .? A!^.)jj| y> ^ 

c... ^ ^ ^ 

“Had they reflected, they would not on my second mani¬ 
festation have been veiled from my Beauty by a Name amongst 
my Names. This is the state of these men and their rank and 
station! Cease to mention them and what flows from their 
pens and comes forth from their mouths. Although I com¬ 
manded all my servants in all the tablets of the BeySn not to 
continue heedless of my subsequent manifestation or be veiled 
by the veils of Names and signs from the Lord of Attributes, 
consider now, not satisfied with being veiled, liow many stones 
of doubt they cast without cessation or interruption at the 
tree of my hidden Glory! And even this did not suffice, till a 


A TRAVELLER’S narrative. 


97 


protection and a consideration,” yet still, the more 
they admonished him, the less did it affect him; and 
how much soever they would direct him, he continued 
to account opposition as identical with advantage. 
Afterwards, too, the fire of greed and avarice was 
kindled, and although there was no sort of need, 
their circumstances being easy in the extreme, they 
fell to thinking of salary and stipend, and certain 
of the women dependent on Mlrzd Yahy4 went to the 
[governor’s] palace and craved assistance and charity. 
So when Behh’u’llhh beheld such conduct and 
behaviour on his part he dismissed and drove away 
both [him and Seyyid Muhammad] from himself. 

Then Seyyid Muhammad set out for Constantinople 
to get his stipend, and opened the door of suffering. 
According to the account given, this matter caused 

Name amongst my Names, whom I created by a loord, and on 
whom I bestowed life with a breath, arose in war against my 
Beauty .” I have already pointed out in another place (B. ii. 
949—953) the important position occupied by the epistle above 
cited, since it appears to be one of the earliest of Beha’s 
writings wherein be distinctly claims to be a new 1 manifesta¬ 
tion ’ of the divinity, and it, more than any other writing 
which I have seen, throws light on that period of conflict and 
travail in the Babi chnrch which made so memorable the latter 
days of the Adrianople period and marked a new development 
in the short but eventful history of the new faith. When I 
wrote the passage above referred to, I believed that the only 
copy of this epistle in Europe was in my possession, but I have 
since learned from Baron Rosen that another copy is included 
in his own library at St Petersburg. 

B. 7 


98 A traveller’s narrative. 

p. 125. the greatest sorrow and brought about cessation of 
intercourse. In Constantinople, moreover, he pre¬ 
sumptuously set afloat certain reports, asserting, 
amongst other things, that the notable personage 
who had come from ‘Irdk was MlrzA YahyL Sundry 
individuals, perceiving that herein was excellent 
material for mischief-making and a means for the 
promotion of mutiny, ostensibly supported and ap¬ 
plauded him, and stimulated and incited him, saying, 
“You are really the chief support and acknowledged 
successor: act with authority, in order that grace and 
blessing may become apparent. The waveless sea 
hath no sound, and the cloud without thunder raineth 
no rain.” By such speech, then, was that unfortunate 
man entrapped into his course of action, and led to 
utter vain words which caused the disturbance of 
[men’s] thoughts. Little by little those who were 

p. 126 . wont to incite and encourage began without exception 
to utter violent denunciations in every nook and 
corner, nay in the court itself, saying, “The B£bls 
say thus, and expound in this wise: [their] behaviour 
is such, and [their] speech so-and-so.” Such mischief¬ 
making and plots caused matters to become misap¬ 
prehended, and furthermore certain schemes got afloat 
which were regarded as necessary measures of self¬ 
protection ; the expediency of banishing the Bdbls 
came under consideration ; and all of a sudden an 
order came, and Beh^’u’llAh was removed from 


a traveller’s narrative. 


99 


Roumelia; nor was it known for what purpose or 
whither they would bear him away 1 . Diverse ac- 

1 It is difficult amidst the conflicting statements of the two 
parties and the silence of disinterested historians to discover 
precisely what were the causes which led to the removal of the 
Babis from Adrianople. Further investigation inclines me to 
abandon the view (B. i. p. 515) that overt acts of hostility be¬ 
tween the two factions made it necessary to separate them, for 
Mirza Yahya appears to have been almost without supporters 
at Adrianople, so that, according to his own account, he and 
his little boy were compelled to go themselves to the market to 
buy their daily food. His version of the events which led the 
Turkish government to change their place of exile is this:— 
that two of the followers of Beha set out from Adrianople for 
Constantinople, ostensibly to sell horses, but really to carry 
controversial books. The Pasha of Adrianople, being apprized 
of their object, telegraphed to the first halting-place on the 
road which they had to traverse and caused them to be arrested. 
The followers of Beha, believing that Mirza Yahya had given 
information to the Pasha, retaliated by lodging information 
against Aka Jan Beg, one of Mirzd Yahya’s followers then in 
Constantinople—the same who was afterwards killed in Acre 
(B. i. 517)—who was at this time, though a Persian, serving 
in the Turkish artillery. Aka Jan Beg had in bis possession 
certain Babi books destined for Baghdad. Unable to find 
means for transporting them thither and apparently warned 
in some way of impending danger, he was contemplating the 
advisability of destroying them by burying them or throwing 
them into the sea when he was arrested. He appears to have 
been examined hoth by the Turkish authorities and the repre¬ 
sentatives of the Persian government in Constantinople, parti¬ 
cularly by a certain Mirza Ahmad then attached to the Persian 
legation. Ak£ Jan Beg—an honest straightforward man in¬ 
capable of concealing the truth by falsehood—frankly admitted 
his connection with “ the people at Adrianople,” his belief in 

7—2 


100 


A traveller’s narrative. 


counts were current in [men’s] mouths, and many 
exaggerations were heard [to the effect] that there was 
no hope of deliverance. 

Now all those persons who were with him with one 
accord entreated and insisted that they should [be per¬ 
mitted to] accompany him, and, how much soever the 
p. 127 . government admonished and forbade them, it was 
fruitless. Finally one Hajf .Ja‘far 1 by name was moved 

the B4bi doctrines, and the existence of certain of their hooks 
in his possession. These books were thereupon seized and 
laid before the Sheykhu ’1-Islam, who, it would seem, hesitated 
to pronounce sentence of heresy against their author, but 
desired to see him himself. However in this wish he was not 
gratified, for he was soon after dismissed, and the books passed 
into the hands of another Sheykhu T-Islam, who, after carefully 
examining them, declared that they did not contain actual 
heresy, although they had a very heretical look. Aka Jan 
Beg, however, was, in spite of his former good services to the 
Turkish government (he had, I believe, distinguished himself 
at the recapture of Damascus), dismissed the army and im¬ 
prisoned for four and a half months. From this imprisonment 
he went forth with hair and beard whitened by premature 
old age an exile to Acre, there shortly to meet with a violent 
death. Whatever may be the respective values of these two 
accounts, they both point to this, that the detection of some 
fresh attempt at propagandism on the part of the Babis im¬ 
pelled the Turkish government to change their place of exile 
once more. 

1 Haji Muhammad Ja'far of Tabriz is twice referred to, 
though not by name, in my first paper on the Babis; first at 
p. 493, where he is simply mentioned as 1 a Persian merchant 
belonging to the sect’ to whom two Bdbi missionaries were 
forbidden to speak during their voyage to Alexandria; and 


A traveller’s narrative. 


101 


to lamentation, and with his own hand cut his throat. 
When the government beheld it thus, it gave per¬ 
mission to all of them to accompany him, conveyed 
them from Adrianople to the sea-shove 1 , and thence 
transported them to Acre 2 . Mirzh Yahyd they sent 
in like manner to Famagusta 3 . 

again at p. 516, where the episode here related is hriefly men¬ 
tioned. Space does not allow me to do more than refer to 
the first incident here. As regards the second it is, as 1 hare 
already pointed out (B. ii. p. 962), alluded to in the Epistle 
from Beha known as j Cjl- I here quote the passage in 

the original :—a-r- a^ a-a; »La-Vl u>.l t5A y 

j I Jyj .uaX.^-1 U I ja V.. 1 fi a, la,..,, y L I ja <vl L>- 

# ^ji'l Jfl iJ J AjjiJ \j\jJM “ And one from amongst 

the Friends sacrificed himself for myself, and cut his throat with 
his own hand for the love of God. This is that [the like of ] which 
tee have not heard from former ages. This is that which God 
hath set apart for this dispensation as a shewing forth of His 
Power: verily He is the Powerful, the Mighty .” It appears 
that the Turkish government at first intended to send only 
Behj£ and his family to Acre, and to give his followers pass¬ 
ports and money to return to their homes, hut the unforeseen 
determination of the Beha’is not to be separated from their 
chief compelled it to change its plans. 

1 Gallipoli was the port whence they embarked. It seems 
that they were first taken direct to Alexandria, and there, 
without being permitted to land, transhipped into vessels 
bound for their respective places of exile. 

2 They arrived at Acre on August 31st, 1868 (see B. i. p. 526, 
and B. ii. pp. 984 and 988, v. 12). 

3 See Note W at end. An official document, dated De- 


102 


A traveller’s narrative. 


' During the latter days [passed] in Adrianople 
BehA’u’lMh composed a detailed epistle setting forth 
all matters clearly and minutely. He unfolded and 
expounded the main principles of the sect, and made 
clear and plain its ethics, manners, course, and mode 
of conduct: he treated certain political questions in 
detail, and adduced sundry proofs of his truthful¬ 
ness: he declared the good intent, loyalty, and 
p. 128. sincerity of the sect, and wrote some fragments of 
prayers, some in Persian, but the greater part in 
Arabic. He then placed it in a packet and adorned 
its address with the royal name of His Majesty the 
King of Persia, and wrote [on it] that some person 
pure of heart and pure of life, dedicated to God, and 
prepared for martyr-sacrifice, must, with perfect 
resignation and willingness, convey this epistle into 
the presence of the King. A youth named Mirzh 
Badl“, a native of Khurdshn, took the epistle, and 

cember 9th, 1881, from the MuhdsebejVs (Accountant’s) office in 
Cyprus, and embodying information relative to the Babl exiles 
required by the Receiver General, states that the original 
fermdn of banishment cannot be found, but that “ from an 
unofficial copy of the fermdn received at the time of banish¬ 
ment of these exiles it appears that the date of their banish¬ 
ment is 5th Rabi‘ul-Akhir, 1285 a.h. (20th July, 1868 Am.).” 
According to other documents, the date of the arrival in the 
island of Subli-i-Ezel and those with him was August 20th. 

1 Cf. B. ii. pp. 956-957. I have not been able to learn the 
proper name of Mirza Badi‘. His father was named H&ji 
‘Abdu T-Majid. After the martyrdom of his son he visited 


a traveller's narrative. 


103 


hastened toward the presence of His Majesty the 
King. The Royal Train had its abode and station 
outside Teherhn, so he took his stand alone on a rock 
in a place far off but opposite to the Royal Pavilion, 
and awaited day and night the passing of the Royal p. 129. 
escort or the attainment of admission into the Im¬ 
perial Presence. Three days did he pass thus in a 
state of fasting and vigilance: an emaciated body and 
enfeebled spirit remained. On the fourth day the 

Acre, and on one occasion during this visit Beha addressed him 
in these strange words—£j j* i>J 

“ Make this lamp-spilt oil an offering for the Imdmzade f which, 
as 1 understand, are applied proverbially to oue who offers up 
that which has become of little value to him, as the oil which 
has been upset from the lamp. Some time afterwards he suf¬ 
fered martyrdom in Khurasan, and it was this which Beha’s 
words were believed to have shadowed forth. For by the death 
of his son in whom his hopes centred had Haji ‘Abdu 'l-Majid’s 
life lost its sweetness for him and become a thing of little 
worth, and this life thus marred did he offer up. Mirza Badi‘ 
was not more than 20 or 21 years of age. He had left Acre 
after accomplishing his pilgrimage thither when news reached 
him of the letter to be carried to Teheran and of the conditions 
under which it must be taken. These were, that the bearer 
must refrain from speaking to or visiting any of his co-reli¬ 
gionists during the whole journey, proceed directly and alone 
to Teheran, and give the letter himself into the hands of the 
king. The letter was written on one side of a large sheet of 
paper with the conditions incumbent on the bearer inscribed 
on the back. The text of these conditions, published by 
Rosen, will appear in vol. vi. of the Collections Scientifiques, 
dc., p. 192-193. 


104 a traveller's narrative. 

Royal Personage was examining all quarters and 
directions with a telescope when suddenly his glance 
fell on this man who was seated in the most respect¬ 
ful attitude on a rock. It was inferred from the 
indications [perceived] that he must certainly have 
thanks [to offer], or some complaint or demand for 
redress and justice [to prefer]. [The King] com¬ 
manded one of those in attendance at the court to 
enquire into the circumstances of this youth. On 
interrogation [it was found that] he carried a letter 
which he desired to convey with his own hand into 
the Royal Presence. On receiving permission to 
p. 130. approach, he cried out before the pavilion with a 
dignity, composure, and respectfulness surpassing de¬ 
scription, and in a loud voice, “0 King, I have come 
unto thee from Sheba with a weighty message'!” [The 
King] commanded to take the letter and arrest the 
bearer. His Majesty the King wished to act with 
deliberation and desired to discover the truth, but 
those who were present before him loosed their 
tongues in violent reprehension, saying, “This person 
has shewn great presumption and amazing audacity, 
for he hath without fear or dread brought the letter 
of him against whom all peoples are angered, of him 
who is banished to Bulgaria and Sclavonia, into the 

1 Cf. Kur’an, xxvii, 22, where, however, the words addressed 
to Solomon by the hoopoe differ slightly from those uttered by 
Mirza Bad! ‘. 


A TRAVELLER > NARRATIVE 


i: > 


preseioe of the Kmc. If so be ibar be de it* ii- 

SXSXIjiy A i;x^T'C*X.5* TXXI^iXIrXT XXcTe TL. C*r 

hvjvaae of ?bis jTtaj rjfSTgiri? S rbe ---'- 


or iRr roarr sjsjsoci jisxr Re Rrlt sere - --•«.-- 
nes *ad «oaei ibe Tccirct. As ibe drsr Tom-enr ; 
TbfT ST^fSed TRr l R.y.I. RR-d IRON. " AIaaS 

kr-ewn bbr cbber ftaesds xhsr bhcc rRRTtsr re dejbvevc. 


cvn awrcici; rcr ds hmez.?. ssd rake rbr ion- 

r^i-*2»vi ^Tiv'u —bSJ"rtNj c^^Oi I*tr If.:_ *j_ t 

XCiTXjirXT C’l XX t* cJjSZH &XuI XXt -S^rXXBS? l * XXr* Jl. 


Bex. lonere, hrazai axi tosxi-zXX ^ as xif-v zii:* 

«rhe*x x:x: '.life ex^xxxxxrs cx xis left axi 
csl iiis ifxxx aid he drill b:xxd lx friers si: 

CLiillj r*rlT$SH XI e >~®~iAT*X TtXrCT Xl’r^rtSlrSS all 

vVIIX.'^IXr - SIu Xlrl Sur*" ail Xr^SXTC'JrC XXX- TxiS 

ricx^xr&rx I sex! f:x. aid r:«xxd 's'cnij :c ^:xtex> 

XiiiXICX^ i;-T Xr* 'R'aS Sfc^aitrO "WXtX ^OlufXX XXXXXTT 
axx snaixe ?x r xiissit cirss.. n ihl*c*>i xc^zixaiii. 

A it 'srbeR His Ms'esTT rbe H : - - bad Tensed r. 
eeram passages and rerecie reg-issri if rbe Kneca 
cs TX'f* cX*i>xx Xr in xx a: "R xa~ XSI 

xsiex ria^e aid x^iiresrei rexrri recall xis 
cvr*xriSeJS xax ussxj ax*i m ixto excdU’i a 

S^TSTc* TXXI> 111 fXX It 15 r^cX XrxatcX XXat X~ ailt 

xxn^ IVrtx axT cxe xcxisx cxe is hit tie 


10G A traveller’s narrative. 

channel of correspondence?” Then the Royal Com¬ 
mand was issued that their Reverences the learned 
doctors and honourable and accomplished divines 
should write a reply to that epistle. But when the 
most expert doctors of the caprital became aware of 
the contents of the letter they ordained:—“That this 
person, without regarding [the fact] that he is at 
variance with the Perspicuous Religion, is a meddler 
with custom and creed, and a troubler of kings and 
p. 133 . emperors. Therefore to eradicate, subdue, repress, 
and repel [this sect] is one of the requirements of the 
Well-established Path', and indeed the chief of obli¬ 
gations.” 

This answer was not approved before the [Royal] 
Presence, for the contents of this epistle had no 
obvious discordance with the Law or with reason, 
and did not meddle with political or administrative 
matters, nor interfere with or attack the Throne of 
Sovereignty. They ought, therefore, to have dis¬ 
cussed the real points at issue, and to have written 
clearly and explicitly such an answer as would have 
caused the disappearance of doubts and the solution 
of difficulties, and would have become a fulcrum for 
discussion to all. 

Now of this epistle sundry passages shall be set 
forth in writing to conduce to a better understanding 
[of the matter] by all people. At the beginning of 
1 The religion of Islam. Cf. Kur’an, v, 52. 


a traveller’s narrative. 107 

the epistle was a striking passage in the Arabic 
language [treating] of questions of faith and assurance; p. 134. 
the sacrifice of life in the way of the Beloved; the 
state of resignation and contentment; the multiplicity 
of misfortunes, calamities, hardships, and afflictions; 
the falling under suspicion of seditiousness through 
the machinations of foes; the establishment of his 
innocence in the presence of His Majesty the King; 
the repudiation of seditious persons and disavowal of 
the rebellious party; the conditions of sincere belief 
in the verses of the Kur’an; the needfulness of 
godly virtues, distinction from all other creatures in 
this transitory abode, obedience to the command¬ 
ments, and avoidance of things prohibited; the evi¬ 
dence of divine support in the affair of the BAb; the 
inability of whosoever is upon the earth to with¬ 
stand a heavenly thing; his own awakening at the 
divine afflux, and his falling thereby into unbounded 
calamities; his acquisition of the divine gift, his P-135. 
participation in spiritual God-given grace, and his 
illumination with immediate knowledge without study; 
the excusableness of his [efforts for the] admonition 
of mankind, their direction toward the attainment of 
human perfections, and their enkindlement with the 
fire of divine love; encouragements to the directing 
of energy towards the attainment of a state greater 
than the degree of earthly sovereignty; eloquent 
prayers [written] in the utmost self-abasement, devo- 


108 


A traveller’s narrative. 


tion, and humility; and the like of this. Afterwards 
he discussed [other] matters in the Persian language. 
And the form of it is this 1 : 

“ 0 God, this is a letter which I wish to send to 
the King; and Thou knowest that I have not desired 

1 This letter to the Shah of Persia I discussed briefly in 
my second paper on the Babis (pp. 954—960). Therein I 
expressed a doubt as to whether another letter, addressed in 
part to the King of Persia, which had been minutely described 
by Baron Rosen (MSS. Arabes, p. 191 et seq.), was to be 
attributed to Beha. I am now convinced, however, both by 
Baron Rosen’s reasonings aud my own further enquiries, that 
I was wrong. However we may account for the undoubted 
difference of tone between the two letters—a difference marked 
and striking—there is no doubt that both of them emanated 
from the pen of Beh&. Baron Rosen is about to publish not 
only the letter to the King of Persia and the other 1 Epistles to 

the Kings ’ but the whole of the j£Tj> of which (though, 

as it would seem, originally written separately) they now form 
a part. To the publication of Baron Rosen’s edition of these 
Epistles (which will appear in the sixth volume of the 
Collections Scientifiques de V Inst it at des Langues Orientales of 
St. Petersburg) all interested in the elucidation of Babi 
doctrine and history must look forward anxiously. Baron 
Rosen has kindly continued to forward to me the proof-sheets 
of his work as they are printed off, and, therefore, knowing as 
I do that in a short while a reliable text of this epistle will be 
available to students, I have not thought it necessary, as I 
might otherwise have done, to mention in my notes all the 
variants from the present text presented by another ms. which 
I obtained in Kirman. The variants presented by the Kirman 
ms. (henceforth denoted by K.) are numerous; in one page of 
25 lines there are no less than 32. As a rule the readings of 


A traveller’s narrative. 


109 


aught of him save the display of his justice to Thy 
people, and the shewing forth of his favours to the 
dwellers in Thy Kingdom. And verily, by my soul, I 
have not desired aught save what Thou hast desired, 
neither, by Thy Might, do I desire aught save what 
Thou desirest. Perish that being which desireth of p. 136. 
Thee aught save Thyself! And, by Thy Glory, Thy 
good pleasure is the limit of my hope, and Thy Will 
the extremity of my desire! Be merciful then, 0 God, 
to this poor [ soul ] ivho hath caught hold of the skirt of 
Thy richness, and to this humble \suppliant\ who calleth 
on Thee, for Thou art indeed the Mighty, the Great. 

Help, 0 God, Ilis Majesty the King to execute Thy 
laws amongst Thy servants and to shew forth Thy 
justice amidst Thy creatures, that he may rule over 
this sect as he ruleth over those who are beside them. 

Verily Thou art the Potent, the Mighty, the Wise. 

the present text are preferable, but not always; e.g. in several 
cases what is in K. a rhyming clause is altered here to one not 
rhyming. But it is the omissions of the present text that are 
most significant, inasmuch as they often consist of clauses 
which either give a greater force and precision to the passages 
wherein they occur, or else imply in a more unequivocal 
manner the position claimed by the writer. Such divergences 
between the two texts—whether it be a question of omission or 
alteration—will be noted at the foot of each page as they occur, 
but only in English. As regards the Arabic exordium (which 
in K. occupies 5 pages of the 17 filled by the whole epistle) a 
translation of it (based on the text of K.) will be found in 
Note X at end. 


110 


A TRAVELLER’S NARRATIVE. 


“Agreeably to the permission and consent of the 
King of the age, this servant turned from the place of 
the Royal Throne' toward Trak-i-‘Arab, and in that 
land abode twelve years. During the period of [his] 
sojourn [there] no description of his condition was 
p. 137. laid before the Royal Presence, neither did any 
representation go to foreign states. Relying upon 
God did he abide in that land, until a certain func¬ 
tionary 2 came to ‘Irak, who, on his arrival, fell to 
designing the affliction of a company of poor unfortu¬ 
nates. Every day, beguiled by certain of the doctors 
of Persia, he persecuted these servants; although 
nothing prejudicial to Church or State, or at variance 
with the principles and customs of their country-men 
had been observed in them. So this servant [was 
moved] by this reflection:—‘ May it not be that by 
reason of the deeds of the transgressors some action 
at variance with the world-ordering counsel of the 
King should be engendered! ’ Therefore was an 
epitome [of the matter] addressed to Mlrzh Sah'd 
Khhn 3 , the Minister for Foreign Affairs, that he might 

1 Teheran. Cf. p. 54 supra. 

2 Evidently Mirza Buzurg Khan of Kazvin. See above, 
p. 84 et seq. 

3 It was at the hands of this minister and his myrmidons 
that Mulla Huseyn of Khurasan (who, with Aka Muhammad 
of Isfahan, had been entrusted with the conveyance of the 
Bab’s remains from Tabriz to Teheran) met his death in 
August 1852. See Note T at end. 


A traveller’s narrative. 


Ill 


submit it to the [Royal] Presence, and that it might 
be done according to that which the Royal command p- 138. 
might promulgate. A long while elapsed, and no 
command was issued; until matters reached such a 
state that it was to be feared that sedition might 
suddenly break out and the blood of many be shed. 

Of necessity, for the protection of the servants of 
God, a certain number [of the Bdbfs] appealed to the 
governor of Tr&k 1 . If [the King] will consider what 
has happened with just regard, it will become clear in 
the mirror of his luminous heart that what occurred 
was [done] from considerations of expediency, and 
that there was apparently no resource save this. The 
Royal Personage can bear witness and testify to this, 
that in whatever land there were some few of this 
sect the fire of war and conflict was wont to be 
kindled by reason of the aggression of certain 
governors. But this transient one after his arrival 
in ‘Irak withheld all ffom sedition and strife; and the p. 139. 
witness of this servant is his action, for all are aware 
and will testify that the multitude of this faction in 


1 i.e. the Turkish governor of Baghdad and ‘ Irak-i-‘Arab, 
probably the same Namik Pasha mentioned in the third line of 
the foot-notes on p. 84. In this passage it is explained to the 
King that the Babis were compelled to enrol themselves as 
subjects of the Ottoman Empire in order to escape the malice 
of the Persians, especially that of Mirza Buzurg-Khan the 
Persian Consul at Baghdad. 


112 


A traveller’s narrative. 


Persia at that time 1 was more than [it had been] 
before, yet, notwithstanding this, none transgressed 
his proper bounds nor assailed any one. It is nigh 
on fifteen years 2 3 that all continue tranquil, looking 
unto God and relying on Him, and bear patiently 
what hath come upon them, casting it on God. And 
after the arrival of this servant in this city which is 
called Adrianople certain of this community enquired 
concerning the meaning of ‘victory V Diverse an¬ 
swers were sent in reply, one of which answers will be 
submitted on this page, so that it may become clear 
p. 140. before the [Royal] Presence that this servant hath in 
view naught save peace and reform. And if some of 
the divine favours, which, without merit [on my part], 
have been graciously bestowed [on me], do not become 
evident and apparent, this much [at least] will be 
known, that [God], in [His] abounding grace and 

1 i.e. at the time Bella was in Baghdad (a.d. 1853—1864). 
K. reads here “ that the multitude of this faction was more in 
‘Irak than in all [other] countries.” 

2 Taking the attempt on the Shah’s life in August 1852 as 
the last act hostile to the Persian government for which the 
Babis can he held in any way responsible, full 16 solar years 
must have elapsed between that date and the composition—or 
at any rate the completion—of this epistle, since allusion is 
made in it to the impending banishment to Acre, which did not 
occur till August 1868. 

3 K. reads “certain of the people of ‘Irak and elsewhere 
asked concerning the meaning of the ‘victory’ which hath been 
revealed in the Books of God. ” 


A traveller’s narrative. 


113 


’undeserved 1 mercy, hath not deprived this oppressed 
one* of the ornament of reason. The form of words 
which was set forth on the meaning of ‘victory is 
thi-:— 

“ : He is God, exalted is He. 

“ ‘ It hath been known that God ''glorious is His 
mention) is sanctified from the world and what is 
therein, and that the meaning of “victory” is not 
this, that anyone should fight or strive with anyone. 

The Lord of He doeth \rhat He will 3 hath committed 
the kingdom of creation, both land and sea, into the 
hand of kings, and they are the manifestations of the p. 141. 
Divine Power according to the degrees of their rank : 
eerily He is the Potent, the Sovereign*. But that 
which God 'glorious is His mention) hath desired for 
Himself is the hearts of His servants, which are trea¬ 
sures of praise and love of the Lord and stores of 
divine knowledge and wisdom. The will of the Eter¬ 
nal King hath ever been to purify the hearts of [His] 
servant- from the promptings of the world and what 
is therein, so that they may be prepared for illumina¬ 
tion by the effulgences of the Lord of the Names and 

1 Lit. ‘preceding mercy,’ Le. mercy not earned or deserved 
by previous good actions at the time it is bestowed. 

2 K. reads ‘-the heart” instead of “this oppressed one.” 

> Kur'an, iii, 35; xrii, 19. 

4 K. substitutes here, “if they happen [to be] in the shadow 
of God. they are accounted of God; and if not , then eerily 
t '.y Lord i* knotting and informed." 


B. 


3 


114 


A traveller’s narrative. 


Attributes. Therefore must no stranger find his way 
into the city of the heart, so that the Incomparable 
Friend may come unto His own place—that is, the 
effulgence of His Names and Attributes, not His 
Essence (exalted is He), for that Peerless King hath 
been and will be holy for everlasting above ascent or 
142. descent 1 . Therefore to-day 2 “victory” neither hath 
been nor will be opposition to any one, nor strife 
with any person ; but rather what is well-pleasing is 
that the cities of [men’s] hearts, which are under the 
dominion of the hosts of selfislmess and lust, should 
be subdued by the sword of the Word, of Wisdom, 
and of Exhortation. Every one, then, who desireth 
“victory” must first subdue the city of his own heart 
with the sword of spiritual truth and of the Word, 

1 Belli here guards himself from the doctrines of 

jUo'l, and the like, held by certain heretical sects, viz. the 
belief that God can pass into man, or man become essentially 
one with God. Jami very beautifully distinguishes the doc¬ 
trine of annihilation in God from that of identification with 
God in the following verse:— 

# • > h = " A J? j ‘S. J} 3 J) r Jv ^ “J u ! 1 

* 3 sf- J 1 . Jj / 'f ^ f \ if) ) i$yZ j y 

“So tread this path that duality may disappear, 

For if there be duality in the path, falsity will arise: 
Thou wilt not become He; but, if thou strivest, 

Thou wilt reach a place where thou-ness shall depart 
from thee.” 

2 K. inserts “the meaning of.” 


A traveller’s narrative. 


115 


and must protect it from remembering augbt beside 
God: afterwards let him turn his regards towards the 
cities of [others’] hearts. This is what is intended by 
“victory:” sedition hath never been nor is pleasing 
to God, and that wliich certain ignorant persons for¬ 
merly wrought was never approved. If ye be slain 
for His good pleasure verily it is better for you than 
that ye should slay. To-day the friends of God must 
appear in such fashion amidst [God’s] servants that 
by their actions they may lead all unto the pleasure 
of the Lord of Glory. I swear by the Sun of the 
Horizon of Holiness that the friends of God never 
have regarded nor will regard the earth or its transi¬ 
tory riches. God hath ever regarded the hearts of 
[His] servants, and this too is by reason of [His] 
most great favour, that perchance mortal souls may 
be cleansed and sanctified from earthly states and 
may attain unto everlasting places. But that Real 
King is in Himself sufficient unto Himself [and inde¬ 
pendent] of all: neither doth any advantage accrue 
to Him from the love of contingent 1 beings, nor doth 
any hurt befal Him from their hatred. All earthly 
places appear through Him and unto Him return, and 


1 By ‘ contingent ’ or ‘ possible ’ being is meant the material 
or phenomenal world, of which the being or not-being are 
alike possible and conceivable, as contrasted with ‘Necessary 
Being’ (God) of which the not-being is inconceivable and 
impossible. 


i. 143. 


8—2 


116 


A traveller’s narrative. 


p. 144 . God singly and alone abideth in His own place which 
is holy above space and time, mention and utterance, 
sign, description, and definition, height and depth. 
And none hioweth this save Him and whosoever hath 
knowledge of the Book. There is no God but Him, 
the Mighty, the Bountiful! Finis. 

“ But good deeds depend on this l , that the Royal 
Person should himself look into that [matter] with 
just and gracious regard, and not be satisfied with 
the representations of certain persons unsupported by 
proof or evidence. We ask God to strengthen the 
King unto that which He willeth: and what He 
willeth should be the wish of the worlds. 

“ Afterwards they summoned this servant to Con¬ 
stantinople. We reached that city along with a num¬ 
ber of poor unfortunates, and after our arrival did 
p. 145. not hold intercourse with a single soul, for we had 
nought to say [unto them], and there was no wish save 
that it should be clearly demonstrated by proof to all 
that this servant had no thought of sedition and had 
never associated with the seditious. And, by Him 
in praise of whose spirit the tongues of all things speak, 

1 This sentence is rather ambiguous, and would at first 
sight appear to signify that the continuance of the Balds’ good 
conduct depends on their being treated with more justice and 
fairness than they have hitherto met witli on the part of the 
Persian government. But I think the real meaning is rather 
that the attribution of good actions to the Shah depends on 
his now acting justly. 


a traveller’s narrative. 


117 


to turn in any direction was difficult in consideration 
of certain circumstances ; but these things were done 
for the protection of lives’. Verily my Lord knoweth 
ivhat is in my soul, and verily He is witness unto what 
I say. The just king is the shadow of God in the 
earth ; all should take refuge under the shadow of 
his justice and rest in the shade of his favour. This 
is not the place for personalities, or censures [directed] 
specially against some apart from others; for the 
shadow tells of him who casteth the shadow 2 . God 
{glorious is His mention) hath called Himself the 
Lord of the worlds 3 for that He hath nurtured and p. 146. 
doth nurture all; exalted is His favour which hath 
preceded 4 contingent beings and His mercy ickich hath 
preceded the worlds. 

“This is sufficiently clear, that, [whether] right 
or wrong according to the imagination of the people, 
this community have accepted as true and adopted 
the religion for which they are notorious, and that 
on this account they have foregone what they had, 
seeking after what is with God. And this same re¬ 
nunciation of life in the way of love for the Merciful 

1 Allusion is made to the action of the Babis in enrolling 
themselves as Turkish subjects. See p. 88, supra. 

- i.e. the action of subordinates reveals the temper of their 
masters. 

s As, for example, in the first verse of the opening chapter 
of the Ku’ran. 

4 See note 1 on p. 113, supra. 


118 


a traveller’s narrative. 


[God] is a faithful witness and an eloquent attest 
unto that whereunto they lay claim. Hath it [ever] 
been beheld that a reasonable man renounced his 
life without proof or evidence [of the truth of that 
for which he died] ? And if it be said, 1 This people 
are mad,’ this [too] is very improbable, for it is not 
[a thing] confined to one or two persons, but rather 
p. 147. have a great multitude of every class, inebriated with 
the Kawthar 1 of divine wisdom, hastened with heart 
and soul to the place of martyrdom in the way of the 
Friend. If these persons, who for God have foregone 
all save Him, and who have poured forth life and 
wealth in His way, can be belied, then by what proof 
and evidence shall the truth of that which others 
assert concerning that wherein they are 2 be estab¬ 
lished in the presence of the King ? 

“The late Hhji Seyyid Muhammad 3 {may God 


1 Kawthar primarily signifies abundance, but it is also the 
name of a river in Paradise. 

2 That is, the religion which they profess. 

3 The event here alluded to occurred in the year a. e. 1241 
(a.d. 1825). The Persians, exasperated by rumours of op¬ 
pression and insult on the part of the Russians towards their 
Musulm&n subjects, especially in the then recently ceded 
provinces of the Caucasus, were incited by the clergy headed 
by Ak4 (here called Haji) Seyyid Muhammad of Isfahan to 
declare a jihad or holy war against their northern enemies, in 
which, though at first encouraged hy some measure of success, 
they were eventually totally vanquished, the campaign ending 
in the capture of Tabriz by the Russians and the treaty of 


A TRAVELLERS NARRATIVE. 


119 


exalt his station and overwhelm him in the depth of 
the ocean of His mercy and forgiveness), although he 
was of the most learned of the doctors of the age and 
the most pious and austere of his contemporaries, and 
although the splendour of his worth was of such a 
degree that the tongues of all creatures spoke in 
praise and eulogy of him and confidently asserted his 
asceticism and godliness, did nevertheless in the war 
against the Russians forego much good and turn hack p. 
after a little contest, although he himself had decreed 
a holy war, and had set out from his native country 
with conspicuous ensign in support of the Faith. 0 
would that the covering might he withdrawn, and that 
what is hidden from [men’s] eyes might appear! 

“ But as to this sect, it is twenty years 1 and more 
that they have been tormented by day and by night 
with the fierceness of the Royal anger, and that they 
have been cast each one into a [different] land by the 
blasts of the tempests of the King’s wrath. How 

Turkmanchay. See Watson’s History of Persia, pp. 207—238. 
Watson, however, credits Aka Seyyid Muhammad with some 
degree of moderation, observing (p. 209) that “he seems to 
have retained some slight remnant of prudence, after that 
quality was no longer discernible in the conduct and language 
of his professional brethren.” 

1 The first interference with the Bab and his followers took 
place in August 1815, so that if we suppose this letter to have 
been written near the end of the Adrianople period (which came 
to a close in August 1868) nearly 23 years of persecution had 
then been endured by the Bibis. 


118. 


120 


a traveller’s narrative. 


many children have been left fatherless ! How many 
fathers have become childless! How many mothers 
have not dared, through fear and dread, to mourn 
over their slaughtered children 1 ! Many [were] the 
servants [of God] who at eve were in the utmost 
. 119. wealth and opulence, and at dawn were beheld in the 
extreme of poverty and abasement! There is no land 
but hath been dyed with tlwir blood and no air where- 
unto their groanings have not arisen. And during 
these few years the arrows of affliction have rained 
down without intermission from the clouds of fate. 
Yet, notwithstanding all these visitations and afflic¬ 
tions, the fire of divine love is in such fashion kindled 
in their hearts that, were they all to be hewn in pieces, 
they would not forswear the love of the Beloved of 

1 This is no mere figure of speech. Ussher writes in his 
Journey from London to Persepolis (London 1865), p. 629, “ It 
was enough to be suspected of Babeeism to be at once put to 
death, and many old feuds and injuries were avenged by 
denouncements and accusation of being tainted by the fatal 
doctrines. No time was lost between apprehensiou and 
execution. Death was the only punishment known; the 
headless bodies lay in the streets for days, the terrified 
relatives fearing to give them burial, and the dogs fought and 
growled over the corpses in the deserted thoroughfares. At 
last the European missions remonstrated, the reign of terror 
ceased, and although still proscribed and put to death without 
mercy whenever discovered, the Babees are supposed yet to 
reckon many seeming orthodox Moslems among their numbers, 
the southern parts of the country being thought to be the 
most tainted with the detested heresy.” 


A TRAVELLER'S NARRATIVE. 121 

all the dwellers upon earth; nay rather with their 
whole souls do they yearn and hope for what may 
befal [them] in the way of God. 

“ 0 King! The gales of the mercy of the 
Merciful One have converted these servants and 
drawn them to the region of the [Divine] Unity—• 

‘ The witness of the faithful lover is in his sleeve ’ 1 — 

but some of the doctors of Persia 2 have troubled the 
most luminous heart of the King of the age with p-150. 
regard to those who are admitted into the Sanctuary 
of the Merciful One and those who make for the 
Ka‘ba of Wisdom. 0 would that the world-ordering 
judgement of the King might decide that this servant 
should meet those doctors 3 , and, in the presence of 
His Majesty the King, adduce arguments and proofs ! 

This servant is ready, and hopeth of God that such a 
conference may be brought about, so that the truth 
of the matter may become evident and apparent 
before His Majesty the King. And afterwards the 
decision is in thy hand, and I am ready to confront 
the throne of thy sovereignty; then give judgement for 
me or against me. The Merciful Lord saith in the 
Furkhn 4 , which is the enduring proof amidst the host 

1 i.e. the faithful lover carries his life in his hand, or, as 
the Persians say, in his sleeve. 

2 K. reads ‘outward [or formal] doctors.’ 

3 K. reads ‘the doctors of the age.’ 

4 i.e. the Kur’an, the supernatural eloquence of which is 


122 A traveller’s narrative. 

of existences, ‘Desire death, then, if ye he sincere'.’ 
He hath declared the desiring of death to be the 
p. 151. proof of sincerity; and it will be apparent in the 
mirror of the [King’s] luminous mind which party it 
is that hath this day foregone life in the way of Him 
[who is] adored by the dwellers upon earth. Had 
the doctrinal books of this people, [composed] in 
proof of that wherein they are"', been written with the 
blood which has been shed in His way (exalted is 
He), books innumerable would assuredly have been 
apparent and visible amongst mankind. 

“ How, then, can one repudiate this people, whose 
words and deeds are consistent, and accept those 
persons who neither have foregone nor will forego 
one atom of the consideration [which they enjoy] in 
the way of [God] the Sovereign ? 

“ Some of the doctors of Persia who have de¬ 
nounced this servant have never either met or seen 
him, nor [even] become cognizant of [his] intent: 
p. 152. nevertheless they said what they desired and do what 
they will. Every statement requires proof, and is 
not [established] merely by assertion or by outward 
gear of asceticism. 

“A translation of some passages from the con- 

the ‘ permanent miracle ’ and ‘ enduring proof ’ of its divine 
origin. 

1 Kur’an, ii, 88; lxii, 6. 

2 i.e. ‘ that which they believe.’ 


A traveller's narrative. 123 
tents of the Hidden Book of Fatima 1 (upon her be 

1 I was at first doubtful as to whether the passages here 
cited were really translated by Beha from some Arabic work 
bearing this name, or whether they were in truth extracts from 
a work of his own called ‘ Hidden Words’ (iUf") whereof 
I had heard frequent mention amongst the Babis. The 
following passage on p. 379 of Mr Merrick’s translation of a 
work on Shifite theology called *yf- seemed to bear 

on the question:-—“After the Prophet’s death Fatima was 
affected in spirit to a degree which Done bnt God knew. 
Jebra’il was sent down daily to comfort her, and ‘All wrote 
what the angel said, and this is the Book of Fatima which is 
now with the Imam Mahdi.” On consulting Bieu’s Catalogue 
of the Persian MSS. in the British Museum., I found mention (vol. 

ii, p. 829 b.) of a work entitled ZjOjF composed 

by Mull a Muhsin-i-Feyz of Kashan, and described as consisting 
of “ one hundred sayings of Imams and Sufis in Arabic, with 
Persian commentary.” I seized the first opportunity of ex¬ 
amining this work, bnt a search of about two hours through its 
pages revealed not hin g resembling the passages in the text before 
ns. Finally I wrote to Acre, asking, amongst other questions, 
what might be the true nature of the work here alluded to. 
The following answer (which is authoritative) was returned :— 
[Translation] “ Fifth Question. Concerning the mention of 
the matters in the Hidden Book of Fatima (upon her be the 
peace of God). The answer is this, that the sect of Persia, 
that is the Shifites, who regard themselves as pure, and the 
[rest of the] world (we take refuge with God!) as unclean, 
believe that after His Highness the Seal of the Prophets 
[Muhammad] Her Highness Fatima (upon her be the blessings 
of God) was occupied night and day in weeping, wailing, and 
lamenting over the fate of her illustrious father. Therefore 
was Jebra’il commanded by the Lord Most Glorious to com¬ 
mune, converse, and associate with Her Highness Fatima; and 


124 


A traveller’s narrative. 


the blessings of God) which are apposite to this place 
will [now] be submitted in the Persian language, in 
order that some things [now] concealed may be 
revealed before the [Royal] Presence. Those ad¬ 
dressed in these utterances in the above-mentioned 
book (which is to-day known as ‘Hidden Words’) 
are those people who are outwardly notable for 

he used to speak words causing consolation and quietude of 
heart. These words were collected and named ‘ The Book of 

Fatima’ j. And they [i.e. the Shi‘ites] believe 

that this Book is with His Highness the Kd’im [i.e. the Imam 
Mahdl] and shall appear in the days of his appearance. But 
of this Book nought is known save the name, and indeed it is 
a name without form and a title without reality. And His 
Highness the Existent [i.e. Beha’u’llah] willed to make known 
the appearance of the Kd’iin by intimation and implication; 
therefore was it mentioned in this manner for a wise reason 
which he had. And that which is mentioned under the 
name of the Book in the Epistle to His Majesty the King [of 
Persia] (may God assist him) is from the ‘Hidden Words’ 
[■cySH oUf”] which was revealed before the Epistle to His 
Majesty the King. The ‘ Hidden Words ’ was revealed in the 
languages of eloquence (Arabic) and of light (Persian). It hath 
been commanded that some portion of it shall he written and 
sent specially for you, that you may become cognizant of the 
truth of the matter. At all events both the Persian and the 
Arabic thereof were revealed in this manifestation. As to the 
pronoun ” [I had asked whether the pronoun in aL ji* 
referred to God, or to Gabriel, or to Fatima, i.e. whether its 
subject was masculine or feminine] “ he says, 1 It refers to the 
Hidden Unseen, from the heaven of whose Grace all verses are 
revealed. ’ ” 


A traveller’s narrative. 125 

science and piety, but who are inwardly subservient 
to their passions and lust. He says :— 

“ ' 0 faithless ones ! Why do ye outwardly claim 
to be shepherds, while inwardly ye have become the 
wolves of my sheep ? Your likeness is like unto the P- 153 - 
star before the morning 1 , which is apparently bright 
and luminous, but really causeth the misguidance 
and destruction of the caravans of my city and 
country.’ 

“ So likewise he saith .— 

‘ 0 outwardly fair and inwardly faulty! Thy 
likeness is like unto clear bitter water, wherein out¬ 
wardly the utmost sweetness and purity is beheld, 
but when it falleth into the assaying hands of the 
taste of the [Divine] Unity He doth not accept a 
single drop thereof. The radiance of the sun is on 
the earth and on the mirror alike; but regard the 
difference as from the guard-stars 2 to the earth ; 
nay, between them is a limitless distance.’ 

1 There is a star which appears before the morning star and 
resembles it, and this the Persians call kdravdn-kush (the 
caravan-killer) or charvaddr-kush (the mnleteer-killer), because 
it entices the caravan to start from its halting-place in the 
belief that the dawn is at hand, and so causes it to lose its 
way and perish. 

2 Farkaddn, the two Farkads, are two bright stars near the 
pole-star [p and y of Ursa Jlinor). See Lane’s Ardbic-Bnglish 
Lexicon s.v. Jp. In English they are properly called the 
“Guards” or “Guardians”—‘“of the Spanish word guardare’ 
saith Hood, ‘ which is to beholde, because they are diligently 


126 


A traveller’s narrative. 


“ So likewise he saith :— 

1 0 child nf the world! Many a morning hath 
the effulgence of my grace come unto thy place from 
the day-spring of the place-less, found thee on the 
p. 154. couch of ease busied with other things, and returned 
like the lightning of the spirit to the bright abode of 
glory. And I, desiring not thy shame, declared it 
not in the retreats of nearness to the hosts of holi¬ 
ness.’ 

“ So likewise he saith :— 

‘ 0 pretender to my friendship ! In the morning 
the breeze of my grace passed by thee, and found 
thee sleeping on the bed of heedlessuess, and wept 
over thy condition, and turned back.’ 

Finis. 

“ In the presence of the King’s justice, therefore, 
the statement of an adversary ought not to be 
accepted as sufficient. And in the Purkfin, which 
distinguished] between truth and falsehood, He says, 

‘ 0 ye who believe ., if there come unto you a sinner 
with a message, then discriminate, lest you fall upon 
a people in ignorance and on the morrow repent of 
p. 156. what ye have done'.' And it hath come down in holy 

to be looked unto, in regard of tlio singular use whieh thuy 
have in navigation. ’ ” (Smyth and Chambers' Cycle of Celestial 
Objects, Oxford, 1881.) 

1 Kur’iin, xi,ix, 0. Concerning the occasion of the revelation 
of this passage see the notes on it in Sale's and 1'aluior’s 
translations of the Kur’dn. 


A traveller’s narrative. 127 

tradition, 1 Credit not the calumniator.’ The matter 
hath been misapprehended by certain doctors, neither 
have they seen this servant. But those persons who 
have met [him] testify that this servant hath not 
spoken contrary to that which God hath ordained in 
the Book, and recite this blessed verse :—He saith 
(exalted is He) ‘ Do ye disavow us for aught save that 
we believe in God, and what hath been sent down unto 
ns, and what ivas sent down before 1 V 

“ 0 King of the age! The eyes of these wan¬ 
derers turn and gaze in the direction of the mercy of 
the Merciful One, and assuredly to these afflictions 
shall the greatest mercy succeed, and after these 
most grievous hardships shall follow great ease. But 
[our] hope is this, that His Majesty the King will 
himself turn his attention to [these] matters, which 
thing will be the cause of hope in [our] hearts 3 . And p-156. 
this is unmixed good which hath been submitted, 
and God sujficeth for a witness. 

“ Glory be to Thee, 0 God! 0 God, I bear witness 
that the heart of the King is between the fingers of 
Thy 'power: if Thou pleasest, turn it, 0 God, in 
the direction of mercy and kindliness: verily Thou art 
the Exalted, the Potent, the Beneficent: there is no 
God but Thee., the Mighty from whom help is sought. 

1 Kur’an, v, 64. 

- K. reads tStij (“ the cause of the good pleasure 

of the Beloved”) in place of vr— 


128 A traveller’s narrative. 

“ Concerning the qualifications of the doctors, he 
saith 1 :— ‘But amongst the lawyers he who guardeth 
himself ’ observeth his religion, oppjoseth his lust, and 
obeyeth the command of his Lord—it is incumbent on 
the people, to follow him...’ unto the end. And if the 
King of the age will regard this utterance, which 
proceeded from the tongue of the recipient of divine 
inspiration, he will observe that those characterized 
p. 157. by the qualities transmitted in the afore-mentioned 
tradition are rarer than the philosopher’s stone. 
Therefore the claim of every person pretending to 
science neither hath been nor is heard. 

“So likewise in describing the lawyers of the 
latter time he says :—‘ The lawyers of that time are 
the most evil of lawyers under the shadow of heaven: 
from them cometh forth mischief, and unto them it 
returneth V 

“And if any person deny these traditions, the 
establishing thereof is [incumbent] on this servant; 
but since [our] object is brevity therefore the detail 
of the authorities 3 hath not been submitted. 

“Those doctors who have indeed drunk of the 

1 The preposition appears to refer to the Prophet Muham¬ 
mad. 

2 K. here adds, “So likewise he saith, ‘ when the standard 
of the Truth appeareth the people of the East and of the West 
curse it.’ ” 

3 i.e. the jLJ, or chain of narrators whereby a reliable 
tradition is substantiated, is omitted for lack of space. 


a traveller’s narrative. 


129 


cup of renunciation never interfered with this ser¬ 
vant, even as the late Sheykh Murtaza 1 {may God 
exalt kis station and cause him to dwell under the 
shadow of the domes of Sis grace) used to shew [us] 
affection during the days of [our] sojourn in ‘Irak, 
and used not to speak concerning this matter other- p. 15S. 
wise than God hath permitted, lie ask God to help 
all [men] unto that ichich He loveth and approcetk. 

“ Xow all people have shut their eyes to all 
[these] matters, and are bent on the persecution of 
this sect; so that should it be demanded of certain 
persons, who (after God's grace) rest in the shadow 
of the King's clemency and enjoy unbounded blessings. 

‘ In return for the King's favour what service have ye 
wrought ? Have ye by wise policy added any country 
to [his] countries I Or have ye applied yourselves to 
aught which would cause the comfort of the people, 
the prosperity of the kingdom, and the continuance 
of fair fame for the state ? they have no reply save 
this, that, falsely or truly, they designate a number 
of persons in the presence of the King by the name of 
Babis, and forthwith engage in slaughter and plunder: p. 159. 
even as in Tabriz and elsewhere 3 they sold certain 

: See note 1 on p. $6 supra. 

- K. reads "and Mansiiriyya of Egypt." The only record 
I can find of any of the Bab is being sold into slavery is in the 
Torlkh-i-Jadui. which, after describing the massacre of most 
of those who surrendered at Sheykh Tabarsi. continues—"The 
remainder of the companions who were left alive they carried 

B. 9 


130 


a traveller’s narrative. 


ones, and received much wealth; and this was never 
represented hefore the presence of the King. All 
these things have occurred because of this, that they 
have found these poor people without a helper. 
They have foregone matters of moment, and have 
fallen upon these poor unfortunates. 

“Many sects and diverse tribes rest tranquil in 
the shadow of the King, and of these sects one is this 
people. Were it not best that the lofty endeavour 
and magnanimity of those who surround the King 
should so be witnessed: that they should be scheming 
for all factions to come under the King’s shadow, and 
that they should govern amidst all with justice? To 
put in force the ordinances of God is unmixed justice, 
. ICO. and with this all are satisfied; nay, the ordinances 
of God [ever] have been and will be the instrument 
and means for the protection of [His] creatures, as 
He snitk (exalted is lie) ‘And in retaliation ye hare 


in fetters and chains to Barfurush. Several they Hold , such as 
Akhiind-i-MuIla Muhammad Sadik of Khuras&n, Ak& Seyyid 
‘Azim the Turk, H&ji Nash* of Kazvin, and Mirzd Huseyn of 
Kum. And some they sent to S&ri, and there martyred them.” 
But it is not clear that these were sold into slavery: they may 
have been ransomed by their friends, as certainly happened in 
some cases. More recent instances are evidently alluded to 
here. Probably the Babis sent to Khartum in the Soudan 
about the period when this letter was written, and afterwards 
released by General Gordon, were sold as slaves. (See B. i, 
pp. 403-4115.) 


A traveller's narrative. 


131 


lit'e, 0 people of understanding 1 .’ [But] it is far from 
the justice of His Majesty the King that, for the 
fault of one person, a number of persons should be¬ 
come the objects of the scourges of wrath. God 
(glorious is His mention) saith:— ‘Xone shall bear 
the burden of another 3 .' And this is sufficiently 
evident, that in every community there have been 
and will be learned and ignorant, wise and foolish, 
sinful and pious. And to commit abominable actions 
is far from the wise man. For the wise man either 
^eeketh the world or abandoneth it. If he aban- 
doneth it. assuredly he will not regard aught save 
God, and, apart from this, the fear of God will with¬ 
hold him from committing forbidden and culpable 
actions. And if he seeketh the world, he will as- p. 161. 
suredly not commit deeds which will cause and induce 
the aversion of [God’s] servants and produce horror 
in those who are in all lands; but rather will he 
practise such deeds as will cause the adhesion of 
mankind. So it hath been demonstrated that detest¬ 
able actions have been and will be [wrought only] 
by ignorant persons 3 . We ask God to keep His 
a mints from regarding aught but Him, and to 

1 Kur’an, ii. 175. 

3 Kur’an, yi. 164; xrii. 16; xxxv. 19; xxxix. 9; liii. 39. 

s Compare the argument on pp. 52—53 wherewith Beha 
meets the charge brought against him of complicity in the 
attempted assassination of the Shah. 

9—2 


132 A traveller’s narrative. 

bring them near to Him: verily He is potent over all 
things. 

“ Glory be to Thee, 0 God! 0 my God, Thou hearest 
my groaning, and seest my state and my distress and 
my affliction, and knowest what is in my soul. If 
my cry be sincerely for Thy sake, then draw thereby 
the hearts of Thy creatures unto the. horizon of the 
heaven of Thy recognition, and turn the King unto the 
right hand of the throne of Thy Name the Merciful; 

162. then bestow on him, 0 my God, the blessing which 
hath descended from the heaven of Thy favour and 
the clouds of Thy mercy, that he may sever himself 
from that which he hath and turn toward the region 
of Thy bounties. 0 Lord, help him to support the 
oppressed amongst [Thy] servants', and to raise up 
Thy Word amidst Thy people; then aid him with the 
hosts of the unseen and the seen, that he may subdue 
cities in Thy Name and rule over all who are upon 
the earth by Thy power and authority, 0 Thou in 
whose hand is the Kingdom of creation: and verily 
Thou art He ivho ruletli at the beginning and in the 
end: there is no God save Thee, the Potent, the Mighty, 
the Wise. 

“They have misrepresented matters before the 
presence of the King in such a way that if any ill 
deed proceed from any one of this sect they account 
it as [a part] of the religion of these servants. But, 

1 Iv. reads “to support Thy religion.” 


A TRAVELLER S NARRATIVE. 


138 

i’jf G-.-i. l-.p'.i-. tchom there »V none other G:-i. thi> 
'errant hath not sanctioned the committing- of sins. p. loS. 
much less that whereof the prohibition hath been 
explicitly revealed in the Boot of God! God hath 
prohibited unto men the drinking of wine', and the 
unlawfalness thereof hath been revealed and recorded 
in the Boot of God*, and the doctors of the age (tneia 
<t';J multiply th< Hie 0 / them) have ttnaniniottsly 

1 The Muhammadans are in the habit c: alleging again?: 

:he Bail? (c: wh.se tenets :h 17 are, with very rare except:;us, 
perfectly ignorant* sundry false and malicitus charges calcu¬ 
lated to discredit them in the eyes of the "world, as. for 
Instance, that they are communis:?: that they allow nine 
hnstands to one woman; that they drink wine and are 
gnilty 0 : ether unlawful practices. These statements have 
been repeated by many European writers deriving their infor¬ 
mation either directly cr iniireotly from Muhammadan sources, 
and esp’ecis^y from tne Ferstan state chronicles called V.>-> 

: r./t-lTtiartf 'nkh and JmumU.b- >.:k\ 0 : these somewhat partial 
and one-sided records the former has the following pass-age:— 

“In every horse where they [he. the Bsbis^ assembled they 
used to drink wine and commit other actions forbid.ten by the 
Law; smi they use! to order their women to come tmveiled 
into tne company 01 strangers, engage m .tttamng gfr.ets of 
wine, and give to drink to the men in the company." Anyone 
knowing what reliance can be placed on the statements of 

exists, will learn without astonishment that the Bab absolutely 
: or cane tne use of wme, opium, aim even to os o. and ins t tne 
Bsbis observe the obligati:us laid upon them at least as well 

ever, been withdrawn by Beia. 

- K_-'a-. V. 


134 


A traveller’s narrative. 


prohibited unto men this abominable action; yet 
withal do some commit it. Now the punishment of 
this action falls on these heedless persons, while those 
manifestations of the glory of sanctity [continue] 
holy and undefiled: unto their sanctity all Being, 
whether of the unseen or the seen, testifieth. 

“Yea, these servants [of God] regard God as ‘doing 
what He pleaseth and ordering what He willeth'.’ 
There is no retreat nor way of fight for any one save 
unto God, and no refuge nor asylum but in Him. 
Aud at no time hath the cavilling of men, whether 
learned or unlearned, been a thing to rely on, nor 
p. 164, will it be so 1 2 . The [very] prophets, who are the 
pearls of the Ocean of Unity and the recipients of 
Divine Revelation, have [ever] been the objects of 
men’s aversion and cavilling; much more these 

1 Kur’an, ii. 254; iii. 35; xxii. 14, 19. K. inserts here:— 
“But they have considered the [further] appearances of the 
Manifestations of Unity in the World of dominion [i.e. the 
phenomenal world] as impossible; whereas if anyone regards 
this as impossible wherein does he differ from those people 
who regard the Hand of God as passive? If they regard God 
(glorious is His mention) as Sovereign, then all must accept a 
matter which appeareth from the Source of command of that 
King of Pre-existence.” 

2 K. has this sentence differently as follows :—“ That thing 
which is necessary is the production on the. claimant’s part 
of proof and demonstration of that which he says and that 
whereunto he lays claim: else at no time hath the cavilling of 
men” &c. 


A TRAVELLER’S narrative. 13-5 

servants. Even as He saith:— ‘Every nation schemed 
against their apostle to catch him. And they con¬ 
tended with falsehood therewith to refute the. truth'.’ 

So likewise He saith, ‘ There came not unto them any 
apostle hut they mocked at him 2 .’ Consider the appear¬ 
ance of the Seal of the Prophets 3 , the King of the 
Elect (the soul of the worlds be his sacrifice); after 
the dawning of the Sun of Truth from the horizon 
of the Hijfiz what wrongs befel that Manifestation 
of the Might of the Lord of Glory at the hands of 
the people of error! So heedless were men that they 
were wont to consider the vexation of that holy one 
as one of the greatest of good works and as the means 
of approaching God Most High. For in the first years p. 165. 
the doctors of that age, whether Jews or Christians, 
turned aside from that Sun of the Highest Horizon; 
and, at the turning aside of those persons, all, whether 
humble or noble, girt up their loins to quench the 
radiance of that Light of the Horizon of Ideals. The 
names of all are recorded in books: amongst them 
were Wahb ibn Rfihib, Ka‘b ibn Ashraf, ‘Abdu’llfih 
[ibn] Ubayy 4 , and the like of these persons; till at 

1 Kur’an, xl. 5. 

2 Kur’an, xv. II, xxxvi. 29. 

3 Muhammad. 

4 I can find no mention of Wahb ibn Rahib. Perhaps 
Wahb ibn Yahudha, one of the Jewish tribe of the Bani 
Kuraydha who strenuously opposed Muhammad and denied 
the Kur’an, is intended; or perhaps Wahb ibn Zayd of the 


136 


A traveller’s narrative. 


length the matter reached such a point that they 
convened a meeting to take counsel as to the shedding 
of the most pure blood of that holy one, as God 
(glorious is His mention) hath declared:-— ‘And when 
those who misbelieved plotted against thee to confine 
thee, or slay thee, or drive thee out ; and they plotted, 
and God plotted; and God is the best of plotters'.' 
So likewise He saith :— ‘And if their aversion be 
grievous unto thee, then, if thou art able to seek out 
p. 166. a hole down into the earth, or a ladder up into the 
shy, that thou i mayest shew them a sign —[do so]: 
but if God pleased He u>onld assuredly bring them 
all to the true, guidance: be not therefore one of the 
ignorant V By God, the hearts of those near [unto 
God] are scorched at tire purport of these two blessed 
verses; hut the like of these matters certainly trans¬ 
mitted [to us] are blotted out of sight, and [men] 
have not reflected, neither do reflect, what was the 

same tribe, who said that he would believe if Muhammad 
would bring down a book from heaven, and whose name 
is mentioned as one of tho “enemies amongst the Jews.” 
Ka‘b ibn Ashraf of the tribe of Tayy went with forty Jews 
from Medina to Mecca and conspired with the areh-enemy of 
the Prophet, Abu 8ofy&n, to compass the death of Muhammad. 
He was subsequently slain by Muhammad ibn Maslama at the 
command of the Prophet. ‘Abdu’lldh ibn Ubayy ibn Salul of 
the tribe of ‘Awf was called “the ehief of hypocrites.” [See 
Ibn Hish&m’s JAfe of Mu{iammad t ed. Wustenfeld.] 

1 Kur’kn, viii. BO. 

2 Knr’&n, vi. 85. 


a traveller’s narrative. 137 

reason of the turning aside of [God’s] servants at the 
appearance of the day-springs of divine lights. 

“So too, before the Seal of the Prophets, consider 
Jesus the Son of Mary. After the appearance of 
that Manifestation of the Merciful One all the 
doctors charged that Quintessence of Faith with 
misbelief and rebelliousness; until at length, with 
the consent of Annas, who was the chief of the 
doctors of that age, and likewise Caiaphas 1 , who was 
the most learned of the judges, they wrought upon 
that Holy One that which the pen is ashamed and 
unable to repeat. The earth with its amplitude teas P-167. 
too strait for Him, until God took Him up into the 
heaven. But were a detailed account of the prophets 
to be submitted it is feared that weariness might 
result 2 . 

1 John xi. 49, 50; xviii. 13-28; Acts iv. 6-10. 

- K. inserts a long passage here as follows:—“And the 
Jewish doctors especially hold that after Moses no plenipoten¬ 
tiary prophet possessed of a [new] Law shall come, [but that] 
one from amongst the children of David shall appear, who shall 
give currency to the Law of the Pentateuch, until, by his help, 
the ordinances of the Pentateuch shall become current and 
effective between the East and the West. So too the people of 
the Gospel regard it as impossible that after Jesus the Son of 
Mary any Founder of a new religion should shine forth from 
the day-spring of the Divine Will; and they seek a proof in 
this verse which is in the Gospel:—‘ Verily it may be that the 
heaven and the earth should pass away , but the word of the Son 
of Man shall never pass away.’ And they hold that what 
Jesus the Son of Mary hath said and commanded shall not 


138 A traveller’s narrative. 

“ 0 would that thou mightest permit, 0 King, 
that we should send unto Thy Majesty that whereby 
eyes would be refreshed, souls tranquillized, and every 
just person assured that with him [i.e. Bella u’llah] is 
knowledge of the Book. Were it not for the turning 
aside of the ignorant and the wilful blindness of the 
doctors, verily 1 would utter a discourse whereat 
hearts would be glad and would fly unto the air 
from the murmur of whose winds is heard, ‘ There 
is no God but HeBut now, because the time ad- 
mitteth it not, the tongue is withheld from utterance, 
and the vessel of declaration is sealed until God shall 
unclose it by His power: verily He is the Potent, the 
Powerful. 

p. 168. “ Glory be to Thee, 0 God! 0 my God, I ask of 

Thee in Thy Name, whereby Thou hast subdued whom¬ 
soever is in the heavens and the earth, that Thou wilt 
keep the lamp of Thy religion with the glass of Thy 
power and Thy favours, so that the. winds of denial 
pass not by it from the region of those who are heedless 
of the mysteries of Thy Sovereign Name: then increase 

suffer change, whereas He saith in one place in the Gospel, 
‘Verily I go and come [again]’; and in the Gospel of John 
likewise He giveth tidings of ‘the Comforting Spirit which 
shall come after me’; while in the Gospel of Luke also certain 
signs are mentioned. But, because some of the doctors of 
that faith have propounded for each utterance an explanation 
after their own lusts, therefore have they remained veiled from 
the meaning intended.” 


A traveller’s narrative. 139 

its light hy the oil of Thy wisdom: verily Thou art 
Potent over whomsoever is in Thy earth and Thy heaven. 

“ 0 Lord, I ask of Thee by the Supreme Word , 
whereat vrhosoever is in the earth and the heaven 
fearetli save him who taketh hold of the ‘ Most Firm 
Handlethat Thou wilt not abandon me amongst 
Thy creatures: lift me up unto Thee, and make me to 
enter in under the shadow of Thy mercy, and give me 
to drink of the pure wine of Thy grace, that I may 
dwell under the canopy of Thy glory and the domes 
of Thy favours: verily Thou art powerful unto that 
Thou wishest, and verily Thou art the Protecting, the 
Self-Sufficing. 

“ 0 King! The lamps of justice are extinguished , P- 169. 
and the fire of persecution is kindled on all sides, 
until that they have made my people captives 2 . This 
is not the first honour which hath been violated in the 
way of God. It behoveth every one to regard and 
recall wliat befell the kindred of the Prophet until 
that the people made them captives and brought them 
in unto Damascus the spacious; and amongst them 
was the Prince of Worshippers 3 , the Stay of the 
elect, the Sanctuary of the eager (the soul of all beside 

1 Kur’an, ii. 257; xxxi. 21. 

2 K. inserts here:— “from Zawrd [Baghdad] unto Mosul ‘ the 
prominent”’ ( el-hadba). 

3 i.e. Zeynu’l-'Abidin, the fourth Imam, son of Imam 
Huseyn and Shahrbami the daughter of Yezdigird. Being ill 
in his bed at the time of the massacre of Kerbela his life was. 


140 


A traveller's narrative. 


him be his sacrifice). It was said unto them , ‘ Are 
ye seceders V He said, ’ No, by God, we are servants 
who have believed in God and in His signs, and 
through us the teeth of faith are disclosed in a smile, 
and the sign of the Merciful One shineth forth; 
through our mention spreadeth Al-Bathd 1 , and the 
darkness which intervened between earth and heaven 
is dispelled.’ It was said, ‘ Have ye forbidden what 
. 170. God hath sanctioned, or sanctioned what God hath 
forbidden l ’ He said, ‘ We were the first v:ho followed 
the commandments of God: we are the source of 
command and its origin, and the first-fruits of all 
good and its consummation: we are the sign of the 
Eternal, and His commemoration amongst the nations.’ 
It was said, ‘ Have ye abandoned the Kur’dn ? ’ Re 
said, ‘ Through us did the Merciful One reveal it; 
and we are gales of the All-glorious amidst [His] 
creatures; v:e are streams which have arisen from 
the most mighty Ocean whereby God revived the earth 
after its death; from us His signs are diffused, His 
evidences are manifested, and His tokens appear; 
and with us are His mysteries and His secrets.’ It 
was said, ‘ For what fault [then] were ye afflicted ? ’ 

after some deliberation, spared, and he was sent with the 
women taken captive to the court of Yezid at Damascus,'where 
the discussion here recorded is supposed to have taken place. 
(Cf. At-Tabari’s Annales, ed. de Goeje, seounda series, v. i. 
pp. 367, et seq.) 

1 Mecca. 


A traveller’s narrative. 


141 


lie said, ‘ For the love of God and oar severance from 
all beside Him.’ 

“ Verily we have not repeated his expressions 
(upon him be peace), but rather we have made mani¬ 
fest a spray from the Ocean of Life which was 
deposited in his words, that by it those who advance 
may live and be aware of what hath befallen the p. 171. 
trusted ones of God on the part of an evil and most 
reprobate people. And to-day we see the people 
censuring those who acted unjustly of yore, while 
they oppress more vehemently than those oppressed, 
and know it not. By God, I do not desire sedition, 
but the purification of [God’s] servants from all that 
withholdeth them from approach to God, the King of 
the Day of Invocation'. 

“ I was asleep on my couch: the breaths of my 
Lord the Merciful passed over me and awakened me 
from sleep 1 2 : to this bear witness the denizens [of the 
realms] of His Power and His Kingdom, and the 
dwellers in the cities of His Glory, and Himself, the 
True, I am not impatient of calamities in His 

1 i.e. the Day of Judgement, “so called,” says the Arabie- 
Turkish dictionary called Akhtari Kabir, “because thereon 
the people of paradise and the people of hell shall call to one 
another.” The expression occurs once in the Kur’an, ch. xl. 
v. 34. 

2 E. inserts :—“and commanded me to proclaim betwixt 
earth and heaven: this was not on my part but on His part, and 
to this...” &e. 


142 A traveller’s narrative. 

way, nor of afflictions for His love and at His good 
pleasure. God hath made affliction as a morning 
shower to this green pasture, and as a match for 
p. 172. His lamp whereby earth and heaven are illumined. 

“ Shall that which any one hath of wealth endure 
unto him, or avail him to-morrow with him who 
holdeth his forelock 1 1 If any should look on those 
who sleep under slabs 2 and keep company with the 
dust, can he distinguish the bones of the king's skull 
from the knuckles of the slave ? Ho, by the King of 
Kings! Or doth he know governors from herdsmen, 
or discern the wealthy and the rich from him who 
was without shoes or carpet ? By God, distinction is 
removed, save for him icho fulfilled righteousness and 
judged uprightly. Where are the doctors, the scholars, 
the nobles ? Where is the keenness of their glances, 
the sharpness of their sight, the subtlety of their 
thoughts, the soundness of their tmderstandings ? 
Where are their hidden treasures and. their apparent 
gauds, their bejewelled thrones and their ample 
p. 173. couches l Alas! All have been laid icaste, and 
the decree of God hath rendered them as scattered 
dust! Emptied is what they treasured up, and dissi¬ 
pated is what they collected, and dispersed is what 
they concealed: they have become [such that] thou 

1 See Kur’&n, xcvi. 15, 16, and cxi. 2 passim. 

- K. reads ph-JI "under marble." 


A TRAVELLERS narrative. 143 

seest nought but their empty places, their gaping roofs, 
their uprooted beams, their new things waxed old. .1.5 
for the discerning man, verily wealth will not divert 
him from regarding the end: and for the prudent 
man, riches will not withhold him from turning toward 
[God] the Eich, the Exalted. T There is he icho held 
dominion over all whereon the sun arose, and who 
spent lavishly and sought after curious things in the 
world and what is therein created l Where is the 
lord of the swarthy squadron and the yellow stan¬ 
dard'? Where is he who ruled in Zawrd 1 , and ichere 
he icho wrought injustice in [Damascus] the spacious'! 

Where are they at whose bounty treasures were afraid, p. 174. 
at ichose open-handedness and generosity the ocean was 
dismayed: Where is he whose arm was stretched 
forth in rebelliousness, whose heart turned away from 
the Merciful One l Where is he who used to make 
choice of pleasures and cull the fruits of desires l 
Where are the dames of the bridal chambers, and 
the possessors of beautyl Where are their waving 
branches and their spreading boughs, their lofty 

1 Baghdad. The name (or rather epithet) of Zawrd (‘-the 
crooked’ - ) is applied to no less than ten different places, i See 
Yakut's JIushtank, ed. WiUtenfeld, p. 235.) Bnt in this and 
similar places Baghdad, the capital of the perfidious ‘Abbasids 
so detestable to every true Shiite, is intended. 

- Al-Feyhd \" the spacious" ) is an epithet designating 
Damascus. Jln’awiya, Yezid, and the Omeyyad caliphs 
generally are here alluded to. 


144 


A traveller’s narrative. 


palaces and trellised gardens ? Where is the smooth¬ 
ness of the expanses thereof and the softness of their 
breezes, the rippling of their iraters and. the murmur 
of their winds, the cooing of their doves and the 
rustling of their trees l Where are their laughing 
hearts and their smiling teeth ? 1 Woe unto them ! 
They have descended to the abyss and become com¬ 
panions to the pebbles; to-day no mention is heard 
of them nor any sound; nothing is known of them 
p. 175. nor any hint. Will the people dispute it while they 
behold it ? Will they deny it when they knoiv it ? 
I know not in■ what valley they wander erringly: 
do they not see that they depart and return not l 
How long will they be famous in the low countries 
and in the high*, descend and ascendl ‘Is not the 
time yet come to those who believe for their hearts to 
become humble for the remembrance of God 3 ?’ Well 
is it with that one who hath said or shall say, 1 Yea, 
0 Lord, the time is ripe and hath come,’ and who 
severeth lumself from all that is 4 . Alas! nought is 
reaped but what is sown, and nought is taken but 
what is laid up, save by the grace of God and His 
favour. Hath the earth conceived him whom the veils 

1 Or perhaps “their heaving bosoms [lit. “dilated lungs”] 
and their smiling mouths .” 

2 Concerning the expression j jii see Lane’s Arabic- 
English Lexicon, Bk. i. Pt. vi. p. 2306, column 3. 

3 Kur’an, Mi. 15. 

4 K. inserts “ unto the King of beings.” 


A TRAVELLER’S narrative. 


145 


of glory prevent not from, ascending into the Kingdom 
of his Lord, the Mighty, the Supreme! Have we any 
good works whereby defects shall he removed or which 
shall bring us near unto the Lord of causes1 We 
ask God to deal with us according to His grace, not 
His justice, and to make us of those who turn toward p-176. 
Him and sever themselves from all beside Him. 

“ 0 King, I have seen in the way of God tvhat no 
eye hath seen and no ear hath heard. Friends have 
disclaimed me; ways are straitened unto me; the 
pool of safety is dried tip; the plain of ease is 
[scorched] yellowHcrw many calamities have de¬ 
scended, and how many icill descend! I walk ad¬ 
vancing toward the Mighty, the Bounteous, while 

1 I am uncertain as to this line, and inoline to think 
(though both mss. agree in the pointing of the first and the 
spelling of the second doubtful word) that we should read 
-g - 

^>^9 in the first clause (which signifies shallow water or a 
pool , and agrees in sense with the verb to dry up or shill 

“G " 

into the ground ), and j-L (‘a fiat, even plain, destitute of 
herbage and containing small pebbles') in the second. At any 

'G ' 

rate I can find no other meaning of which would seem 

appropriate to the verb However, Baron Rosen’s text 

(Collections Scientifiques, etc., vol. vi. p. 213) agrees with the 
two mss. in my possession, and a gloss therein appended to the 

-G 

passage before us explains as meaning ‘ a pool of water ’ 

fjril .L), and as meaning ‘garden’ 

10 


B. 


146 


A traveller’s narrative. 


behind me glides the serpent. My eyes rain down 
tears until my bed is drenched; but my sorrow is not 
for myself By God, my head longeth for the spears 
for the love of its Lord, and I never pass by a tree but 
my heart addresseth it [saying], ‘ 0 would that thou 
wert cut doicn in my name and my body tcere cruci¬ 
fied upon thee in the way of my Lord;' yea, because I 
see mankind going astray in their intoxication, and 
p. 177. they know it not: they have exalted their hists, and 
put aside their God, as though they took the command 
of God for a mockery, a sport, and a plaything; and 
they think that they do well, and that they are 
harboured in the citadel of security. The matter is 
not as they suppose: to-morroiv they shall see what 
they [now] deny. 

“ We are about to shift from this most remote 
place of banishment' unto the prison of Acre. And, 
according to what they say, it is assuredly the most 
desolate of the cities of the world, the most un¬ 
sightly of them in appearance, the most detestable in 
climate, and the foulest in water; it is as though it 
were the metropolis of the owl; there is not heal'd 
from its regions aught save the sound of its hooting. 
And in it they intend to imprison the servant, and to 

1 Adrianople. In K. this sentence runs as follows:— “The 
lords of command and wealth are about to send us forth from 
this land, which is named Edirni [Adrianople], unto the city of 
Acre," etc. 


a traveller’s narrative. 


147 


shut in our faces the doors of leniency and take away 
from us the good things of the life of the ivorld during 
ichat remaineth of our days. By God, though weari¬ 
ness should weaken me, and hunger should destroy me, 
though my couch should be made of the hard rock and 
my associates of the beasts of the desert, I will not P-178. 
blench, but will be patient, as the resolute and deter¬ 
mined are patient, in the strength of God, the King of 
Pre-existence, the Creator of the nations; and under 
all circumstances I give thanks unto God. And ice 
hope of His graciousness (exalted is He) the freedom 
of our necks from chains and shackles in this im¬ 
prisonment: and that He will render [all men’s] 
faces sincere toward Him, the Mighty, the Bounteous. 

Verily He ansicereth him icho prayeth unto Him, and 
is near unto him who calleth on Him. And ice ask 
Him to make this dark calamity a buckler for the 
body of His saints, and to protect them thereby from 
sharp swords and piercing blades. Through affliction 
hath His light shone and His praise been bright 
unceasingly: this hath been His method through past 
ages and bygone times. 

“ The people shall know ichat to-day they under¬ 
stand not when their steeds shall stumble, their beds be p. 179 
rolled up, their swords be blunted, and their footsteps 
slip. I know not how long they shall ride the steed of 
desire and wander erringly in the desert of heedlessness 
and error. Of glory shall any glory endure, or of 

10—2 


148 


a traveller’s narrative. 


abasement any abasement ? Or shall he endure v-lm 
used to stay himself on high cushions, and who attained 
in splendour the utmost limit l No, by my Lord the 
Mercifull ‘ All that is thereof is transient, and there 
remaineth [only] the face of my Lord’ the Mighty, the 
Beneficent. What buckler hath not the arrow of 
destruction smitten, err what pinion hath not the hand 
of fate plucked- ? From what fortress hath the mes¬ 
senger of death been kept back when lie came l What 
throne hath not been broken, or -what palace hath not 
been left desolate ? Did men but know what pure wine" 
of the mercy of their Lord, the Mighty, the All-know¬ 
ing, was beneath the seal, they would certainly cast 
. 1*0. aside reproach and seek to be satisfied by this ser¬ 
vant; but now have they veiled me with the veil of 
darkness which they have /coven with the hands oj 
doubts and fancies. The White Hand 3 shall cleave 
an opening to this sombre night\ On that day the 
servants [of God] shall say what those cavilling 
women said- of yore 1 ', that there may appear in the 

1 i.e. on the earth. See Kur’an, lv. 26, and cf. 27. 

3 See above, p. 77, note 2. 

3 Alluding to the miracle of Moses. See Kur’an, vii. 105; 
xxvi. 32; xx. 23; xxvii. 12; and xxviii. 32, especially the two 
last passages. 

4 K. inserts, “ and God icill open into His city a gate 
[hitherto] shut [or, a great gate ]. On that day men shall enter 
in in crowds, and shall say what the cavilling women said,” etc. 

0 Alluding to what was said by the women who had 
censured Potiphar’s wife Zuleykha for her love of Joseph when 


A traveller’s narrative. 


149 


end what began in the beginning. Do they desire 
to tarry when their foot is in the stirrup ? Or do 
they see any return in their going? No, by the 
Lord of Lords, save- in the Resurrection ! On that 
day men shall arise from the tombs and shall be 
questioned concerning their riches. Happy that one 
whom burdens shall not oppress on that day whereon 
the mountains shall pass away and all shall appear 
for the questioning in the presence of God the Exalted ! 

Verily He is severe in punishing. 

“ We ask God to sanctify the hearts of certain of V • 181. 
the doctors from rancour and hatred that they may 
regard things with eyes ivhich closure overcometli not; 
and to raise them unto a station where the world 
and the lordship thereof shall not turn them aside 
from looking toward the Supreme Horizon, and 
where- [anxiety for] gaining a livelihood and [pro¬ 
viding] household goods shall not divert them from [the 
thought of] that day whereon the mountains shall be 
made, like carpets. Though they rejoice at that which 
hath befallen us of calamity, there shall come a day 
whereon they shall wail and weep. By my Lord, 
were I given the, choice between the glory and opulence, 
the wealth and dignity, the ease and luxury wherein 
they are, ancl the distress and affliction wherein I 
am, I would certainly choose that wherein I am to- 

they afterwards beheld the latter:— “This one is none other 
than a gracious angell” See Kur’an xii. especially v. 31-32. 


150 a traveller’s narrative. 

day, and I would not now exchange one atom of these 
afflictions for all that hath been created in the kingdom 
of production ! Were it not for afflictions in the way 
p. 182. of God my continuance would have no sweetness for 
me, nor would my life profit me. Let it not be hidden 
from the discerning and such as look towards the 
chiefest outlook that I, during the greater part of my 
days, was as a servant sitting beneath a sword sus¬ 
pended by a single hair who knoweth not when it 
shall descend upon him, ivhether it shall descend 
instantly or after a while. And in all this we give 
thanks to God the Lord of the worlds, and we praise 
Him under all circumstances: verily lie is a witness 
unto all things. 

“ We ask God to extend His shadow', that the 
Unitarians may haste thereto, and that the sincere 
may take skelter therein; and to bestow on [these] 
servants flowers from the garden of his grace and 
stars from the horizon of his favours; and to assist 
him in that which he liketh and approveth; and to help 
him unto that which shall bring him near to the 
Day-spring of His Most Comely Names, that he may 
not shut his eyes to the wrong which he seeth, but 
p. 183. may regard his subjects ivith the eye of favour and 
preserve them from violence 1 2 . And we ask Him 

1 By “ the Shadow of God” is meant the King of Persia. 

2 K. inserts here:— “And we ask Him (exalted is He) to 
gather all together by the gulf of the Most Mighty Ocean where- 


A traveller’s NARRATIVE. 151 

(exalted is He) to make thee a helper 1 unto HU 
religion and a regarder of His justice, that thou 
mayest rule over [His] servants as thou rulest over 
those of thy kindred, and mayest choose for them 
what thou urmldest choose for thyself. Verily He is 
the Potent , the Exalted, the Protecting, the Self- 
subsistent.” 

Now since suitable occasion hath arisen it hath 
been considered appropriate that some of the precepts 
of BeM’u’llah which are contained in tracts and 
epistles should also be inserted briefly in this treatise, 
so that the main principles and practice and [their] 
foundations and basis may become clear and ap¬ 
parent. And these texts have been copied from 
numerous tracts. 

Amongst them [is this]: —“ Consort with [people 
of all] religions with spirituality and fragrance*... 

of each drop crieth, ‘Verily He is the giver of good tidings to 
the Worlds and the quickener of the worlds; and praise be to 
God the King of the Day of Judgement.'" 

1 Perhaps there is an allusion here to the name of the 
Shah of Persia— Hasiru'd-Din —‘the helper of religion' or 
‘defender of the faith,’ and a prayer is uttered that he may 
indeed become that which his name implies. 

2 The words “that they may perceive in you the scent of the 

Merciful One” jz pSA proper to this passage 

are, whether intentionally or accidentally, omitted in the text, 
but they occur in all mss. of the Kitdb-i-Akdas, from which 
this quotation is taken. 


1-52 A traveller’s narrative. 

p. 184. Beware lest the zeal of ignorance possess you amongst 
mankind. All originated from God and returneth 
unto Him: verily He is the Source of creation and 
the Goal of the ivorlds.” 

And amongst them [is this]:—" Ye are forbidden 
sedition and strife in the books and epistles; and 
herein I desire nought save your exaltation and ele¬ 
vation, lohereunto heareth witness the heaven and its 
stars, the sun and its radiance, the trees and their 
haves, the seas and their waves, and, the earth and its 
treasures. We ask God to continue His saints and 
strengthen them unto that which befitteth them in this 
blessed, precious, and ivondrous station, and we ask 
Him to assist those ivho surround me to act according 
to that wh&reunto they have been commanded on the 
part of the Supreme Pen," 

And amongst them [is this]:—'“The fairest tree 
of knowledge is this sublime word:—‘ Ye are all the 
fruit of one tree and the leaves of one branch.’ Pride 
is not for Mm who loves his country, but for him who 
loves the [whole] world.’’ 

p. 185. And amongst them [is this] :—“ Verily he who 
educateth his son, or one of the sons [of another], it is 
as though he educated one of my sons. Upon him be 
the splendour of God, and His grace, and His mercy 
which preceded the worlds 1 .” 


1 This quotation is also from the Kitab-i-Akdas. 


A traveller’s narrative. 153 

Amongst them [is this]:—“0 people of Bel A! 
Ye have been and are the dawnings of affection and 
the day-springs of divine grace: defile not the tongue 
with cursing or execration of any one, and guard the 
eye from that which is not seemly. Shew forth that 
which ye have: if it be accepted, the object is at¬ 
tained; if not, interference is vain 1 : leave him to 
himself, [while] advancing toward God, the Pro¬ 
tecting, the Self-subsistent. Be not a cause of grief, 
much less of strife and sedition. It is hoped that 
ye will be nurtured in the shade of the lote-tree of 
Divine Grace, and practise that which God desireth. 
Ye are all leaves of one tree and drops of one sea.” ] 

Amongst them [is this]:—“ The faith of God and 
religion of God hath been revealed and manifested 
from the heaven of the Will of the King of Pre- 
existence only for the union and concord of the 
dwellers upon earth: make it not a cause of discord 
and dissension. The principal means and chief 
instrument for [bringing about] the appearance and 
irradiance of the luminary of concord is the religion 
of God and the Law of the Lord; while the growth of 
the world, the education of the nations, and the 
peace and comfort of those in all lands are through 
the divine ordinances and decrees. This is the 
principal means for this most great gift; it giveth 


i. 186. 


1 Cf. p. 72 supra. 


154 A traveller’s narrative. 

the cup of life, bestoweth everlasting life, and con- 
ferreth eternal blessedness. The chiefs of the earth, 
especially the exemplars of divine justice, must make 
strenuous efforts to guard this state and to upraise 
p. 187. and preserve it. So likewise that which is necessary 
is enquiry into the condition of the people, and cog¬ 
nizance of the deeds and circumstances of each one of 
the different classes. We desire of the exemplars of 
God’s power, namely of kings and chiefs, that they 
will make endeavour: perchance discord may de¬ 
part out of [their] midst, and the horizons may be 
illumined with the light of concord. All must hold 
to that which floweth from the Pen of Reminder, and 
practise it. God witnesseth and [all] the atoms of 
existences testify that we have mentioned that which 
will be the cause of the exaltation, elevation, education, 
preservation, and reformation of the dwellers upon 
earth. AVe desire of God that He will strengthen 
[His] servants. That -which this oppressed one seeketh 
of all is justice and fairness: let them not be satisfied 
with listening; let them ponder on w'hat hath become 
manifest from this oppressed one. I swear by the 
Sun of Revelation, which hath shone forth from the 
p. 188. horizon of the heaven of the Kingdom of the Merci¬ 
ful One, that, if any [other] expositor or speaker had 
been beheld, 1 would not have made myself an object 
for the malevolence and the calumnies of mankind.’’ 
Finis. 


A traveller's narrative. 155 

By these sentences a clue to the principles, ideas, 
line of conduct, behaviour, and intentions of this sect 
is placed in the hand; whereas if we seek to become 
acquainted with the truth of this matter through the 
accounts and stories which are in the mouths of men, 
the truth will be entirely concealed and hidden by 
reason of their manifold differences and contrariety. 

It is therefore best to discover the principles and 
objects of this sect from the contents of their teachings, 
tracts, and epistles. There is no authority nor are 
there any proofs or texts superior to these, for this is 
the foundation of foundations and the ultimate cri¬ 
terion. One cannot judge of the generality by the 
speech or action of individuals, for diversity of states p. 189. 
is one of the peculiarities and concomitants of the 
human race. 

At all events, in the beginning of the year one 
thousand two hundred and eighty-five [a.ii.] they 
transferred Behd’u’lMh and all those persons who 
were with him from Adrianople to the prison of Acre, 
and Mfrzi Yahy& to the fortress of Famagusta, and 
there they remained 1 . But in Persia after a while 
sundry persons who were discerning in matters, no¬ 
table for wise policy, and aware and cognizant of the 

1 According to Nahil’s chronological poem, Beha’u’llah and 
his companions left Adrianople on the 20th of Rahl‘ II. a.h. 

1285 (August 10th, a.b. 1868) and reached Acre on the 12th of 
Jemadi I. (August 31st). See notes 2 and 3 on p. 101, and 
note W at end. 


156 A traveller’s narrative. 

truth of the earlier and later events, made representa¬ 
tion before the presence of His Majesty the King 
saying, “What has hitherto been reported, related, 
asserted, and alleged concerning this sect in the Royal 
Presence was either an exaggeration, or else [the 
speakers] fabricated statements with a view to [their 
p. 190 . own] individual designs and the attainment of personal 
advantages. If so be that His Majesty the King will 
investigate matters in his own noble person, it is 
believed that it will become clear before his presence 
that this sect have no worldly object nor any con¬ 
cern with political matters. The fulcrum of their 
motion and rest and the pivot of their cast and 
conduct is restricted to spiritual things and confined 
to matters of conscience; it has nothing to do with 
the affairs of government nor any concern with the 
powers of the throne; its principles are the with¬ 
drawal of veils, the verification of signs, the education 
of souls, the reformation of characters, the purification 
of hearts, and illumination with the gleams of en¬ 
lightenment. That which befits the kingly dignity 
p. 191. and beseems the world-ordering diadem is this, that all 
subjects of every class and creed should be the objects 
of bounty, and [should abide] in the utmost tran¬ 
quillity and prosperity under the wide shadow of the 
King’s justice. For the divine shadow 1 is the refuge 

1 i.e. “the royal protection”; for a King is called “the 
shadow of God on the earth." 


a traveller’s narrative. 157 

of all the dwellers upon earth and the asylum of all 
mankind; it is not limited to one party. In par¬ 
ticular, the true nature and real doctrine of this sect 
have [now] become evident and well known: all 
their writings and tracts have repeatedly and fre¬ 
quently fallen into [our] hands, and are to be fouud 
preserved in the possession of the government. If 
they be perused, the actual truth and inward verity 
will become clear and apparent. These pages are 
entirely taken up with prohibitions of sedition, [re¬ 
commendations of] upright conduct amongst man¬ 
kind, obedience, submission, loyalty, conformity 1 , and 
acquisition of laudable qualities, and encouragements p. 192. 
to become endowed with praiseworthy accomplish¬ 
ments and characteristics. They have absolutely no 
reference to political questions, nor do they treat of 
that which could cause disturbance or sedition. 

Under these circumstances a just government can 
[find] no excuse, and possesses no pretext [for further 
persecuting this sect] except [a claim to the right of] 
interference in thought and conscience, which are the 
private possessions of the heart and soul. And, as 
regards this matter, there has [already] been much 
interference, and countless efforts have been made. 

What blood has been shed ! What heads have been 
hung up 1 Thousands of persons have been slain; 

1 i.e. conformity to the royal commands, civil laws, and all 
such observances and customs as are harmless, even if useless. 


158 A traveller’s narrative. 

thousands of women and children have become 
wanderers or captives; many are the buildings which 
have been ruined; and how many noble races and 
families have become headless and homeless! Yet 
nought has been effected and no advantage has been 
p. 193. gained; no remedy has been discovered for this ill, 
nor any easy salve for this wound. [To ensure] 
freedom of conscience and tranquillity of heart and 
soul is one of the duties and functions of govern¬ 
ment, and is in all ages the cause of progress in 
development and ascendency over other lands. Other 
civilized countries acquired not this pre-eminence, nor 
attained unto these high degrees of influence and 
power, till such time as they put away the strife of 
sects out of their midst, and dealt with all classes 
according to one standard. All are one people, one 
nation, one species, one kind. The common interest 
is complete equality; justice and equality amongst 
mankind are amongst the chief promoters of empire 
and the principal means to the extension of the skirt 
p. 194. of conquest. From whatever section of earth’s deni¬ 
zens signs of contentiousness appear, prompt punish¬ 
ment is required by a just government; while any 
person who girds up the loins of endeavour and carries 
off the ball of priority is deserving of royal favours 
and -worthy of splendid and princely gifts. Times are 
changed, and the need and fashion of the world are 
changed. Interference with creed and faith in every 


a traveller’s narrative. 159 

country causes manifest detriment, while justice and 
equal dealing towards all peoples on the face of the 
earth are the means whereby progress is effected. It 
is right to exercise caution and care with regard to 
political factions, and to be fearful and apprehensive 
of materialist sects; for the subjects occupying the 
thoughts of the former are [designs of] interference 
in political matters and [desire of] ostentation, while 
the actions and conduct of the latter are subversive p-195. 
of safety and tranquillity. But this sect are steadfast 
in their own path and firmly established in conduct 
and faith; they are pious, devoted, tenacious, and 
consistent in such sort that they freely lay down their 
lives, and, after their own way, seek to please God; 
they are strenuous in effort and earnest in endeavour; 
they are the essence of obedience and most patient in 
hardship and trouble; they sacrifice their existence 
and raise no complaint or cry; what they utter is in 
truth the secret longing of the heart, and what they 
seek and pursue is by the direction of a leader. It is 
therefore necessary to regard their principles and 
their chief, and not to make a trivial thing a pretext. 

Now since the conduct of the chief, the teachings of 
his epistles, and the purport of his writings are 
apparent and well known, the line of action of this p. 196. 
sect is plain and obvious as the sun. Of whatever 
wa^ possible and practicable by way of discourage¬ 
ment, determent, eradication, intimidation, repre- 


160 A traveller’s narrative. 

hension, slaughter, banishment, and stripes there was 
no lack, yet nothing was thereby effected. In other 
countries when they perceived severity and persecution 
in such instances to be identical with stimulation and 
incitement, and saw that paying no attention was 
more effectual, they abated the fire of revolution. 
Therefore did they universally proclaim the equal 
rights of all denominations, and sounded the liberty 
of all classes from east to west. This clamour and 
outcry, this uproar and conflagration, are the con¬ 
sequences of instigation, temptation, incitement, and 
provocation. For thirty years there has been no 
p. 197. rumour of disturbance or rebellion, nor any sign of 
sedition. Notwithstanding the duplication of ad¬ 
herents and the increase and multiplication of this 
body, through many admonitions and encouragements 
to virtue this sect are all in the utmost repose and 
stability: they have made obedience their distinctive 
trait, and in extreme submissiveness and subordination 
are the loyal subjects of the King. On what lawful 
grounds can the government further molest them, or 
permit them to be slighted ? Besides this, interf erence 
with the consciences and beliefs of peoples, and perse¬ 
cution of diverse denominations of men is an obstacle 
to the expansion of the kingdom, an impediment to 
the conquest of other countries, an obstruction to 
multiplication of subjects, and contrary to the es¬ 
tablished principles of monarchy. In the time when 


a traveller’s narrative. 


161 


the mighty government of Persia did not interfere 
with [men’s] consciences, diverse sects entered in and 
abode beneath the banner of the great king, and p. 198. 
[many] different peoples reposed and served under the 
shadow' of that mighty government’s protection. The 
extent of the empire increased from day to day; the 
greater portion of the continent of Asia was under the 
just rule of its administration; and the majority of 
the different religions and races were [represented] 
amongst the subjects of him who wore its crown. 

But when the custom of interference with the creeds 
of all sects arose, and the principle of enquiring into 
men’s thoughts became the fashion and practice, the 
extensive dominions of the empire of Persia dimin¬ 
ished, and many provinces and vast territories passed 
out of her hands, until it reached such a point that 
the great provinces of Tur&n, Assyria, and Chaldrea 
were lost; until—what need of prolixity?—the greater 
part of the regions of Khurd,s£n likewise passed out of 
the control of the government of Persia by reason of 
the interference with matters of conscience and the p- 199. 
fanaticism of its governors. For the cause of the 
Afghan independency and the revolt of the Turcoman 
tribes was in truth this thing, else were they at no time 
or period separate from Persia. In face of its evident 
harmfulness what necessity is there for persecuting 
the harmless? But if we desire to put in force the 
sentence [of the doctors of religion] no one will escape 

11 


B. 


162 


a traveller’s narrative. 


fetters and chains and the keenness of the sword, for 
in Persia, apart from this sect, there exist diverse 
sects, such as the Mutasharri's, the Sheykhi's, the 
Sufis, the Nuseyris 1 , aud others, each one of whom 
regards the other as infidels and accuses them of 
crime. Under these circumstances what need that 
the government should persecute this one or that one, 

. 2C0. or disturb itself about the ideas and consciences of its 
•subjects and people ? All are the subjects of the 
king, and are under the shadow of the royal pro¬ 
tection. Every one who hears and obeys should be 
undisturbed and unmolested, while every one who is 
rebellious and disobedient deserves punishment at the 
hands of his Majesty the King. Above all, the times 
are completely changed, while principles and institu¬ 
tions have undergone alteration. In all countries 
such actions hinder development and progress, and 
cause decline and deterioration. Of the violent 
agitation which has befallen the supports of Oriental 
government the chief cause and principal factor are in 
truth these laws and habits of interference; while 
that state the seat of whose dominion over the 
Atlantic and the Baltic is in the furthest regions of 

1 Concerning the Sheykhis see Note E at end. Concerning 
the Nuseyris see note 1 on p. 14. The Mutasharri‘s are those 
who conform to the SharVat or Sacred Law founded on the 
Kur’an and traditions, or, in other words, the orthodox party. 
The Sfifis—those mystical pantheists of Persia—are too well 
known to need description. 


A traveller’s narrative. 1G3 

the North has, by reason of equal dealing with its r 
different subjects and the establishment of the uni¬ 
form political rights of diverse nationalities, acquired p. 201. 
extensive colonies in each of the five continents of 
the world. Where is this little island in the North 
Atlantic, and where the vast territory of the East 
Indies? Can such extension be obtained save byi 
equal justice to all peoples and classes? At all 
events, by means of just laws, freedom of conscience, 
and uniform dealing and equity towards all nation¬ 
alities and peoples, t hey have actually brought under 
their dominion nearly all of the inhabited quarter 
of the world, and by reason of these principles 
of freedom they have added day by day to the 
strength, power, and extent of their empire, while 
most of the peoples on the face of the earth celebrate 
the name of this state for its justice. As regards 
religious zeal and true piety, their touchstone and 
proof are firmness and steadfastness in noble qualities, 
virtues, and perfections, which are the greatest p. 202. 
blessings of the human race; but not interference 
with the belief of this one or that one, demolition of 
edifices, and cutting off of the human race. In the 
middle ages, whereof the beginning was the time of 
the fall of the Roman Empire, and the end the 
capture of Constantinople at the hands of [the 
followers of] Isl&m, fierce intolerance and molestation 
of far and near arose in [all] the countries of Europe 

11—2 


164 A traveller’s narrative. 

by reason of the paramount influence of religious 
leaders. The matter came to such a pass that the 
edifice of humanity seemed tottering to its fall, and 
the peace and comfort of chief and vassal, king and 
subject, became hidden behind the veil of annihilation. 
Night and day all parties were slaves to apprehension 
and disquietude: civilization was utterly destroyed: 
p. 203. the control and order of countries was neglected: 
the principles and essentials of the happiness of the 
human race were in abeyance: the supports of kingly 
authority were shaken: but the influence and power 
of the heads of religion and of the monks were in 
all parts complete. But when they removed these 
differences, persecutions, and bigotries out of their 
midst, and proclaimed the equal rights of all subjects 
and the liberty of men’s consciences, the lights of 
glory and power arose and shone from the horizons of 
that kingdom in such wise that those countries made 
progress in every direction; and whereas the mightiest 
monarchy of Europe had been servile to and abased 
before the smallest government of Asia, now the great 
states of Asia are unable to oppose the small states of 
Europe. These are effectual and sufficient proofs 
p. 204. that the conscience of man is sacred and to be re¬ 
spected; and that liberty thereof produces widening 
of ideas, amendment of morals, improvement of 
conduct, disclosure of the secrets of creation, and 
manifestation of the hidden verities of the contin- 


A traveller’s narrative. 


165 


gent 1 world. Moreover, if interrogation of conscience, 
which is one of the private possessions of the heart 
and the sonl, take place in this world, what further 
recompense remains for man in the court of divine 
justice at the day of general resurrection? Con¬ 
victions and ideas are within the scope of the com¬ 
prehension of the King of kings, not of kings; and 
soul and conscience are between the fingers of control 
of the Lord of hearts, not of [His] servants. So in 
the world of existence two persons unanimous in all 
grades [of thought] and all beliefs cannot be found. 

‘ The ways unto God are as the number of the breaths 
of [His] creatures 2 ’ is a mysterious truth, and ‘To 
every [people] We have appointed a [separate] rite 3 ’ 
is one of the subtleties of the Kur’dn. If this vast 
energy and precious time which have been expended p. 205. 
in persecuting other religions, and whereby no sort of 
result or effect has been obtained, had been spent in 
strengthening the basis of the monarchy, fortifying the 
imperial throne, making prosperous the realms of the 
sovereign, and quickening the subjects of the king, 
ere now the royal dominions would have become 
prosperous, the seed-plot of the people would have 

1 On the meaning of ‘contingent’ being, see note 1 on 
p. 115. 

- This is a very well-known and often quoted tradition. 

3 Kur'an xxii. 35. The verse is inaccurately quoted here. 

It should be SJI w>l jC 1 ‘ to every people,’etc. 


166 a traveller’s narrative. 

been watered by the bounty of princely justice, and the 
splendour of the kingdom of Persia would be evident 
and apparent as the true dawn throughout the 
horizons of the w r orld.” 

These questions and considerations, at all events, 
certain persons have reported. But let us return to 
our original subject. The Royal Personage was 
pleased to investigate the hidden secret in his own 
noble person. According to the account transmitted, 
it became clear and obvious before the [Royal] 
p. 206. Presence that most of these suspicions arose from the 
intrigues of persons of influence who were continually 
engaged in fabricating matters behind the veil of 
fancy and casting suspicion upon the community, 
and who, to attain advantages for themselves and 
preserve their own positions, were w 7 ont to make 
motes appear as globes, and straws as mountains in 
the mirror of their imagination. For these suspicions 
there was absolutely no foundation or basis, nor had 
these assertions any proof or verisimilitude. What 
power and ability have the helpless people, or what 
boldness and strength have poor subjects that they 
should inflict injury or hurt on the sovereign might, 
or be able to oppose the military forces of the 
crown ? 

From that time till now disturbance and sedition 
have been on the wane in Persia, and clamour and 
p. 207. strife have ceased; although [still] on rare occasions 


A traveller’s narrative. 


167 


certain of the official doctors do, for their own per¬ 
sonal and private advantage, stir up the common 
folk, raise a hue and cry, and, by their importunity 
and pertinacity, molest one or two individuals of this 
sect, as happened ten or twelve years ago in Isfahan. 
For there were amongst the inhabitants of Isfahan 
two brothers, Seyyids of Tab&tabi, Seyyid Hasan 
and Seyyid Huseyn, celebrated in those parts for 
piety, trustworthiness, and nobility; men of wealth, 
engaged in commerce, behaving towards all men with 
perfect kindliness and courtesy. And to all outward 
appearance no one had observed in either of these 
two brothers any swerving from what was best, much 
less any conduct or behaviour which could deserve 
torment or punishment; for, as is related, they were P 
admitted by all [pre-eminent] in all praiseworthy and 
laudable qualities, while their deeds and actions were 
like exhortations and admonitions. These had trans¬ 
acted business with Mir Muhammed Huseyn the 
Imim-Jum‘& of Isfahan; and when they came to 
make up their accounts it appeared that the sum of 
eighteen thousand tumdns 1 was due to them. They 
[therefore] broke off [further] transactions, prepared 
a bond for this sum, and desired it to be sealed. 
This thing was grievous to the Imdm-JunTa, so that 
he came to the stage of anger and enmity. Finding 


208. 


1 About £5400. 


168 a traveller’s narrative. 

himself in debt, and having no resource but to pay, 
he raised clamour and outcry saying “ These two bro¬ 
thers are IMbi's and deserve severe punishment from 
the king.” A crowd at once attacked their house, 
p. 209. plundered and pillaged all their goods, distressed 
and terrified their wives and children, and seized and 
despoiled all their possessions. Then, fearing that 
they might refer the punishment to the step of the 
king’s throne and loose their tongues in demand of 
redress, he [i.e. the Inffim-Jum‘a] fell to thinking 
how to compass their death and destroy them. He 
therefore persuaded certain of the doctors to co¬ 
operate with him, and they pronounced sentence of 
death. Afterwards they arrested those two brothers, 
put them in chains, and brought them before the 
public assembly. Yet seek as they might to fix on 
them some accusation, find some fault, or discover 
some pretext, they were unable to do so. At length 
they said, “ You must either renounce this faith, or 
else lay down your heads beneath the sword of 
p. 210.'punishment.” Although some of those present urged 
them saying, “Say merely ‘We are not of this sect,’ 
and it is sufficient, and will be the means of your de¬ 
liverance and protection,” they would by no means 
consent, but rather confirmed and declared it with 
eloquent speech and affecting utterance, so that the 
rage and violence of the Inffim-Junda boiled over, 
and, not satisfied with killing and destroying them, 


A traveller’s narrative. 


169 


they inflicted sundry indignities on their bodies after 
death to mention which is not fitting, and of which 
the details are beyond the power of speech. Indeed 
in such wise was the blood of these two brothers 
shed that even the Christian priest of -Tulfh cried out, 
lamented, and wept on that day; and this event 
befel after such sort that every one wept over the 
fate of those two brothers, for during the whole p. 211. 
period of their life they had never distressed the 
feelings even of an ant, while by general report they 
had in the time of famine in Persia spent all their 
wealth in relieving the poor and distressed. Yet, 
notwithstanding this reputation, were they slain with 
such cruelty in the midst of the people! 

But now for a long while the justice of the King 
has prevented and withheld, and none dares attempt 
such grievous molestations'. 

VALE. 


1 Unfortunately in face of the martyrdom of Aka Jlirza 
Ashraf of Ab£de at Isfahan in or about October 1888, and the 
.still more recent persecutions at Si-dih near Isfahan, this 
statement can no longer be taken as true. For some remarks 
on these persecutions, and some further account of the 
martyrdom of Seyyid Hasan and Seyyid Huseyn, with which 
our history concludes, see B. i. pp. 489-491, B. ii. pp. 998-999, 
and Note Y at end. 


170 A traveller’s narrative. 

There ceased from the mating of th is its poor writer 
the Letter Zd 

on the night of Friday the 18 i th of 
Jamdcli-ul- Uld 
a.h. 1307 '. 

1 January 10th, a.d. 1890. Concerning “the Letter Za’ 
(Zeynu’l-Mukarrabin), and the colophons wherewith ass 
written by bis hand conclude, see Note Z at end. 


NOTE A. 


Persian and European Accounts of the Bab and his 
Religion. 

I. Persian Accounts. 

Four works, besides the present, written in the Persian 
language treat more or less fully of tlie history of the Babf 
movement. Two of these, the N disikhu’ t-Tawdnkk and 
the Rawzatu s-Safci, are general liistories compiled by 
Musulmdn historians ; one, the Tdrikh-i-Jadtd, is a mono¬ 
graph on the said movement, whereof the author, if not 
actually a Bhbf , at least sympathised warmly with the 
reformers :one. the Kisasul-'Ulmnd, is a biography of 
Shi'ite divines, which deals incidentally at some length with 
the Bhbl doctrines and the history of their originator and his 
precursors. Each of these works I shall now consider in 
detail. 


1. The Ndsikhu t-Tawdrikh. 

This is a general history of the world, intended, as its 
name implies, to supersede all preceding works of a similar 
character. Its author is Mi'rzd Takf Mustauji, better 
known by his poetical nom-de-guerre of Sipihr and his 
official title of Lisdniil-Mulk (‘ The Tongue of the King¬ 
dom ’). Gobineau, at p. 454 of his interesting work Trois 
Am en Asie (Paris, 1859), gives a description of the social 
aspects of this historian (to whom he is indebted for the 
greater part of the facts relating to the B&bi movement so 
graphically pourtrayed in his Religions et Philosophies dans 
VAsie Centrale ), and of Rizh-Kuli Klffin, the author of the 
work to be next mentioned.’ The Ndsiklmt-Tawdr'ikh 
consists of a series of large volumes, each of which deals 


174 


NOTE A—BIBLIOGRAPHY. 


with a particular period of history. The last_ volume is 
entirely devoted to the K&j&r dynasty, and with it alone are 
we here concerned. It is divided into three parts, of which 
the first treats of the origin and rise of the K4j&rs and the 

reigns of Akfi Muhammad and Fath-‘Ah' SliAh ; the second 
of the reign of Muhammad ShAh ; and the third of the reign 
of NAsiru’d-Din, the present ShAh, down to the year a. h. 
1267 (a.d. 1850—1851). A further supplement published 
separately carries the history down to the year a.h. 1273 
(a.d. 1856—1857). All that relates to the BAbfs is contained 
in tlie second and third parts of the main volume and 
in the supplement, of the contents of which I shall imme¬ 
diately give a brief abstract. My intention was to have 
made this abstract a complete index of contents, but, having 
already written more than half of it, I perceived that it 
would occupy more space than could conveniently be spared, 
and I was therefore compelled to confine myself to a mere 
summary of the chief heads of the narrative, deferring a 
fuller presentation thereof till some future occasion. This 
is the less to be regretted, inasmuch as almost everything 
relating to the subject before us which is contained in this 
history has been embodied in the works of Gobineau and 
Kazem-Beg. The whole of the Nasikhu t-Tawarikh has 
been lithographed at TeherAn, but unfortunately the pages 
are unnumbered and there is no index save occasional mar¬ 
ginal references to the chief events narrated in the text. 
The numeration of the pages here given is supplied by 
myself. It is re-commenced for each part and for the sup¬ 
plement, but, inasmuch as my copy of the latter has no 
title-page and appears to be incomplete, it cannot in this 
case be regarded as having more than a relative value. 


Contents of Part ii of the Kdjdriyya volume in 
so far as they relate to the Biibis. 

P. 130. Events of the year a.ii. 1260 (a.d. 1844). 
Appearance of the BAb—His parentage, education, and 
character—Development of his claims—Peculiarities of his 
doctrines and ordinances—Reception accorded to him by 
different classes. 


XASIKHU’T-TAW ARIKH, 


175 


P. 131. Proofs advanced by the BAb—His innovations 
in matters of religion—Accusations against the chastity 
and temperance of his followers—The BAb’s pilgrimage to 
Mecca and return to Bushire—Action taken against him 
and his missionaries by Huseyn KhAn Ajuddn-basM the 
governor of Pars—The BAb confined to his house. 

P. 132. The BAb is entrapped by a stratagem of Hu¬ 
seyn KhAn’s into a too free enunciation of his doctrines— 
He is punished, and imprisoned with greater rigour for 
six months—Minuchilvr Khan Mu'tamadu d-Dawla, the 
governor of IsfahAn, succeeds in effecting the BAb’s release 
and bringing him to Isfahan, where he treats him with con¬ 
sideration and kindness. 

P. 133. Huseyn Khan expels Seyyid YahyA and other 
prominent BAbfs from ShfrAz—Minuchihr KhAn, anxious to 
test the BAb’s knowledge, summons a number of learned 
men to confer and dispute with him. [See Note J, infra.\ 

P. 134 [first 7 lines]. Conclusion of this conference— 
Minfiehihr KhAn conceals the BAb in his house and sets 
afloat a rumour that he has sent him to TeherAn. 

***** 

P. 175 [last 3 lines]. Account of the BAb’s first exami¬ 
nation before the clergy of Tabriz in a.h. 1263 (a.d. 1847). 

P 176 1 

p' i ' 1 Continuation of the same. [See note M, infra.] 

P. 178 [first 9 lines]. Conclusion of the same—The 
BAb is bastinadoed until he recants. 


Contents of Part iii of the Kdjdriyya volume in 
so far as they relate to the BAbfs. 

P. 45. Events of the year a.h. 1264 (a.d. 1848). Kur- 
ratu’l-‘Ayn, her parentage, education, beauty, learning and 
eloquence—She embraces the BAbt doctrines. 

P. 46 [first 12 lines]. The devotion inspired by Kur- 
ratu’l-‘Ayn in her followers—She discards the veil, and 
openly preaches the new doctrines—Anger of her uncle, 
MullA Muhammad Takf—He drives her from his house— 
He is assassinated by BAbfs—KurratuVAyn flies from 


176 


NOTE A—BIBLIOGRAPHY. 


Kazvln, but continues her propaganda elsewhere. [See 3S T ote 
Q, infra.] 

* * * * * 

P. 53 [last line]. MulM Huseyn of Bushraweyh and the 
Bhbl insurrection in M&zandardn. 

P. 54. MulM Huseyn is converted to Bhblism—His 
missionary journey—His l-eception and adventures in Isfa¬ 
han, KMslMn, and Teheran. 

P. 55. MulM Huseyn attempts to attach Muhammad 

Shall and IMjl Mlrz4 Akdsl to the Bdb’s cause—He is 
compelled by threats to leave Teher&n—He proceeds to 
Khnr&s&n— Conversions to B&blism—Measures adopted 
against the B4bls— H&mz6 Mi'rzd imprisons MulM Huseyn 
in his camp at Bidag&n—Escape of MulM Huseyn from 
custody—His journey westward, successes, and rebuffs. 

P. 56. Continuation of Mull4 Huseyn’s journey to¬ 
wards M4zandar t 4n—Encounter with the populace at Mi- 
y4ml and defeat of the B4bls—Altercation with MulM 
Muhammad Kazirn, the mujtahid of SlMhrhd—Death of 
Muhammad SlMli—Account of H&jl Muhammad ‘All of 
BMfurush—He falls in with the B&b on the pilgrimage to 
Mecca and embraces his doctrines—He returns to Bdr- 
furush—He joins MulM Huseyn at Masli-had—Beturns 
thence on the an-est of his colleague—At Badasht near 
Bistim meets Kurratu’l-‘Ayn and her followers who have 
arrived from Kazvln. 

P. 57. Kurratu’l-'Ayn’s address — Its effect on the au¬ 
dience—She returns with Hdjl Muhammad ‘All towards 
M4zandar4n—Imputations on the conduct of Kurratu’l- 
‘Ayn and Hdjl Muhammad ‘All—They are attacked by 
the people of Hazdr-Jarlb—They separate, he returning to 
B4rfurhsh, and she continuing to wander through Mhzan- 
dardn preaching—MulM Huseyn joins his colleague at 
B&rfuriish—Success of the B^bl propaganda—Enmity of 
the Sa‘ldu’l-‘UIanM—Preparations for battle — KlMnlar 
Mlrzh’s aid invoked by the orthodox party to put dowu 
the innovators. 

P. 58. The B4bls retreat from, but return to, B4r- 
fnn'ish—‘Abbds-Kull KlMn of iMrijhn interferes—Collision 
between the two parties in the city—Terms offered by the 


NASIKHU’T-TAWARlKH. 


177 


Bibls and accepted by ‘Abbis-Kull Khin—The Bibls 
retire accompanied by an escort sent by ‘Abbis-Kull Khin 
—After the escort leaves them they are attacked' by Khus- 
raw of Kidi-Kali at the head of a band of plunderers— 
Ivhusraw is killed and bis followers routed—The Bibls 
take up their quarters at the Tomb of Sheykh Tabarsi. 

P. 59. The Biibis fortify their position strongly without 
let or hindrance, most of the nobles and chiefs of the pro¬ 
vince having gone to assist at the Shill’s coronation at 
Teherin—Description of these fortifications—Garrison and 
commissariat of the Bibls—Mulli Huseyn continues his 
propaganda—Extreme veneration paid to Hijl Muhammad 
‘All by the Bibls—Mulli Huseyn’s encouragements and 
exhortations to his followers. 

P. 60. A letter arrives from the Bib containing this 
passage:— 

iJ~>- (j a OjjJaej 

Iflll bl O^hai j 

‘ They [the Bibls] shall descend from the Green Isle [Mi- 
zandarin] unto the foot of the mountain ofZawrd [Teherin], 
and shall slay about twelve thousand of the Turks ’—The 
Government, informed of the Bibls’ proceedings, instructs 
the Mizandarinl chiefs to take action against them—Aka 
‘Abdu’llih marches against Sheykh Tabarsi with some 
Afghan, Kurdish, and Turkish tribesmen and volunteers 
from Kidl-Kali—Mulli Huseyn makes a night-attack on 
the besiegers. 

P. 61. Aki ‘Abdu’llih is slain and his force routed 
with a loss of thirty killed—The fugitives flee to the village 
of Farri, which is sacked, burned, and razed to the ground 
by the Bibls, and its inhabitants put to the sword—Rage 
of Xisiru’d-Dln Shih on hearing this news—Prince Mahdl- 
Kull Mlrzi is ordered to proceed against the Bibls with all 
speed and exterminate them—He quits Teherin at the 
end of Muharram [a.h. 1265 = Christmas, a.d. 1848] for 
Mizandarin—‘Abbis-Kull Khin marches by another route 
to join him—The Prince takes up his quarters at Visaks 

12 


B. 


178 


NOTE A—BIBLIOGRAPHY. 


near ‘Alf-4b4d—His negligence—Stormy weather and snow 
come on. 

P. 62. Mulld Huseyn makes a sortie with 300 resolute 
men before dawn on Safar 15th [a.h. 1265 = January 10th 
a.d. 1849]—By means of a stratagem he enters Vdsaks, 
surrounds and fires the Prince’s quarters, and defeats and 
disperses the enemy, of whom many are killed, including 
two princes, SultAn Huseyn Mfrzh and Dd’tid Mi'rza— 
Prince Mahdf-Kulf Mfrzd escapes with difficulty—Hdjf 
Muhammad ‘All is wounded in the mouth. 

P. 63. Courageous stand made by the men of Ashraf 
against the Bhbfs—Cowardice of the other troops—Trium¬ 
phant return of the Bdbfs to their fortress—The Prince is 
discovered and harboured by a peasant, and his troops gra¬ 
dually re-assembled—He declines to risk another encounter 
—Arrival of ‘Abbds-Kuli Khdn with his troops before 
Sbeykh Tabarsf—His foolhardiness and negligence—Mulld 
Huseyn at the head of 400 Bdbfs makes a sortie before dawn 
ou Rabfiu’l-Avval 10th [a.h. 1265 = February 3rd a.d. 1849]. 

P. 64. Description of the engagement—Rout of the 
besiegers—Mulld Huseyn is mortally wounded—The B4bfs 
retire in good order to their stronghold—After their depar¬ 
ture and the dawn of day some of the scattered besiegers 
return, bury their own dead, decapitate the B4bf corpses, 
and retire. 

P. 65. How the news of the defeat is communicated 
to Prince Mahdf-Kuli Mfrz4—Death of Mull4 Huseyn after 
re-eutering Sheykh Tabarsf—His dying injunctions—His 
burial in the shrine—Thirty other B4bfs die of their wounds 
—The B4bfs go out to bury their dead, find them decapi¬ 
tated, and in retaliation exhume and decapitate the Musul- 
m4n corpses and fix their heads on posts round the gate of 
the fortress—How the news of the defeat is received by the 
Prince—After much hesitation he advances against the B4bfs 
and encamps at Kiy4-Kal4. 

P. 66. On reaching Sheykh Tabarsf the Prince’s courage 
fails him—He retires to K4sht, and there meets 'Abb4s-Kulf 
Kh4n—Preparations for the siege of Sheykh Tabarsf— 
Arrival of artillery—Discon tent and insubordination amongst 
the besieging troops caused by the wilfulness and incapacity 
of Mahdf-Kulf Mfrz4. 


NASIKHU’T-T a W ARIKH. 


179 


P. 67. Sortie of 200 BAbfs—They capture one of tire 
towers erected by the besiegers—Cruelty of Mahdf-Kulf 
MfrzA to one of his wounded officers—Renewed anger of 
the Sh&h because the siege has lasted for four months 
without any decisive advantage having been gained— 
Threats and reproaches addressed hy the Sh&h to the 
besiegers. 

P. 68. Suleymdn KhAn AfshAr is sent from TeherAn 
to superintend the siege—Revival of the courage of the 
besiegers—A breach is effected in the BAbf fortifications 
by means of a mine sprung under the western tower of the 
fortress—A vigorous attempt to storm the breach fails, 
once again through the incapacity of Mahdf-Kulf MfrzA— 
Desertions from the BAbf camp—Fate of AkA Rasul and 
thirty other deserters. 

P. 69. Desertion of Riza KhAn and some others from 
the Babfs—They receive promises of pardon from the 
Prince—They are placed in the custody of HAcll KhAn of 
Xur—The BAbfs, having consumed all their provisions, are 
reduced to eating grass, leaves, boiled leather, and broth 
made from the bones of dead horses—They make another 
desperate sortie, and attempt, but fail, to capture the tower 
erected by the besiegers against the western gate—The 
BAbfs capitulate on receiving a written promise, signed and 
sealed by the Prince, that their lives shall be spared. 

P. 70. Evacuation of Sheykh Tabarsf and entry of the 
surviving Babfs (216 in number) into the royalist camp— 
They are reassured hy the manner in which they are at 
first received, but on the following day are perfidiously 
massacred, except HAjf Muhammad ‘All and some of the 
other chiefs, who are reserved to grace the Prince’s trium¬ 
phal entry into BArfurush—The Prince visits the deserted 
fortress, marvels at the skill displayed in its construction, 
and carries off the spoils accumulated by the BAbfs—Execu¬ 
tion of HAjf Muhammad ‘All and the other BAbf chiefs by 
command of the MusulmAn clergy—During the whole war 
in MAzandarAn 1500 BAbfs and 500 soldiers perished. 

* *- * * * 

P. 83 [last 12 lines]. Troubles at ZaujAn—MullA Mu¬ 
hammad ‘All ZanjAnf—His character and previous career— 
His innovations, and disagreements with the other clergy. 

12—2 


180 


NOTE A—BIBLIOGRAPHY. 


P. 84. He is summoned to TeherAn by Muhammad 
ShAh and forbidden to return to ZanjAn—On the death of 
that king he escapes in disguise and returns home—He is 
received with acclamation by his admirers—He begins to 
preach the BAbf doctrines, and soon gains 15,000 adhe¬ 
rents—Action is taken against him by die government—- 
Collision between him and AslAn-Khan the governor of 
ZanjAn. 

P. 85. The BAbfe assume the offensive—Their organiza¬ 
tion and preparations—Fighting begins on Rajab 5th [a.h. 
1266 = May 17th, a.d. 1850. In the Nasikhu’t-Taivuukk 
these events are described under the year a.h. 1265, but 
this is an error, as proved by the accounts of Watson and 
Lady Sheil]—Names of some of the killed and wounded, 
who number about forty in all—Execution of a BAbf pri¬ 
soner named Sheyklri remarkable for his valour—Attack on 
Aslan KhAn’s residence by a party of BAbfs led by one Mir 
SAlih—Repulse of the BAbfs and death of their leader— 
Names of some of the killed and wounded. 

P. 86. Arrival of Sadru’d-Dawla on Rajab 20th [Jnne 
3rd], and of Seyyid ‘All KhAu of Fi'ruzkuh, ShahbAz KhAu 
of MavAgha, Muhammad ‘All KhAn Shahsfvan, KAzim KhAn 
AfshAr, and Mahmud KhAn of Khfiy with large reinforce¬ 
ments of cavalry and artilllery on Sha'bAn 2nd—5th [June 
13th—16th]—Capture of a BAbf position held by Mash¬ 
had f Plrl on Sha‘bAn 20th [July 1st]—Impatience of the 
Government—MustafA KMn KAjAr, colonel of the 16th 
(ShakAkf) regiment, is sent to join the besiegers—Capture 
of a BAbf position held by MfrzA Faraju’llAh after a des¬ 
perate struggle on RamazAn 15th [July 25th]—Besiegers 
further reinforced by NAsiriyya regiment and a corps of 
picked marksmen, and threatened with severe punish¬ 
ment unless they quickly bring the siege to a close— 
General attack on the BAbfs on RamazAn 25th [August 
4th], 

P. 87. The day goes against the BAbfs till Mull A Mu¬ 
hammad ‘All creates a diversion by setting fire to the 
bazaar—On ShawwAl 8th [August 17th] the besiegers are 
further reinforced by Muhammad KMn Begler-begi with 
3000 troops, 6 cannons, and 2 mortars—On the same day 
the NAsiriyya and ShakAkf regiments are ordered to attack 


NASIK HU’t-TAWARIkH. 


181 


the Bdbis—The stratagem whereby Mulld Muhammad ‘Alt 
throws the Ndsiriyya regiment into confusion—Description 
of the Bdbf defences—The Begler-begt tries conciliatory 
measures, wherein he is seconded by ‘Aziz Kirin AjMan- 
bash i and Mirzd Hasan Kirin the Amtr-Xizums brother, 
both of whom happen to pass through Zanjdn at this time 
—Conciliation failing, a fresh attack is made. 

P. 88. Failure of this attack—Punishment inflicted 
on certain officers—The Sadru d-Dawla is replaced by 
Farrukh Kirin (the son of Yahyd Kirin of Tabriz and the 
brother of Suleynriu Kirin the Bdbi), who reaches Zanjdn 
on Zi’l-Ka'da 4th [September 11th]—Arrival of fresh rein¬ 
forcements—A way of escape is intentionally left open 
for the Bdbis—The Bdbi's again turn to account the covet¬ 
ousness of the troops to inflict on them fresh losses—Ex¬ 
traordinary courage of the Bdbi women—Letter from the 
Amtr-Niziim to Farrukh Kirin—The stratagem whereby 
the Bdbis decoy Farrukh Khan to his destruction. 

P. 89. Capture of Farrukh Kirin by the Rain's—He 
and two renegades are tortured to death and their heads 
cast into the camp of the besiegers—Anger of the King at 
this news—More artillery is seut against Zanjdn—Renewed 
attack on the Bdbfs—Capture of the Castle of ‘Alf-Marddn 
Khan and other Bdbi positious—Twenty Babfs taken pri¬ 
soners. 

P. 90. Execution of these prisoners—Desertion and 
capture of twenty-five Bdbis—Their ultimate fate—Mulld 
Muhammad ‘Alf is wounded—He survives his wound for 
one week—His dying instructions—His death and burial— 
His followers capitulate on receiving promise of pardon— 
Entry of the royal troops into Zanjkn—MulH Muhammad 
‘All’s body is exhumed and dishonoured—Bad faith of the 
royalist leaders—Plunder of the Bdbl quarter—Massacre of 
the Bdbi prisoners on the third day after the surrender. 

P. 91 [first 7 lines]. Hdji Kdzim Kaitiiki and Mash¬ 
had! Suleynriu the cloth-maker are blown from the mouths 
of mortars—Approval of the Slrih—Some of the Bdbi chiefs 
are brought to Teherdn—Mirzd Rizd, Hdjl Muhammad ‘All, 
and Hdji Muhsin are put to death at the command of the 
Amh'-Nizdm, while the rest are cast into prison. * 

[Fourth and third lines from the bottom.] Suleynrin 


182 


NOTE A—BIBLIOGRAPHY. 


Khin Afshir arrives at Tabriz with the death-warrant of 
the Bib. 

# * 

P. 93. Mirzi Taki Khin the Amtr-Khdm advises 
Nisiru’d-Dln Shdh to order the Bib to be put to death— 
Discussion between the King and the Minister—The Bibls 
execution is finally decided on—Suleymin Khin Afshir is 
sent to Tabriz with the Bib’s death-warrant and instruc¬ 
tions to Hamze Mirzi, the Prince-Governor of Azarbaijin, 
as to the method of procedure—The Bib and his amanu¬ 
ensis, Aki Seyyid Huseyn of Yezd, are brought from 
Chihrik to Tabriz—AM [here called Mulli] Muhammad 

‘Ali of Tabriz is also arrested—His brother, Aka Abdu’llih, 
unsuccessfully attempts to induce him to recant—Hamzi 
Mirzi desires the clergy of Tabriz to dispute with and con¬ 
fute the Bib—They decline. 

P. 94. The Bib is brought before Hamze Mirzi, Mirzi 
Hasan, Hdji Mirzi ‘All, and Suleymin Khin Afshir by 
night—Hamze Mirzi asks him to recite verses concerning 
a crystal candlestick—The Bib complies, and these verses 
are writtten down—Hamze Mirzi requests the Bib to 
repeat these verses—They are repeated differently—It is 
decided to kill the Bib with the utmost publicity—He is 
taken to the houses of three prominent members of the 
clergy, Hiji Mirzi Bikir, Mu Hi Muhammad Mimakini, 
and AM Seyyid Zanvazi, who ratify the sentence of death 
—Aki Seyyid Huseyn of Yezd recants—The steadfastness 
of Aki Muhammad Ah'—The execution takes place on 
Sha'bin 27th [a.h. 1266, not 1265 as stated by Sipihr and 
Kazem-Beg. See pp. 45 and 186—187]—The firing-party 
is formed of Christian soldiers—At the first volley AM 
Muhammad All is killed, but the Bib, released from his 
bonds by the bullets, falls uninjured to the ground—He 
takes refuge in the rooms of one of the soldiers. 

P. 95 [first 9 lines]. Reflections on this strange occur¬ 
rence—The Bib is dragged forth from his retreat by Kucli 
‘Alt Sultin, again bound, and once more fired on by the 


nasikhu’t-tawarikh. 


183 


soldiers—This time he is killed—Indignities offered to his 
body. 

***** 

P. 112 [last half]. The insurrection at Niriz—Aki 
Seyyicl Yahyi of Dirib—His character, and that of his 
father Aki Seyyid .Ta'far-AA"«.s/#/T—Scyyid Yahyi is con¬ 
verted to the Bibi doctrines—He goes to Teheran to 
preach the new faith—He goes to Yezd—The Yezd insur¬ 
rection and its failure—Seyyid Yahyi goes to Fasi in Firs 
—Bahrim Mirzi having been dismissed from the govern¬ 
ment of Firs, and Firhz Mi'rzi not having yet arrived to 
take his place, Mirzi Fazlu’llbh Nauru l-Mulk is the 
supreme authority in the province—The nobles of Fasi 
request him to put a stop to Seyyid Yahyi’s propaganda. 

P. 113. The Nasiru l-Mulk writes a letter to Sejyid 
Yahyi—He receives a reassuring reply—Fresh complaints 
are made—Another message to Seyyid Yahyi proves equally 
ineffectual—Seyyid Yahyi goes to Nfriz with the force 
which he has collected—Disaffection of Niriz, and unpopu¬ 
larity of its governor, Zeynu’l-'Abidin Khin—Seyyid Yahyi, 
with 300 followers, occupies an old castle near Niriz—The 
Nasiru’l-Mulk sends him a third message—His answer— 
He makes a night attack on Niriz, sacks the town, and puts 
Zeynu’l-‘Abidin Khin to flight—Hereupon many recruits 
join the Bibis, so that their forces amount to more than 
2000 men. 

P. 114. Firiiz Mirzi the new governor, wdien distant 
four stages from Shiriz, receives news of the success of the 
Niriz insurgents—He sends a messenger to Shiriz instruct¬ 
ing Mihr ‘Ali Khin Nuri Shuja‘ul-Mulk and Mustafi-Kuli 
Khin to proceed against Seyyid Yahyi with two Kira- 
guzlh regiments—The Nasirul-Mulk writes to Zeynu’l- 
‘Abidin Khin the fugitive governor of Niriz ordering 
him to collect what forces he can and join the attacking 
force—The royalist forces combine and proceed to Niriz 
—Preliminary skirmish—Siege operations commenced-^. 
Failure of Mustafi-Kuli Khin’s attempts to bring about a 
peaceable settlement—Seyyid Yahyi supplies his followers 
with amulets—Sortie of 300 Bibis—Failure of the sortie 


184 


NOTE A—BIBLIOGRAPHY. 


after prolonged fighting, during which 150 B4bis and four 
soldiers are slain—Desertions amongst the Bdbls—Second 
sortie of the BAbis. 

P. 115 [first half]. Repulse of BAbi sortie—Vail KMn 
is sent with reinforcements from Shiraz—Seyyid YahyA is 
induced to quit his fortress, and, accompanied by one 
attendant, to return to his house in Nirfz—On his way 
thither he is met by the sons of ‘All ‘Askar IvhAn who kill 
him in revenge for their father’s death—Seyyid YahyA’s 
two sons and thirty of his followers are brought to ShirAz— 
The former are spared in consideration of their being sey- 
yids, but the latter are put to death by order ol Finiz 
MirzA. 

Contents of the Supplement to the Kajdrhjya volume 
in so far as they relate to the BAbis. 

P.22. Events of the year a.h. 1268 [a.i>.18521. ImAm- 
Kuli MirzA is appointed governor of KirmAnshAh—His 
energy in restoring order to his province—He arrests MullA 
‘All Asghar, a BAbi missionary, and sends him in chains to 
TeherAn—One Teymfir 1 of KaPa-Zanjiri claims to be the 
vicegerent of the Absent ImAm and draws to himself a 
great number of people—He is seized and put to death by 
ImAm-Kuli MirzA—Account of the attempt on the ShAh’s 
life—Digression on the character and doctrines of Sheykh 
Ahmad AhsA’i. 

P. 23. HAji Seyyid KAzitn of Resht succeeds Sheykh 
Ahmad—Dissensions amongst his followers after his death 
—MullA Huseyn—HAji Muhammad Karim KhAn—How 
MullA Huseyn persuades many of the Sheykhis to follow 
MirzA‘Ali Muhammad the BAb—His journey to KhurAsAn— 
MullA Sheykli ‘Ali [whom the BAbis entitle Jendb-i- Azhii] 
becomes a BAbi and engages in active propaganda—He goes 
from KerbelA to KAshAn, where he sees and attempts to 

1 Subh-i-Kzel informed me that this Teynnir was not a Babi 
but advanced a claim on his own account. After his death, 
however, a youth calling himself Seyfiir, who was a BAbi, ap¬ 
peared, and used to declare that he was Teymur returned again 
from the dead. 


NASIKHU’T-TAW ARfKH. 


185 


convert Mlrzd Aka KlMn of Niir, afterwards Sadr-i-A‘zam 
(Prime Minister)—He goes to Teheran, where, under various 
names and in diverse disguises, he continues his attempts 
at proselytizing—During the ministry of the Amtr-Nizdm 
he meditates a rising to be inaugurated by the slaughter of 
Mirza Abu’l K&sini the Imtim, Jum‘a —This plot is discovered 
by government spies and reported to the Amtr-Nizdm — 
Mlrzh ‘Abdu’r-Rahim, the brother of MulM Muhammad 
Takl of Herht, one of the disciples of MulM Sheykh ‘All, is 
arrested. 

P. 24. Mlrzii ‘Abdu’r-Rahim refuses to betray his 
confederates—Mlrzh Thhir, fellow-lodger of the above, is 
questioned—Hhjl Seyyid Muhammad of Isfahan is beguiled 
by a forged letter into revealing MulM Sheykh ‘All’s abode 
—A servant of MulM Sheykh ‘All’s is aiTested and tor¬ 
tured, but discloses nothing—He is put to death, but Mlrzh 
‘Abdu’r-Rahlm’s life is spared—MulM Sheykh ‘All escapes 
and takes refuge in SlMh ‘Abdu’l-'Azlm, whence he pre¬ 
sently flies to Azarbaijhn—On the fall of the Amtr-Nizdm , 
MulM Sheykh ‘All returns to Teherhn and begins to or¬ 
ganize the conspiracy against the SlMh’s life—The house 
■of Hhjl SuleynMn KlMn of Tabriz becomes the meeting- 
place of the conspirators, and there MulM Sheykh ‘All 
takes up his quarters—Seventy persons are involved in the 
■conspiracy—Nature of the plot—Twelve Biibis volunteer 
for the attempt, amongst them being Muhammad Shdik [of 
Zanjhn], Mlrzii ‘Abdu’l-WahMb of Shlrhz, MulM Fath- 
u’lMh of Kum, and Muhammad Bhkir of NajaMbhd. 

P. 25. The attempt on the SlMh’s life is made on 
Sunday, ShawwM 28th [a.h. 1268 = August 15th, 1852]— 
Account of the attempt and its failure. [See infra, Note T.] 

P. 26. Fate of the assassins—Consternation of the 
ministers—Conjectures as to the originators of the plot— 
Firmness of the Prime Minister ( Sadr-i-A‘zttm). 

P. 27. Messengers despatched to all parts of the king¬ 
dom to announce the SlMh’s safety—The search for the 
Bhbls begins—Arrest of Hhjl SuleynMn KlMn and twelve 
of his confederates—On information obtained from some of 
these prisoners 36 Biibis are captured, amongst whom is 
MulM Sheykh ‘All. 

P. 28. The Hajibu’d Dawla cuts off MulM Sheykh 


186 


NOTE A—BIBLIOGRAPHY. 


‘All’s ear—Examination of the prisoners—MfrzA Huseyn 
‘All Nurl [apparently Behd’u’llAh himself], MfrzA Suley- 
lnhn-Kulf, MfrzA Mahmud, AkA ‘Abdu’llAh, MfrzA JawAd 
of KliurAsAn, and MfrzA Huseyn of Kum are imprisoned, 
there not being sufficient evidence to incriminate them in 
the plot: the other BAbf prisoners are apportioned amongst 
the different departments and classes each to be slain in 
such fashion as shall please those to whom he has been 
assigned—The slaughter takes place on the last day of 
Zi’l-Ka‘da [a.h. 1268 = September 15th, a.d. 1852]—Ac¬ 
count of the executions [see infra, Note T]. 

P. 29. Account of the executions continued, including 
that of Kurratu’l-‘Ayn [see infra. Notes Q and T]—Public 
rejoicings. 


Whoever carefully examines the arrangement of matter 
in the Nasikhu t-Tawartkli as indicated in the above table 
of contents will perceive that this arrangement is not 
strictly chronological, although ostensibly intended to be 
so. A desire not to interrupt the continuity of the narra¬ 
tive in relating an episode often induces the historian to 
include under the year in which the episode which he is 
describing first began, events properly belonging to subse¬ 
quent years. Thus the first public appearance of the BAb 
was in the year a.h. 1260, but the narrative is carried on 
without interruption not only to the time of his return from 
Mecca to Bushire, which certainly did not occur till a.h. 
1261, but to the period of his concealment by the Mu- 
‘tamadit! d-Daivla in Isfahan, which belongs to the year 
a.h. 1262. So likewise the beginning of the insurrection 
in MAzandarAn was in a.ii. 1264, while its final suppression 
did not take place till a.h. 1265; yet the whole insurrec¬ 
tion from its earliest beginning to its ultimate conclusion is 
described under the year a.h. 1264, the only indication of 
a change of year being afforded by the rotation of the 
months. Other instances might be adduced, but these are 
sufficient to prove a fact which it is most important to 
bear in mind. The erroneous dates given for the siege of 
ZanjAn and the BAb’s martyrdom (of which events, accord¬ 
ing to all testimony, the latter took place during the 


XASIKHU ’t-TAWARIKH. 


1S7 


former) cannot, however, be satisfactorily accounted for in 
this way; and I am forced to suppose that in this case the 
Lisanu’l Mulk has committed a positive error, which, as it 
has been copied and reproduced by Kazem-Beg and a 
number of writers who have followed him, it is necessary 
to expose in the clearest manner possible. This I strove to 
do in my first paper on the Bdbi's in the Journal of the 
Royal Asiatic Society for 1889 (pp. 511—513), where I 
attempted to prove that both of the events in question were 
to be assigned, not, as stated in the Kasikhu’t-Tav:artkh 
and repeated by those who have unreservedly followed it, 
to the year a.h. 1265 (a.d. 1849), but to the year a.h. 1266 
(a.d. 1850). It is unnecessary for me to repeat in this 
place the arguments there adduced to support an opinion 
in which further study of the matter serves but to confirm 
me; I will only observe that further corroboration of that 
opinion is afforded not only by the present work {supra, 
pp. 44—45) and the Bawzatu s-Safd, but also by Dr A. H. 
Wright’s memoir contributed to the Z. T). M. G. in 1851, 
wherein the Bhb’s execution is described (p. 385) as having- 
occurred “last year’’ and by Binning {Journal of Tim 
Years’ Travel in Persia Ac., London, 1857, vol. i, p. 407), 
who, in a passage written in 1850 or early in 1851, remarks, 
after describing the Bhb’s execution, that “a large number 
of them [i.e. the Bhbi's] are now up in arms in Zenjan.” 

Complete impartiality is a quality we could not reason¬ 
ably expect to find in the court historian of a despot whose 
ears must hear what is pleasant rather than what is true, 
and whose actions must be not only justified but extolled 
as models of wisdom and virtue. When we consider that, 
apart from this, the Lisa mi l-Mulk, as a presumably 
orthodox Shi'ite Muhammadan, was bound to disparage 
and traduce in every way possible those whose object was 
nothing less than the complete overthrow of Islhm and the 
abrogation of its ordinances, we cannot but admire the 
candour which he displays; for if, on the one hand, he 
brings against the Bhbi's many unfounded and absurd accu¬ 
sations, on the other hand he pourtrays with a fidelity 
scarcely surpassed by the witty and sarcastic Comte de 
Gobineau the cowardice, incapacity, and treachery of 
Mahdi-Kuh Mirzd, the courage of Mulla Huseyn of Bush- 


188 


NOTE A—BIBLIOGRAPHY. 


raweyh, the constancy of AkA Muhammad ‘All of Tabriz, 
and the heroism of the BAbf women of ZanjAn. 

Each page of the Ndsikhu’t-Tawdrtkh consists of 29 
lines containing on an average 21 words each, so that a 
page is equivalent to about 600 words. That portion of 
the narrative which refers to the BAbfs occupies in all not 
less than 46 pages, and cannot contain fewer than 27,000 
words. 


2. The Raivfatu’s-Sttfd. 

The Teller An lithographed edition of this work, whereof 
the publication was completed in Rabfu’l-Avval a.h. 1274 
(Oct.—Nov., a.d. 1857), consists of ten volumes bound in 
two. Of these ten volumes the first six composed by 
MfrkhwAud (d. a.D. 1498) and the seventh composed by his 
grandson KhwAndamlr (d. a.d. 1534) constitute the whole 
of what is generally understood by European writers when 
they speak of the Ravjzatus-Safa. The three last (eighth, 
ninth, and tenth) volumes, which supplement the older 
work and bring the narrative down to our own days, 
were written by that most talented and learned scholar 
RizA-Knlf KhAn ‘ Lele-BdsM,’ of whose life and works a 
most valuable account from the pen of Mr Sidney Churchill 
will be found in vol. xviii (New Series) of the Journal of 
the Royal Asiatic Society, pp. 196—206. All that relates 
to the BAbfs is contained in the last (tenth) volume, with 
which alone, therefore, we are here concerned. The nume¬ 
ration of the pages in this volume is supplied by my hand, 
the pages in the original being unnumbered. As the 
narrative of the BAbf movement here given agrees very 
closely for the most part with that contained in the 
Ndsikhu t-Tawdrikh , I shall in the summary of its contents 
about to be given indicate very briefly that portion of it 
dealt with in each page, except in cases where some fact is 
added or differently stated. 

Contents of vol. x of the Rawzatu s-Safd 
in so far as they relate to the BAbfs. 

P. 69 [last 17 lines]. From the first appearance of the 


BAWZATrV^ATA, 1 > < 

Bab to the stratagem whereby Huseyn Khan AjM'm-B-Ul' 
induces him to expose Ms ideas without reserve. 

P. TO jirst IS lines . From the Bab’s disputation with 
the clergy of Shiraz to the death of Minuchihr Kitan in 
Rabi'u 1-Awal ah. 1263 and the Bab’s removal to Chihnk. 
Reneorions on the causes which led to the rapid spread of 
Ms doctrines. He is accused of ho.ding and teachim the 
doctrine of metempsychosis. 

***** 

P. 11' last 26 lines'. From the beginning of Media 
Hv.seyn" s propaganda to his escape from Mash-ha i and 
advance on Mazandaran witli 300 or 40b f/dowers. It is 
stated that Ms original intention was to proceed to Chihr.k 
and liberate the Bat'. The last three lines of this page begin 
the account of the Bab’s hr-t examination ah. 1263=ad. 
1S47 by The clergy of Tabriz presided over by Tlie prcSeliT 
Shah, at that time Crown-Prince. The account of the pro¬ 
ceedings of tills assembly is professedly copied "without 
favour or enmity” from the report written by Hah Media 
Mahmud the Siz-lmul- U1‘tmd. Concerning this con¬ 
ference see supf’i. pp. 1'—21, and inf-a. Note M. 

P. 119.1 , _ , , ' „• , 

p j - Account oi the conference continued. 

P. 121. Conclusion of the conference, and punishment 
of the Bab, who is afterwards sent back to Chihnk—Exas¬ 
peration of the Bab:- on hearing what indignities have been 
offered to their master—Muiia Muhammad Ali of Bar- 
funisii—Kurrart i-'Ayn—The meeting at Badasht—The 
attack on the Bates at Hazar-Jar.b—The death of Muham¬ 
mad Shah Shawwal. ie 1264=August 31st—September 
2sth, ad. 1'4' : —Beginning of the Mazandaran insur- 
recti-m. 

P. 122. Recapitulation of Mulla Huseyn’s earlier ad¬ 
ventures and behaviettr—Narrative of events from th-r 
collision between Mulla Hiiseyn’s 700 or s>.’0 white-robed. 
wMte-rurbaned followers and the Mus'ilmans of Barfirus.: 
to the occupation A’ Sheykh Tatars: by the former—Iff 
scription of the Babf fortress. 

1 According to Wataon Eir.or-j of p~rr<u, p. 3-34 . the dea.cn 
of Muhammad »L..h took place on September 4th. Is4s. 


190 


NOTH A—BIBLIOGRAPHY. 


P. 123. Continuation of narrative of the Mfizaudarfin 
insurrection to the surprise and discomfiture of Mahdf-Kulf 
Mfrzh by the B&bfs at Vhsaks. 

P. 124. Continuation of narrative to the night attack 
of the Bfibfs led by MuM Huseyn on ‘Abbfis-Kulf Khbn’s 
army. The date of this event is here stated as Rabf‘u’1- 
Avval 10th a.h. 126G (January 24th, a.d. 1850), which 
is a mistake. The correct date, Itabf'u’l-Avval (10th) 
a.h. 1265 (February 3rd, a.d. 1849) is given in the 
2sdsikhut-TawArikh. 

P. 125. From the death of Mulld Huseyn to tlie 
second advance of Mahdf-Kulf Mirzfi against Sheykh 
Tabarsf. 

P. 126. Continuation of the narrative to the arrival of 
Ja‘far-Kulf Khin and Tahm&sp Kulf Kh&n with reinforce¬ 
ments for the besiegers. 

P. 127. Continuation of the narrative to the Bfibf 
sortie, which results directly in the death of Tahm&sp-Kulf 
KMn, and indirectly in that of his uncle Ja‘far-Kulf Khdn 
through the wanton and inconsiderate cruelty of Mahdf- 
Kulf Mfrzb 

P. 128. Conclusion of the narrative of the Mfizandar4n 
insurrection. Beginning of the narrative of the Zanjfin 
insurrection. 

P. 129. Continuation of the narrative to Seyyid ‘Ah 
KhJu’s unsuccessful attempt at pacification. 

P- 130. Continuation of the narrative to Farrukh 
Khfin’s capture and terrible fate. 

P. 131. Continuation of the narrative to Hasan Kh&n’s 
unsuccessful attempt at pacification. (According to the 
Nusikliut-Tawdrtkli this event preceded the last, and this 
version is on the face of it more probable.) 

P. 132. Conclusion of the narrative of the Zanjdn in¬ 
surrection—Brief account of the execution of the Bhb at 
Tabriz. (The date ol this event is here correctly stated as 
a.h. 1266. The account itself is most meagre, amounting 
in substance merely to this: that the B.ib was brought from 
Chihrfk to Tabriz, condemned to death by the clergy of 
that city, and suspended and shot, together with two of his 
disciples, by the. Christian regiment, his body being after¬ 
wards cast outside the city as food for wolves and dogs. 


No mention is made of Lis miraculous escape from the first 
volley fired by the soldiers.)—Beginning of the narrative of 
the Nlrlz insurrection. 

P. 133. Conclusion of the narrative of the Nirfz insur¬ 
rection. (According to this account, Ak<4 Seyyid Yahya of 
Darab the insurgent leader was brought to SlniAz and there 
put to death. Allusion is also made to the second Bhbf 
rising at Nfiiz and the assassination of the governor 

Zeynu’l-'Abidfn Khan, which events occurred about two 
years later. See Note H, infra.) 

* * * * * 

P. 167 [last 21 lines]. The attempt on the Shdh’s life 
(see Note T, infra). Preliminary recapitulation of .similar 
attempts on the lives of kings and ministers made by 
members of heretical sects—Eulogies of Ndsiru’d-Dm 
Shah. 

P. 16S. After the death of the Bab a new leader (whom 
the author of this history apparently believes to have been 
Mulla Sheykli ‘Ah' 'Jenub-i-‘Aztm ) is chosen by his fol¬ 
lowers—The Babi conspiracy—The assassination is planned 
by twelve Bdbis, who arrange that the attempt shall take 
place on the morning of Sunday the 28th of Shawwal a.h. 
1268 (August 15th, a.I). 1852) as the Shah is riding out on a 
hunting expedition from his summer residence at Xiydvanln 
—Description of the Royal Cavalcade and the approach of 
the conspirators in the guise of suppliants. 

P. 169. Of the twelve assassins, six fail to arrive in 
time, while three lag behind—The three who are ready 
approach the Shah as petitioners, surround him, and fire 
two shots at him—The Shah’s retainers come up and kill 
one of the conspirators—Another shot is tired wounding the 
Shah in the shoulder—The two surviving conspirators are 
-eized and retained for examination—The Shah wishes to 
continue his expedition, but is dissuaded by the Prime 
Minister—Panic in Teheran—The Shah holds a public 
reception on the following day. 

P. 170. Messengers are despatched in all directions 
to announce the Shrill’s safety—Certain malicious persons 
strive unsuccessfully to cast suspicion on the Prime 
Minister and Muhammad Hasan Khan of Erivan— It is 


192 


NOTE A—BIBLIOGRAPHY. 


discovered that 70 Bdbfs are in the habit of resorting to 
the house of Hdji Suleyman Kh&n, on which accordingly a 
raid is made, resulting in the capture of Suleym&n Kh&n 
and twelve others—Mulld Sheykh ‘All and thirty-six other 
B&bls are also aiTested—Account of the execution of these 
—The Shih returns to Teheran from Niydvardn amidst 
general rejoicings on Friday, Zi’l-Ka‘da 17th, a.h. 1268 
(September 2nd, a.i>. 1852). 


Rizd-Kuli Khdn’s narrative substantially agrees with 
that of the Lhanul-Mulk, but is on the whole less full, 
more bombastic, and more vituperative, execrations and 
curses on the Bdbis severally and generally being freely 
introduced throughout. Some new dates are added, and 
some, such as that of the Zanjdn troubles, which are 
erroneously stated in the Nasikhu’t-Tawarikh, are here 
correctly given; but, on the other hand, some fresh chrono¬ 
logical errors, notably in the case of MulM Huseyn’s last 
sortie and death, are introduced. The account given of 
the B&b’s death is extremely meagre; and in other parts of 
the narrative we miss that abundance of detail and fulness 
of description which render the Nasikhu t-Tawdrtkh so 
readable and so graphic. 

Each page of the Rawzatu s-Safii contains 33 lines, and 
each line an average of 26 words, making about 858 words 
to the page. The number of pages devoted to the Bdbis is 
in all twenty and a half, so that the whole narrative above 
summarized contains not fewer than 17,500 words, and is 
about two-thirds of the length of the account given in the 
Nusikh u’t-Tu irii rfkh. 


3. The T&rikh-i-Jadid. 

Of this work, which exists only in manuscript, two- 
copies only, so far as I know, have reached Europe 1 . One, 

1 Quite recently, as I have learned from Baron Rosen, another 
MS. of this work, obtained by M. Tumanski at Ishkdbdd, has 
been added to the library of the Institut des Langues Orieutales 
of St Petersburg. 


TARIKH-I-JADID. 


193 


obtained by Mr Sidney Churchill, is in the library of the 
British Museum, and is numbered Or. 2942. The other is 
in my oun possession, and is briefly described at p. 496 of 
my first paper on the Babi's in the J. It. M. S', for 1889, and 
at pp. 1002—1003 of my second paper in the same volume. 
Of the manner in which I first became acquainted with this 
work, of the means whereby I obtained the ms. now in my 
possession, of my intention of publishing it, and of the 
causes which led me to lay aside (I trust but for a season) 
the text and translation on which I was engaged in favour 
of the present work, I have already spoken in the Introduc¬ 
tion. As the T'tnkh-i-Jadid is not at present generally 
available to scholars, I shall confine myself to giving a brief 
statement of its contents based on my own ms. Before 
doing so, however, a few words must be said concerning the 
British Museum codex, which is superior alike in accuracy, 
neatness, and calligraphy to my own. 

In the ms. catalogue of recent acquisitions the ms. in 
question is described thus:— 

“Or. 2942. Tdrikh-i-Jadid. A history of the Babi's. 
a.h. 1298 (1881). Persian.” 

On its cover it bears the following inscription:— 


BRIT. MUS. TARIKH JADID 
OR. 2942 PERSIAN 


Inside the cover is written:— 

Aj A»- O j 2' At 0^) 

The blank leaf at the beginning bears the name of the 
work (jua>. both in Arabic and English characters, 

the date July 1882, and Mr Sidney Churchill’s signature, 
substituted for that of Mr Henry Churchill through which 
a pen has been drawn. 

At the end of the text is the following colophon:— 

ii » ; 

A-*_.■>- jtd 1 

(Rajab a.h. 1298 = May 30th—June 28th a.d. 1881). 

B. 13 


194 


NOTE A—BIBLIOGRAPHY. 


A final note states that the ms. was bought of Mr S. 
Churchill on October 10th, 1885. It consists, of 177 fol. 
(354 pp.). Quotations, headings, and the initial words of 
sentences are sometimes written in red. The paper is of a 
bluish colour. The text, so far as I have collated it, offers 
a good many variants from, and some additions to, my ms., 
and its readings are generally preferable. 

My ms. consists of 374 pp., each of which contains 19 
lines numbering on an average 10 words apiece. The 
whole history may be estimated to contain over 70,000 
words. 

As regards the authorship of the work, it is concealed 
for obvious reasons; and indeed the author goes out of his 
way to describe himself as a traveller who, having visited 
all parts of Europe and India, undertook a journey to 
Persia for scientific purposes and especially geographical 
research. He expresses thankfulness to God that he does 
not belong to the Persian nation, whose faults he exposes 
unsparingly. He pourtrays himself as a non-Muhammadan 
open to conviction on matters of religion and associating 
freely with all sects. And at the conclusion of his work 
he apologizes for his lack of literary style, advances as an 
excuse the statement that Persian is not his native tongue, 
and alludes to a “ treatise written in his own language in 
French writing ” wherein the matter in hand is more 
eloquently set forth. Now that any European should have 
been capable or desirous of composing such a work is on the 
face of it extremely improbable, and there can be little 
doubt that the author advanced the statements above 
alluded to merely as a blind. Of the Bdbis whom I have 
questioned on the subject some attribute the authorship 
of the work to a certain well-known and widely-travelled 
resident in the Persian capital, whom, as he is still living, I 
do not feel myself justified in indicating more particularly; 
others to his mrrzd or secretary, now dead. It appears not 
improbable that it was the joint product of these two. 
Whoever the author or authors may have been, the informa¬ 
tion set forth is so detailed and so minute that it must have 
been derived for the most part from persons who had con¬ 
versed with actual eye-witnesses of the events described, if 
not from eye-witnesses themselves. The author, whether 


TArIkH-I-JADID. 


195 


he had really embraced the Bdbi faith or not, was, on his 
showing, a warm admirer of the Bdb and his apostles and 
disciples, and was during the composition of his work in 
continual communication with certain prominent members 
of the sect. Yet the work when completed—perhaps be¬ 
cause of the violence wherewith it denounces the Musulmdn 
clergy and reproaches the Persian nation, perhaps because 
of the slight mention which it makes of BehdVlMh (of 
Subh-i-Ezel it makes no mention at all) and the exaggerated 
veneration paid to the Bdb—did not meet with the approval 
of the Bdbf chiefs at Acre, and as early as the spring of 1888 
I learned in Shiraz that instructions had been issued for the 
compilation of a new history more in accordance with the 
views entertained by those chiefs. Of these instructions 
the history now offered to the public is the outcome. 

Summary of the contents of the 
Turikh-i-Jadid. 

Pp. 1—38‘. Introduction. 

„ 39—40. ILljl Seyyid Kdzirn of Resht foretells the 

approaching 1 manifestation ’ and dies. 

Pp. 41—47. Conversion of MulM Huseyn of Bushra- 
weyh. 

Pp. 48—50. Conversions of Hdji Muhammad ‘All of 
Bdrfurush (‘Jendb-i-Kuddus’), MulM Muhammad Sddik of 
Khurdsdn (‘ Mukaddas ’), and others. 

Pp. 51—55. From MulM Huseyn’s journey to Khurd- 
sdn to his entry into Bdrfurhsh with Hdjf Muhammad ‘Alt 
and their combined followers. 

Pp. 56—114. From the first collision between the Bdbfs 
and the Musuhndns in Bdrfurush to the fall of the Castle of 
Sheykh Taharsi. 

Pp. 115—132. Biographies of certain eminent Bdbfs 
who suffered martyrdom in Mdzandardn, with some reflec¬ 
tions on the heroism displayed by the besieged. 

Pp. 133—155. The struggle at Nfrfz, and reflections 
thereon. (See Note H, infra.) 

1 The pagination refers to my own ms., not to the British 
Museum Codex. 


13—2 


196 


NOTE A—BIBLIOGRAPHY. 


Pp. 156—163. The siege of Zanjhn. 

Pp. 164—166. Reflections thereon. 

„ 167—176. Account of a disputation between a 
learned Bhbl and an assembly of Musulmhn divines. 

Pp. 177—201. The decadence of the Persian empire 
and the deterioration of its people traced to the complete 
ascendency obtained by the clergy, whose ignorance, wicked¬ 
ness, and arrogance are unsparingly exposed. 

Pp. 202—222. Personal history of the B4b from the 
beginning of his mission until his exile to M&ku. 

Pp. 223—236. Sufficiency of the testimony given by a 
host of martyrs of every class to the truth of BAbiism. 
Objections answered. 

Pp. 237—240. Personal history of the B&b continued 
until his removal from MAkh to Chihrfk. 

i 

Pp. 241—243. History of the ‘Indian believer’ 

Pp. 244—246. History of Seyyid Basir the Indian. 

„ 247—249. Eulogy on the devotion and self-sacri¬ 
fice of the B&bis. 

Pp. 250—261. History of the ‘Seven Martyrs.’ (See 
Note B, infra.) 

Pp. 262—264. Reflections thereon. 

„ 265—277. History of Kurratu’l-‘Ayn. (See Note 

Q, infra.) 

Pp. 278—280. First examination of the Bhb at Tabriz. 
(See Note M, infra.) 

Pp. 281—286. Reflections on the unfairness of the 
proceedings. 

Pp. 287—300. Personal history of the B4b until his 
martyrdom. 

Pp. 301—305. Review of former prophetic dispensa¬ 
tions and comparison of these with the present ‘ manifesta¬ 
tion.’ 

Pp. 306—322. Discussion of the kind of proof neces¬ 
sary to establish the truth of a new revelation, and reflec¬ 
tions on the hard-heartedness, obstinacy, and stiff-necked- 
ness of the Musulnffins in general and their clergy in 
particular, together with further proofs of their want of 


KISASlfL-'ULAMA. 


197 


fairness illustrated by additional details concerning the 
conference at Isfahan, (See Aote J, infra.) 

Pp. 323—331. The irrational beliefs, absurd traditions, 
and gross ignorance of the generalit}- of $hi‘ite divines. 

Pp. 332—369. Account of a discussion which took 
place in the author's presence between a B.ibi and a mujta- 
kid, and discomfiture of the latter. 

Pp. 370—372. Refutation of certain charges falsely 
alleged against the Babis. 

Pp. 373—374. Conclusion. 

4. The Kwtsu’l-Ulama. 

This is a work of 350 pages containing biographical 
notices of 153 eminent Shiite divine,-., amongst whom the 
author, Muza Muhammad ibn Sulejrnan-i-Tanakabuni, 
includes himself. It was published for the second time 
at Teheran in A.H. 1304 a.ix 1886—7), together with two 
treatises composed by Seyyid Mwrtaza ' ‘Umiil-Hudd,' 
which are included in the same volume. The second 
biography in this volume, extending from p. 12 to p. 43, is 
devoted to Haji Mulla Muhammad Tala ibn Muhammad 
al-Burghani al-Kazvim, called by the Ski'ites Shahtd-i- 
Thdlith (‘ the Third Martyr and treats incidentally at 
some length of the Babis, with whom the subject of the 
memoir in question came into such fatal collision. Of the 
book under consideration we are here concerned with this 
section alone, and indeed only with a part of that. 

Haji Mulla Muhammad Taki was the eldest of three 
brothers, of whom the second, Hfiji Mulla Muhammad Salih, 
was also a ditine and jurisconsult, while the third, Haji 
Mulla ‘Ah', was first a disciple of Sheykh Ahmad Ahsa’i 
and afterwards a partisan of the Bab. bow Haji Mulli 
Muhammad Taki detested Sheykh Ahmad and his doctrines, 
and was indeed the first amongst the Shiite clergy to 
denounce him as a dangerous heretic ; but if his detesta¬ 
tion of the Sheykhis was great, much bitterer and more 
violent was his hatred of the Babis. The fact that not 
only his youngest brother Haji Mulla ‘Ah', but also his 
niece and daughter-in-law Zamii-Taj (or, to give her the 
title whereby she has become for ever famous, Kurratu’l- 


198 


NOTE A—BIBLIOGRAPHY. 


‘Ayn), had embraced the doctrines which he so abhorred, 
must have greatly conduced to an intensification of this 
hatred, which rose to such a pitch that, as we learn from 
the present work, he was during the last year of his life 
chiefly engaged in violent public denunciation of the B&b 
and his religion. This cost him his life; for at length 
certain B4b!s, stung by his words into uncontrollable anger, 
fell upon him early one morning as he was praying in the 
mosque, and 110111 knives and daggers inflicted on him 
eight wounds, from the effects of which he expired two 
days later. He was buried at Kazvfn in the precincts of 
Sh&hz4de Huseyn. 

Contents of the Kisasu’l- Ulumu in so far as they 
relate to the B&bls. 

P. 20. Ildj! Mulld Muhammad Takl first denounces 
Sheykh Ahmad Ahs4’! as a heretic—-Account of Sheykh 
Ahmad. 

Pp. 21—30. Account of Sheykh Ahmad and H4j! 
Seyyid Iv&zim—Exposition and refutation of their doctrines. 
(See Note E, infra, and B. ii, pp. 890—892.) 

Pp. 30 — 35. Account of H4j! Muhammad Karim Klidn 
of Klrm&n—Further remarks on the Sheykh! doctrines. 

P. 36. Account of the assassination of HAjf Mulld 
Muhammad Tak! by certain B4b!s in a.h. 1264 (a.d. 1848). 

P. 37. Account of Mlrz4 ‘Al! Muhammad the BAb— 
His diligent attendance at H4i! Seyyid Kdzim’s lectures. 
(See B. ii, p. 894.) 

P. 38. How the attention of the author was first 
drawn to the B4b (see B. ii, pp. 894, 895)—The B4b 
returns to Bushire and begins to practise austerities—He 
composes a ‘Kur’An’—The heresy of his doctrines exposed. 

P. 39. Imprisonment of the B4b at Chilirfk—His first 
examination before the clergy of Tabriz. (See Note M, 
infra.) 

Pp. 40, 41. Account of the B&b’s examination con¬ 
tinued and concluded—He is bastinadoed—Further parti¬ 
culars concerning H&j! Muhammad Karim Kh&n. 

Pp. 42, 43. Disparagement of H.4j f Muhammad Karim 
Kli&n, and proofs of his lack of scholarship. 


KA’anI—BUSTAN f—SAMI BEY. 


199 


II. Other Writings in Oriental languages wherein 

INCIDENTAL REFERENCE TO THE BabIs IS MADE. 

Besides the Persian works above noticed which hear 
directly on the history of the Bfibl movement, we may 
observe that the Persian poet Kh’dm has two kasidas 
written to celebrate the Shdh’s escape from the attempt on 
his life 1 . These, however, as one would naturally expect, 
throw very little new light on the facts of the case. It is 
said that Kfi’finl was at first disposed to regard the Bfib 
with favour, and that the kasida beginning :— 

J)Jj Jjal Ul 
JjJj Jal Ul ^Jjjl (_$l 

“ The ensample of men and jinn hath appeared, 

The leader of these and those hath appeared,” 

was written in his honour. If this be so, it is by no means 
the only instance of inconstancy wherewith this talented 
but fickle poet can be taxed. 

In Arabic there is an article on Bbbfism in the Ency¬ 
clopaedia (, ij l.d 1 °f ButrusuT-BusthnI (Beyrout, 

1881) which contributes some important facts not pre¬ 
viously published, but also contains one or two grave 
errors. It comprises about 1600 words, and is based on 
information communicated by Seyyid Jemdlu’d-D<n al- 
Afghfin. Of a portion of this I published a translation in 
my second paper on the Bbbi's (J. K. A. S. for 1889, 
pp. 942—943). 

In Turkish a short article of about 240 words in vol. ii 
of Sfimf Bey’s Dictionnaire Universal d’Histoire et de 

Geographic Constantinople, a.h. 1307) 

contains no new facts, but several new errors. 

1 See infra , Note T. 


200 


NOTE A—BIBLIOGRAPHY. 


III. European Accounts. 

Numerous accounts of the B&b aud his religion have 
been published in Europe, and these, so far as they are 
known to me, I shall now enumerate in the order of their 
publication, noting as far as possible whence each work 
derives the information which it embodies. A mere casual 
remark of some traveller often sheds a fresh ray of light on 
the matter, or helps to decide some doubtful date, and 
therefore 1 shall include in my list several works wherein 
only a few paragraphs are devoted to the Bhbls ; while on 
the other hand 1 do not consider it necessary to refer to all 
of the numerous articles on the subject which have appeared 
in various encyclopsedias and magazines, since these for 
the most part merely repeat more or less fully and 
eloquently the facts recorded by other writers. 

[a.d. 1851 .] Bab und seine Secte in Persien, by A. H. 
Wright of the American Mission at Urhmiyya, Persia, 
contributed by J. Perkins, also of the aforesaid Mission, 
to the German Oriental Society, and published in Vol. v 
of the Z. D. M. G. (Leipzig, 1851, pp. 384—385). From a 
note appended by the Editor we learn that the ms. of this 
article, dated March 31, 1851, was forwarded with a letter 
from Mr Perkins dated March 29, and that another copy 
of the same article was sent to the American Oriental 
Society. From the Journal of the last-named society it 
appears that this paper was read at one of their meetings, 
but, so far as I can discover, it was not published, so that 
we have it only in its German dress. This document is of 
capital importance, and I have more than once had occasion 
to refer to it in my notes. 

[a.d. 1856 .] Glimpses of Life and Manners in Persia , 
by Lady Sheil (London, 1856). The authoress of this work 
also was resident in Persia during the Bhbi troubles, and 
much valuable information is supplied by her. That this 
information was derived for the most part, if not entirely, 
from bitter enemies of the new faith, or in other words 
from persons attached to the Persian Court, is sufficiently 


EUROPEAN ACCOUNTS. 


201 


evident. Some of the statements advanced seem to be 
traceable to one or other of the Court historians whose 
works have been already noticed. Others—especially one 
to the effect that the Mb, while resident at Baghdad or 
Kerbeld, was arrested by the Turkish authorities, and only 
saved from execution at their hands by the intervention of 
the Persian consul (p. 177)—stand alone, and are unsup¬ 
ported by other testimony. What relates to the B&bls in 
this work is as follows : 

P. 176. Origin of the sect. 

P. 177. Personal history of the Bib until his death. 

P. 178. Confessions of ex-Babls. 

P. 179. Bibi doctrines exposed. 

P. 180. Bibls compared to Assassins and Mazdakdtes 
—Mazandaran and Yezd insurrections—Execution of the 
‘ Seven Martyrs.’ 

P. 181. Ruing at Zanjdn—Probability that the Bitbl 

faith is spreading. 

* * * 

Pp. 273—282. Accounts of the attempt on the Shdh’.~ 
life and of the B4bl executions which followed it, the 
latter translated from the ‘ Teheran Gazette ’ in which it 
appeared. 

[a.d. 1857 .] Journal of Tko Years Tracel in Persia 
Ceylon, etc., by Robert B. M. Binning, Esq., of the Madras 
Civil Service (London, 1857, 2 vols.). Some few pages of 
the twentieth chapter of this work (vol. i, pp. 403—408) 
are devoted to the Bdbls. Of all accounts which I have 
read, not excluding those given by the Musulmdn historians, 
this is the most hostile, the most unfair—I had almost said 
the most libellous. The writer, not content with likening 
the Babfs to Mormons and Sadducees and describing their 
Founder as a kind of oriental Joe Smith, casts aspersions 
on the BMPs honesty, and almost accuses him of theft in 
so many words. This should not, perhaps, cause us much 
surprise in one who considers that the Gospel of Christ 
would be best commended to the people of Persia by the 
annexation of their country by some “ Christian State,” 
and who thinks that King Ndshirvan acted “very properly” 
in ordering the massacre of Mazdak and his adherents. In 


202 


NOTE A—BIBLIOGRAPHY. 


point of accuracy, too, this account leaves much to be desired. 
Thus the author, writing in 1850—1851, describes the Nfriz 
insurrection and the death of Seyyid Yahy4 as having- 
occurred “about five years ago,” and states that the B.4b 
himself travelled into M4zandar4n, evidently confusing him 
with Muhammad ‘All of liirfurash. Yet, open to criticism 
as it is, Mr Biuning’s narrative has its value, and, as I have 
shown above (p. 187), helps to determine some doubtful 
points of chronology. Mr Binning appears to have left 
Persia by way of Bushire on February 7, 1852, having- 
learned, almost at the moment of his departure, the tragic 
fate of Mfrzd Takl KMn Amir-Nizam, which befel in 
January of that year. 

[a.d. 1864 , 65 .] In the Bulletin de TAcademie Imperial* 
de St Petersbourg, dated December 22 , 1864- (vol. viii, pp. 
247-—248), is a most valuable article by Dorn on certain 
BAbl mss. belonging to the St Petersburg collection. One 
of these—described as “ the Koran of the B,4bls ”—derives 
special value from the fact that it was written by the B4b’s 
own secretary, and by him placed in European hands. 
A portion of this text given by Dorn as a specimen was 
pronounced by Subh-i-Ezel (to whom I submitted it) an 

extract from the Booh of Names NN')- The other 

ms. described is a history of the MJzandarJn insurrection 
composed in the M4zandardnl dialect, and was obtained by 
Dorn during his sojourn in that province in 1860. From 
the abstract given of its contents it would appear to be of 
the highest interest, even though it be not in all respects 
worthy of credence. A short postscript referring to the 
authenticity of these two mss. is added in the Bulletin for 
February 8 , 1865. Concerning the occurrences in Mhzand- 
arhn, Dorn also refers to a previous article of his at p. 353 
of vol. iv of the Bulletin (Melanges Asiatiques, vol. iv, 
p. 442), but this I have not seen. 

[a.d. 1865 .] Les Religions et les Philosophies dans I’Asie 
Centrale , by M. le Comte de Gobineau (Paris, 1865 and 
1866). This most brilliant, most graphic, and most charm¬ 
ing work is too well known to need any detailed description. 


EUROPEAN ACCOUNTS. 


203 


Though largely based on the Lisanu l-Mulic s account of 
the B&bi movement, it embodies also many statements 
derived from B&bl sources ; and not only are the facts thus 
obtained sifted with rare judgment and arranged with 
consummate skill, but the characters and scenes of this 
stirring drama are depicted in a manner so fresh, so vivid, 
and so lifelike that the work in question must ever remain 
a classic unsurpassed and indeed unapproached in the 
subject whereof it treats. The account of the B4bl books 
and doctrines (occupying 50 pages) is of the utmost value, 
being based on Bdbi MSS. (now in the Bibliotheque Nationale 
at Paris) obtained by the author; and the translation of 

the Booh of Precepts which forms an 

Appendix of 82 pages, is still the only complete translation 
into any European language of a Bfibi sacred book. Of the 
543 pages composing this volume, 299 are devoted to the 
Bhbls. 

[a.d. 1865 .] Persien. Das Land und seine Beicohner, by 
Dr Jakob Eduard Polak, formerly Physician to the Shhli of 
Persia and Professor at the Medical College of Teher&n 
(Leipzig, 1865, 2 vols.). This work, embodying as it does 
researches into every phase of Persian life made by one 
whose position gave him rare opportunities of observing 
facts which his scientific training enabled him to describe 
with precision and accuracy, is also of the highest value. 
What relates to the BAbis occupies only four pages (pp. 
350—353) of the first volume. Of these four pages the 
contents are briefly as follows:— 

P. 350. The B4b and his teaching—Its rapid spread, 
especially amongst Seyyids, men of learning, and women of 
the most cultured class—Kurratu’l-‘Ayn—Alleged use of 
narcotics such as hashish by the Bfibls—Determination 
of the A mir-Nizam to put the B£b to death. 

P. 351. Execution of the Bfib—Insurrections in 
Mdzandar&n and Zanj&n. [Both of these risings are here 
described as having taken place subsequently to the B^b’s 
death, whereas in fact the former had terminated and the 
latter was in progress when this event occurred.]—Attempt 
on the ShMi’s life in 1852. 


204 NOTE A—BIBLIOGRAPHY. 

P. 352. Attempt on the Shdh’s life—Persons suspected 
—-“Macchiavellian means” adopted for the extirpation of 
the Bdbls—Hdjl ‘All Khdn the Farrdsh-BdsM- —His cruel 
disposition—Partition of the Bdbi prisoners. 

P. 353 . Horrible cruelties perpetrated on the Bdbls 
—Their extraordinary fortitude—The tortures inflicted 
on the beautiful Kurratu’l-‘Ayn, and the “superhuman 
courage” wherewith she endured her lingering death. [Of 
this execution Dr Polak was himself a witness.]—Persecu¬ 
tions in the provinces—Activity of the Bdbls continued, 
though concealed. 

[a.d. 1865 .] Journey from London to Persepolis, by John 
Ussher, F.KGr.S. (London, 1865). This work contains 
(pp. 627—629) some mention of the BAbfs, and depicts 
in vivid colours the reign of terror which succeeded the 
attempt on the Shah’s life. A portion of this description 
is quoted in a footnote on p. 120 , supra. 

[a.d. 1866 .] Bab et les Babis, an article—or rather a 
series of five articles—communicated to the Journal Asia- 
tique for 1866 by Mirza Kazem-Beg. The Journal Asiatique 
for each year being divided into two volumes in the second 
of which the pagination is recommenced, I have, for the 
sake of brevity, denoted all that portion of Mirza Kazem- 
Beg’s article which occurs in vol. vii ( 6 th series) by the 
abbreviation ‘Kazem-Beg i,’ and that which occurs in vol. 
viii by ‘Kazem-Beg ii,’ whenever I have had occasion to 
refer to them. The whole article amounts to 251 pages 
distributed in the two volumes as follows:— 

Vol. vii (sixitme sdrie), pp. 329—-384. Preface, and 
biography of the Bdb in 16 sections. 

Pp. 457—522. The Sheykhi doctrines. History of 
the Bdbls, until the final suppression of the Mdzandardn 
insurrection. 

Vol. viii (sixieme sdrie), pp. 196—252. History of the 
Bdbls concluded. (Insurrections of Zanjdn and Nlrlz, 
attempt on the Shdh, persecution of a.d. 1852.) 

Pp. 357—400. The doctrine of the Bdbls, and its 

Pp. 473-507. Two letters from a Bdbl Seyyid— 


EUROPEAN ACCOUNTS. 


205 


Changes in the original doctrine of the B4b wrought by his 
followers—Translations from a B&bl work of a devotional 
character. [This work, as 1 have attempted to show 
on pp. 897—899 of my second paper on the B4bls in the 
J. R. A. S., is none other than the Ziyarat-nama —the so- 
called “B^cit du Pfelerinage”—composed by the BUb.]— 
Conclusion. 

The sources from which Mirza Kazem-Beg drew his 
information are, as stated by himself in a note on p. 332 
(vol. vii), the following :— 

(a) The Ndsikhu’t-Tawdrikh. 

(/3) The ms. History in the M^zandardnl dialect described 
by Dorn (see p. 202 , supra). Its author calls himself Shey- 
khu’l-Ajam. Kazem-Beg describes the work in question as 
“full of inexactitudes,” “of no historic value,” and “curious 
only because composed in the dialect of Mdzandardn.” 

(y) A memoir on the B&bis by M. Sdvruguin, who 
resided for twenty years in Persia. 

( 8 ) Another memoir by M. Mochenin, who was in 
Persia at the time of the Bhbl troubles, and who (vol. vii, 
p. 371) was so fortunate as to be at Cliihrik in June 1850, 
and even, as it would appear, to see the Bdb addressing the 
multitudes who flocked thither. 

Some of Kazem-Beg’s dates and facts I have already 
had occasion to criticize (though in almost all such cases it 
is the Ndsikhut-Tawdrikh which is ultimately responsible); 
neither can I concur in several of the views which he 
advances (especially his estimate of the characters of Akd 

Seyyid Hnseyn of Yezd and AkJ Seyyid YahyJ of DJrJb 
and his theory of the passive part taken by the Bdb in the 
formation of the new doctrines); but, whatever new light 
further research may throw on the subject treated of by 
Mirza Kazem-Beg, there is no doubt that his work will 
always remain one of the chief authorities thereon. 

[a.d. 1866 .] History of Persia from the beginning of the 
Nineteenth Century to the Year 1858, by Piobert Grant 
Watson, formerly attached to Her Majesty’s Legation at 
the Court of Persia (London, 1866). This work is also of 
the utmost value, since the author, from the position which 


206 


NOTE A—BIBLIOGRAPHY. 


he occupied, had at his disposal the best means for arriving 
at the truth of matters of historical fact (especially of 
chronology), and was, moreover, by no means disposed 
unreservedly to follow the Musulm&n historians, of whose 
unreliability he was well aware. What refers to the Bdbfs 
in this work is as follows :— 

Pp. 347—352. Origin of the movement—Early life of 
the B&b—The treatment experienced by him at the hands 
of Huseyn Kli£n—Edicts against the Bdbfs. 

* *- * 

Pp. 360—362. Rising at Yezd (not described in this 

passage as BMri). 

P. 385. Yezd rising described as a Bdbf movement. 

P. 386. Account of the ‘ Seven Martyrs.’ 

P. 387. Siege of Zanj^tn. 

Pp. 388—392. Execution of the Bill)—Fall of ZanjAn. 

* * €■ 

Pp. 407—410. Attempt on Shah’s life—Executions of 
B4bis. 

[a.d. 1867 .] Meine Wanderungen und Erlebnisse in 
Persien, by Hermann Viinbdry (Pest, 1867). This well- 
known traveller, « 2 Jr0 P 0S of a conversation which he had 
during his passage through M&zandardn with some of the 
inhabitants of ‘AllAMd, in whose minds the recollection of 
the siege of Sheykh Tabarsl was still fresh, gives a disserta¬ 
tion on the Bib Is which extends from p. 286 to p. 303 
of this work. This account seems to be based almost 
entirely on what be was able to learn from the Persians, 
though Gobineau’s work is occasionally quoted. The 
details here given concerning Suleymin KMn’s martyrdom 
(which differ somewhat from those embodied in other 
traditions) will be referred to in Note T, infra. 

[a.d. 1 868 . ] Geschichte der herrschenden Ideen des Islams, 
by Baron Alfred von Kremer (Leipzig, 1868). Twenty 
pages of this work (pp.. 202—222) are devoted to Bab und 
seine Lehre, which article constitutes sect, vii of Book ii. 
One of the Bib! mss. in the British Museum (Or. 3114) 
was, as appears from a note on the first page, bought from 


EUROPEAN ACCOUNTS. 


207 


Baron von Kremer, and contains a short note in pencil 
in his handwriting, but it does not seem that he made 
use of this in the compilation of the article in question. 

[a.d. 1869 .] L'Annee PMlosophique for this year con¬ 
tains an article by F. Pillon referred to with approbation 
in the last edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica (vol. 
iii, s. v. Bdbi). 

[a.d. 1872 .] Essays und Studien, by Dr Hermann Etlie 
(Berlin, 1872). Of this work 61 pages (pp. 301—362) are 
occupied by an essay on the Bdb and his doctrine entitled 
Ein moderner Prophet des Morgenlandes and based on the 
works of Gobineau, Kazem-Beg, Vhmb&ry, and Perkins. 
This essay is written in a sympathetic spirit, and the Bdbf 
doctrines are expounded in a very lucid and logical 
manner. 

[a.d. 1873 .] The Journal Asiatique for this year (7th 
series, vol. ii, pp. 393—395) contains an article “Sur les 
sectes dans le Kurdistan” by M. T. Gilbert wherein is 
included a short notice of the B&bfs. After briefly de¬ 
scribing the beliefs attributed to them by their neighbours, 
M. Gilbert estimates the number of those settled in 
Kurdistan at about five thousand. 

[a.d. 1874 .] Persia—Ancient and Modern, by -John 
Piggot, F.S.A., F.G.S., F.R.G.S. (London, 1874). The 
account of the BAbl movement given in this work is full of 
inaccuracies. Thus, on p. 104, speaking of the BMfls up 
in arms at Yezd in May 1850, the writer says, “failing in 
this” (i.e. their attempt to capture the citadel) “they 
retired to Zinjan”; and he further describes the Bhb as 
having been present in person amongst the besieged in 
that city, and as having been captured “in one of the 
assaults of the Shah’s troops” and executed there. 

[a.d. 1874 .] Gurrei-ul-Eyn: Ein Bild aus Persiens 
Neuzeit, by Marie von Najmhjer (Vienna, 1874). This is a 
poem in six cantos in hononr of the B&bl heroine Kurratu 
’l-‘Ayn, which, if not possessing much historic value, is at 


208 


NOTE A—BIBLIOGRAPHY. 


least a graceful and pleasing tribute to the memory of a 
noble woman. 

[a.d. 1875.] Journey in the Caucasus, Persia, and 
Turkey in Asia, by Lieut. Baron Max von Thielmann, 
translated into English by Charles Ilenneage, F.R.G.S. 
(London, 1875, 2 vols.). The first volume of this work 
contains (at p. 262) a brief reference to the B.dbls a pro)ms 
of ‘ Muridism.’ The second volume contains (at p. 52) an 
allusion to the Bib’s execution in the citadel (arg) of 
Tabriz, which event is wrongly described as having occurred 
in a.d. 1843; and (at pp. 90—91) an interesting account of 
a Bib! named Muhammad Ja'far 1 who was the author’s 
fellow-traveller from Tabriz to Mosul. 

[a.d. 1877.] Collections Scientifiques de Vlustitut des 
Laugues Orientates, vol. i, Manuscrits Arabes, by Baron 
Victor Rosen (St Petersburg, 1886). To this most valuable 
contribution to our knowledge I have had occasion to refer 
frequently, both in my second paper on the Bibls (pp. 886, 
905—909, 954—960, &c.), and in the present work. Of 
the two Bib! mss. described, the first is conjectured by 
Baron Rosen (and there can hardly be a doubt that his 
conjecture is right) to be the Commentary on the Sura of 

Joseph composed by the Bab at the 

beginning of his mission; the second, concerning which I was 
unable to arrive at a definite conclusion in my second paper 
on the Bibls (p. 954—958), has since been proved beyond all 
question to be a copy of Behi’s Sura-i-IIeykal, whereof the 
Epistles to the Kings (including the Epistle to the Shih, 
a complete translation of which is given in the present 
work 2 ) form a portion. Baron Rosen’s convincing arguments 
(which he has kindly allowed me to see in proof) are 
prefixed to the text of the ms., which will be published in 

1 Baron von Tliiolmann’s fellow-traveller is very prohably 
identical with the HAjl Muhammad Ja‘far mentioned on p. 100, 
supra, and in note 1 on the same page. 

2 See pp. 108—151, supra, and Note X, infra. The latter 
contains a translation of that portion of the Arabic exordium 
which is not cited in the Persian text. 


EUROPEAN ACCOUNTS. 


209 


extenso in vol. vi of the Collections Scientijiques <tc., 
shortly to appear (p. 145 et seq.). 

[a.d. 1879 .] The Deutsche Rundschau (vol. xviii, pp. 
284—291) contains an article entitled Orientaliscker Social- 
ismus by Professor T. Noldeke, in which the tenets of the 
Bdbfs are briefly discussed, and compared with those of the 
Mazdakites. 

[a.d. 1886 .] Collections Scientijiques <ic. , vol. iii, Manu- 
scrits Persons, by Baron Rosen (St Petersburg, 1886). 
This volume, equally valuable with the other, contains 
descriptions of mss. of the Persian Reyan (pp. 1—32) and 

the tk&n (pp. 33—51). 

[a.d. 1887 .] The Revue Critique d’Histoire et de Litte- 
rature for April 18th of this year contains (pp. 297—298) 
a review of Baron Rosen’s Manuscrits Persons by M. E. 
Fagnan. Special notice is taken of the B4bf mss. described 
by Baron Rosen, and some valuable information is given 
concerning the five B&bi mss. brought by Gobineau from 
Persia, which, on the death of their owner, were bought by 
the Biblioth^que Nationale. 

[a.d. 1887 .] Haifa, or Life in Modern Palestine, by 
Laurence Oliphant (Edinburgh and London, 1887). This 
work consists of a series of letters or essays on different 
subjects connected with the Holy Land, of which the 
twenty-first, entitled “the Bahs and their Prophet” (pp. 
103—107), gives an account of a visit paid by the writer to 
one of Belies gardens in the vicinity of Acre, together 
with such information as to the history of the B4b and the 
B4bfs and the personal character and claims of Behd as he 
was able to collect. This account is very noteworthy, 
since it is, so far as I know, the first published notice of 
Beh4 and the B4bf colony at Acre. Several erroneous 
statements are made, especially one to the effect that Beh4 
“is visible only to women or men of the poorest class,” and 
that “his own disciples who visit him are only allowed 
a glimpse of his august back.” 1 myself, during the week 
which 1 spent at Acre (April 13th—20th, 1890), was 

B. 14 


210 


NOTE A—BIBLIOGRAPHY. 


admitted to the august presence four times, each interview 
lasting about 20 minutes; besides which on one occasion I 
saw Behd walking in his garden of Janayn surrounded by a 
dozen or so of his chief disciples. Not a day passes but 
numerous Bdbis of all classes are permitted to wait upon 
him. 

[a.d. 1887 .] Note sur trois ouvrages Bdbis communi¬ 
cated by M. Clbment Huart to the Journal Asiatique for 
1887 (eighth series, vol. x, pp. 133—144). Of the first 
of the three mss. described I submitted an extract to 
Subh-i-Ezel, who pronounced it to be (as M. Huart had 
conjectured) from his own work the Kitdb-i-Nur (‘Book 
of Light’), or rather from one of the two works which go 
by that name. The translation of Subh-i-Ezel’s words 
(contained in a letter written at the end of September 1889) 
will be found in Note U infra. The other two mss. de¬ 
scribed by M. Huart appear to be from the same source. 
Baron Rosen alludes to another article about these mss. by 
M. Huart in the Revue de I’Histoire des Religions (vol. 
xviii, p. 279—296), which I have not seen. 

[a.d. 1889 .] La Religion de Bab, a little volume of 64 
pages, also by M. Huart, forming one of the series known 
as the Bibliotheque Orientale Elzevirienne (Paris, 1889). 
This contains some translations from the above mss. The 
historical portion supplies us with no new facts. 

[a.d. 1889 .] The Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 
[New Series] vol. xxi contains my two papers on the 
Bdbis, whereof the first (throughout this work referred to 
as B. i) is entitled The. Bdbis of Persia. I. Sketch of their 
History and Personal Experiences amongst them, and the 
second (referred to as B. ii) The Bdbis of Persia. II. 
Their Literature and Doctrines. These two papers embody 
the results of my investigations on this subject during the 
year which I spent in Persia (1887—1888). 

[a.d. 1889 .] Baron Rosen’s Zapiski (vol. iv, parts 1 and 
2 , pp. 112—114) contains a short account of four Bdbl 
works recently brought to St Petersburg. These four 


EUROPEAN ACCOUNTS. 


211 


works are:—(1) A MS. of the jlil ; (2) A copy of the 
Bombay lithographed edition of the jlil; (3) A ms. of the 
^jsl (which work I wrongly named j£| in 

my papers on the Bdbls in the J. R. A. S.) ; (4) A ms. 
of the i! j.UI a jj-*, (or JSCk s 'a jyN). A much fuller 

description of all these will be found in vol. vi of the 
Collections Scientifiques when it appears. See immediately 
below. 

[To appear shortly.] Collections Scientifiques, vol. vi, 
by Baron Rosen. Although this volume is not yet pub¬ 
lished, the kindness of the learned author in sending me 
the proof-sheets as they were printed off has enabled me 
to make reference to it when occasion required. It will 
contain, amongst much other valuable matter, the complete 
text of the Sura-i-Heifkal. 

See also articles in the Encyclopaedia Britannica s.v. 
Bdbi (vol. iii, 1875, pp. 180—181), Persia, Modern History 
(vol. xviii, 1885, pp. 650—651), and Sunnites and Shi'ites 
(vol. xxii, 1887, p. 665); and articles in the following 
periodicals:— Contemporary Review (vol. xi, p. 581; vol. 
xii, p. 245), Chambers’ Journal (vol. xxix, p. 45), All the. 
Year Round (vol. xxii, p. 149), Hours at Home (vol. viii, 
p. 210), and The Nation (vol. ii, p. 793). 


NOTE B.' 

The Martyrdom of Mi'rza Seyyid ‘Alt the Bab’s 
maternal Uncle amongst the ‘Seven Martyrs.’ 

“ This year,” says Lady Sheil writing in September 
1850, “seven Babees were executed at Tehran for an 
alleged conspiracy against the life of the Prime Minister. 
Their fate excited general sympathy, for every one knew 
that no criminal act had been committed, and suspected 
the accusation to be a pretence. Besides this Babeeism 

14—2 


212 


NOTE B—MfRZA SEYYID ‘ALf. 


had spread in Tehran too. They died with the utmost 
firmness. Previously to decapitation they received an 
offer of pardon, on the condition of reciting the Kelema, or 
creed, that Maliommed is the Prophet of God. It was 
rejected, and these visionaries died steadfast in their faith. 
The Persian minister was ignorant of the maxim that 
persecution was proselytism 1 ”. Amongst these seven—‘the 
Seven Martyrs’ as they are called by the B&bls—was the 
Bdb’s uncle HAjl Mlrzd, Seyyid ‘All. The other sufferers 
were H4jf Mu 114 Isma‘11 of Kum, Mlrzii Kurban ‘All the 
dervish, Akh Seyyid Huseyn of Turshfz the mujtahid, 
Hdjl Mull.i Nakl of Kirmdn, Mlrzd Muhammad Huseyn of 
Tabriz, and Mulld S&dik of Mar&gha. Of their martyrdom 
the Thnkh-i-Jadid gives a long and touching account, or 
which I here append an abridgement. 

What led to this tragic event was, as stated by Lady 
Sheil, a report conveyed to Mfrzd, Takl KhAn the Prime 
Minister that the Babls in Teheran meditated a rising. 
Thirty-eight persons suspected of belonging to the obnoxious 
sect were therefore arrested and cast into prison. After a 
few days it was decided that all of these who would consent 
to renounce or repudiate their connection with the B4b and 
his doctrines should be released, but that those who refused 
to do so should suffer death. 

When this news was brought to the prisoners, Hdji 
Mull4 Isma‘11 of Kum, who was one of the earliest believers 
and who had been present at the conference at Badasht 
[see Gobineau, pp. 180—184], arose and addressed his 
fellow-captives, announcing his own intention of standing 
firm in the faith even unto death, and exhorting others 
like-minded with himself and not hindered by any im¬ 
pediment to follow his example, “ for,” said he, “ if we do 
not show forth the religion of His Highness the Kahn, 
who then will show it forth ? ” At the same time he 
declared that those whose faith was weak, or who were 
prevented by domestic ties from freely laying down their 
lives, must judge for themselves as to the duty incumbent 
upon them, and decide whether they were justified in 
making a formal renunciation of the B4b’s doctrine. 


1 Lady Shell’s Life and Manners in Persia , pp. 180—181. 


THE SEVEN MARTYRS. 


213 


Accordingly of the thirty-eight prisoners seven (in¬ 
cluding Hilji MulH Isma'il) determined to adopt the more 
courageous course, while the others for various reasons 
were not prepared to forfeit their lives, and decided to 
recant. The latter were therefore released : the former 
were led out to die. 

In spite of the wide-spread sympathy felt for the 
sufferers there were not lacking wretches to deride and 
mock them as they were led forth to the place of execu¬ 
tion 1 . Some of these threw stones at them; others con¬ 
fined themselves to abuse and raillery, crying out, “ These 
are Bfibls and madmen.” Thereupon Hfijl Mullfi Isma‘11 
turned towards them and said, “Yes, we are Bfibis; but 
mad we are not. By God, 0 people, it is for your awakening 
and your enlightenment that we have foregone life, wealth, 
wife, and child, and have shut our eyes to the world and 
its citizens, that perchance ye may be warned and may 
escape from uncertainty and error, that ye may fall to 
making enquiry, that ye may recognize the Truth as is 
meet, and that ye may no longer be veiled therefrom.” 

Now when they were come to the place of execution, 
one came to Hfijl Mullfi Isma'fl and said, “Such an one of 
your friends will, on condition of your recanting, give a 
sum of money in order that they may not kill you. To 
save your life what harm is there in saying merely ‘ I am 
not a Bfibf ’ ? ” To this, however, Hfijf Mullfi Isma‘11 
would by no means consent; and, when greatly importuned, 
he drew himself up and said, 

.. c l.1—i ^ I ■ cAl 

■ 7 -J , A—S— ■ ... S J j 

“ 0 zephyr! Say from me to Ism Ail 2 destined for sacrifice, 

‘ To return alive from the street of the Friend is not the 
condition of love.’” 

1 This, as I have heard, was the square called Sabz-i-Meyddn, 
adjoining the northern limit of the bazaars, but according to the 
T&nkh-i-Jadid the execution took place in the Meyddn-i-Shah. 

2 According to the Muhammadans it was Ishmael [IsmAfl] not 
Isaac [Is-hdk] whom Abraham designed for a sacrifice to God. 


214 


NOTE B—MlRZA SEYYID ‘ALf. 


Then he took oil his turban and said to the executioner, 
“ Go on with thy work; ” and the latter, filled with amaze¬ 
ment, struck the fatal blow. 

The next victim was Mfrzd Kurb&n-'Alf the dervish, an 
old man highly respected and beloved of all, who had spent 
the last night in prison in exhorting and encouraging his 
comrades and reciting verses appropriate to their condition. 
So high was the consideration in which he was held that 
the Sh&h’s mother exerted her influence with her son to 
have him pardoned, declaring that it was impossible that 
he could be a Biibf. So, as he stood there awaiting death, 
messengers came from the palace to give him another 
chance of saving his life. “ Thou art a dervish,” said they, 
“ and art a man of excellence and virtue: they have 
thrown suspicion upon thee, but thou art not of this 
misguided people.” “ I consider myself as one of the dis¬ 
ciples and servants of His Highness [the Bab],” answered 
the old dervish, “ though whether He hath accepted me 
into His service or not I know not.” And when they 
continued to press him and urge him to save his life he 
cried, “ This drop of blood—this poor life—is nought : 
were I possessed of the lordship of the world, and had I a 
thousand lives, I would freely cast them before the feet of 
His friends.” So, when they perceived that their efforts 
were of no avail, they desisted therefrom, and signified to 
the executioner that he should proceed with his w T ork. 
The first blow struck only wounded the old man’s neck and 
cast his turban to the ground. He raised his head and 
exclaimed, 


Ol 

Jjlj.il fl jS' JLiljLi 3 

“ o happy that intoxicated lover who at the feet of the 
Friend 

Rnoweth not whether it be his head or his turban 
which he casteth!” 

Then the executioner quickly dealt him another blow which 
slew him. 


THE SEVEN MARTYRS. 


215 


After him was slain Akd Seyyid Huseyn the mujtakid 
of Turshlz, who, returning homewards from Kerbeld to visit 
his friends and family, had been arrested in Teher&n. He 
too died with the utmost firmness and alacrity. 

Then came the turn of the Bib’s uncle Hdjl Mlrzd 
Seyyid ‘All. A merchant of his acquaintance wished to 
ransom him for the sum of three hundred tum&ns, but he 
declared that to suffer martyrdom was his greatest desire. 
Then he took off his turban, and, raising his face towards 
heaven, exclaimed, “ 0 God, Thou art witness of how they 
are slaying the son of Thy Most Honourable Prophet with¬ 
out fault on his part.” Then he turned to the executioner 
and recited this verse:— 

' A —: — 1 ^ ^ 3 

J L ij c) J*** y S 1 ^ Ij "J 

“ How long shall grief of separation from him slay me ? 

Cut off my head, that Love may bestow on me a head 1 .” 

When he had said this he too submitted himself to the 
executioner’s hands. 

After this the other three victims, each in his turn, met 
their death with like heroism. Of the martyrdom of one 
of these not specified by name but described as “ a young 
Seyyid of pleasing countenance and attractive aspect ” ; of 
the attempt to save him made by Hrijl ‘All KMn the 
Hdjibu’d-Dawla (see p. 52, note 1), who was superintending 
the execution and was moved to a compassion rare in 
him at the sight of so youthful and comely a sufferer; 
and of the refusal of the youthful B&bl to escape death 
and secure wealth, luxury, and a fair bride as the price of 
a simple recantation, the Tdrikh-i-Jadid gives a detailed 
account, which, notwithstanding its pathetic interest, lack 
of space compels me to omit in this place. 

When the executioners had completed their bloody 
work, the rabble onlookers, awed for a while by the patient 
courage of the martyrs, again allowed their ferocious fanati- 

1 Masnavi, Book vi, p. 649, 1. 2 (ed. ‘Aid ’ud-Dawla). 


216 


NOTE B—MiRZA SEYYID ‘ALf. 


cism to break out in insults to the mortal remains of those 
whose spirits had now passed beyond the power of their 
malice. They cast stones and filth at the motionless 
corpses, abnsing them, and crying out, “ This is the recom¬ 
pense of the people of affection and of such as pursue the 
Path of Wisdom and Truth!” Nor would they suffer their 
bodies to be interred in a burial-ground, but cast them into 
a pit outside the Gate of Shfih ‘Abdu’l-'Azlm, which they 
then filled up. 

After detailing the occurrences briefly set forth above, 
the Bdbi historian proceeds to point out the special value 
and unique character of the testimony given by the 
“Seven Martyrs.” They were men representing all the 
more important classes in Persia—divines, dervishes, mer¬ 
chants, shop-keepers, and government officials; they were 
men who had enjoyed the respect and consideration of all; 
they died fearlessly, willingly, almost eagerly, declining to 
purchase life by that mere lip-denial, which, under the 
name of ketm&n or takiya, is recognized by the Shi'ites as 
a perfectly justifiable subterfuge in case of peril; they were 
not driven to despair of mercy as were those who died at 
Sheykh Tabarsf and Zanjan ; and they sealed their faith 
with their blood in the public square of the Persian capital 
wherein is the abode of the foreign ambassadors accredited 
to the court of the Slidh. And herein the Bfibl historian 
is right: even those who speak severely of the Bdbl move¬ 
ment generally, characterizing it as a communism destruc¬ 
tive of all order and all morality, express commiseration for 
these guiltless victims. To the day of their martyrdom we 
may well apply Gobineau’s eloquent reflection on a similar 
tragedy enacted two years later:—“Cette journ^e donna 
au Bilb plus de partisans secrets que bien des predications 
n’auraient pu faire. Je l’ai dit tout k l’heure, l’impression 
produite sur le peuple par l’effroyable impassibility des 
martyrs fut profonde et durable. J’ai souvent entendn 
raconter les scenes de cette journ£:e par des temoins ocu- 
laires, par des homines tenant de prks au gouvernement, 
quelques-uns occupant des fonctions eminentes. A les 
entendre, on eut pu croire aisfment que tous dtaient babys, 
tant ils se montraient p(Metres d’admiration pour des 
souvenirs oh l’lslam ne jouait pas le plus beau r 61 e, et par 


THE SEVEN MARTYRS. 


217 


la haute id4e qu’ils avouaient des ressources, des espdrances, 
et des moyens de succfes de la secte 1 .” 

With regard to Hijf Mfrzi Seyyid ''All the Bib’s uncle, 
with whom we are more particularly concerned, the Tarikh- 
i-Jddid gives the following additional particulars. Before 
leaving Shlriz (where, as it would appear, he had re¬ 
mained after the Bib departed to Isfahin) he set all his 
affairs in order and paid all his creditors in person, as 
though in anticipation of a speedy death. Then he took a 
tender farewell of all his friends and relatives, besought 
them to pardon any fault which he might have committed 
in regard to them, and set out for Teherin, apparently 
with the intention of proceeding thence to Chihrfk to visit 
the Bib. Perhaps on his arrival at the capital he was met 
with the news of his nephew’s martyrdom at Tabriz on 
July 9th 1850: at all events it would appear that he con¬ 
tinued there till, not two months later, he himself met 
with a similar fate. 

As the Bibf historian does not omit to point out, no 
stronger evidence of the marvellous personal influence of 
the Bib over all with whom he came in contact can be 
found than the devoted attachment to him manifested by 
his aged uncle, who, knowing him from his childhood up¬ 
wards, and being fully conversant with his daily life, was 
one of the first to embrace the faith for which he died. Of 
the extraordinary purity and piety of the Bib’slife, indeed, 
we have ample evidence. His bitterest enemies cannot 
asperse his personal character. Hence those who knew 
him best loved and revered him most. I was fortunate 
enough to meet at Acre one who was the Bib’s cousin, 
comrade, play-fellow, and brother-in-law. He was a gentle 
old man with light blue eyes and white beard. I begged 
him to give me some account of the Bib’s personal 
character. “He was very dignified and gentle in his 
manner,” replied he, “yet at times, when any attempt to 
treat him unfairly or discourteously was made, he could 
be very stem. Once I remember while we were engaged in 
business at Bushire a custom-house officer attempted to 

1 Gobineau, Religions et Philosophies dans VAsie Centrale, 2nd 
ed. p. 303. 


218 


NOTE C—PROOFS OF BAB’S AGE 


extort money from him wrongfully and treated him with 
disrespect. Thereupon the Bib, finding remonstrance un¬ 
availing, struck his assailant with his slipper once, accom¬ 
panying the blow with a look of such majestic anger that 
the latter instantly became silent and took his departure.” 


NOTE C. 

Texts from the Persian Beyan giving the Bab’s age at 

THE COMMENCEMENT OF HIS MISSION, AND THE DATE 
THEREOF. 


The Bib mentions his age in two passages in the Persian 
Beyan. The first of these occurs in Viihid h, ch. 1 and 
runs as follows in my ms. The variants of the British Mu¬ 
seum codex marked Or. 2819 are here and hereafter given 
at the foot of each page. This codex is denoted by the 
letter B. 

JuL*j 

£ 

^ ^ IJjUj <Ul! ^o! ^0 J 

JtS^ Jj) 

CjJ% (Jill Jl>- j al_jj iSjJua Ails' jJjilo L^il) 

JA J JljLkHo 

^ ^ vlbl>.Lo _^A 


1 B inserts 2 B omits. 3 B inserts ji . 

4 B reads pis£». 5 B reads ccSi*. 0 B adds . 

7 B adds 


FROM PERSIAN BEYAN. 


219 


J Ololilo jit- 

3 iM j\ JXJLi oj^lcl ->jljj> 61 JJ ^Uiio- j > udc 
j <tbl JiC s6il 5 ala*. J a 3 ^a.j 

J3 ^>-1 li (J^l j\ i^jLic 

^•oVI ^>-1 a 3C£3 3 3^. jj**“ _?* '—' 

A^»- jl Lgjl ■".i J?. 3 JjV d5^* jur 

dS^ lI.»u 1 ^yl 6^“^ 3 6^ ^6 *^'ad^J t 6^ > ’ 

3■ mfl d .t>- L»a ^1 3 ^" 1 6w I 0^-3 


“ And if anyone should reflect on the appearance of this 
Tree 12 , he will without doubt admit the loftiness of God’s 
religion. For in one from whose life [only] twenty-four 
years had passed, who was devoid of those sciences wherein 
all are learned, who now recites verses after such fashion 
without thought or hesitation, who in the course of five hours 
writes a thousand verses of supplications without pause of 
the pen, who produces commentaries and learned treatises 
of so high a degree of wisdom and understanding of the 
Divine Unity that doctors and philosophers confess their 
inability to comprehend those passages, there is no doubt 
that all this is from God. What pains do these doctors 


1 B reads j,l. jL,. 

4 B omits. 

7 B omits. 

10 B reads 

12 i.e. the Bdb, who 
Truth.” 


2 B inserts jU. 3 B inserts l^i. 

6 B inserts c B inserts j».. 

8 B omits. 9 B reads j jU ... . 

11 B inserts j|, 

repeatedly calls himself “the Tree of 


220 


NOTE C—PROOFS OF BAB’S AGE 

take who study diligently from the beginning to the end of 
their lives when writing a single line in Arabic ! Yet after 
all [the result] is but words which are unworthy of mention. 
All these things are for a proof unto the people ; else is the 
religion of God too mighty and glorious for one to be able 
to understand it by aught other than itself; rather by it is 
all else understood.” 

The second passage occurs in Vahid vi, ch. 11, which 
prohibits the cruel beating of children and defines the 
penalties incurred by schoolmasters and teachers who in¬ 
fringe this injunction. After stating these in full it con¬ 
tinues as follows:— 


~ — > 

\j-iJ *4^ 3 J\_j j>* J.O jCo ^ia J\ 3 J >cj jl 


l LlJuJ JL J^>- Ll JU ^ 

$■ 

*JL S.'j L* — -J OL ilaflj Ji I J&SljSU>- 


“ The fruit of these ordinances is this, that perchance 
no sorrow may befal that Soul from the ocean of whose 
bounty all are endowed with existence. For the teacher 
doth not recognize the Teacher of himself and of all, even 
as in the manifestation of the Furkdn [i.e. the Kuran\ 
none recognized that Sun of Truth till forty years had 
passed, and in the [case of the] Point of Revelation [i.e. 
the Bib] for twenty-five years.” 


In my first paper on the Bdbls in the J. R. A. S. 
(B. i, pp. 509—511), I was disposed to believe that in each 
of these two passages the Bib referred to his actual age at 


1 B inserts if. 2 B reads ^ jl. 

* Breads ^ jA-LA;. 5 Breads JL 


3 B omits. 


FROM PERSIAN BEYAN. 


221 


the time of writing, and that this was why he described 
himself in one passage as being twenty-four years of age 
and in the other as twenty-five. Starting with this hypo¬ 
thesis, I attempted to fix as nearly as possible the date 
when the first of these passages was written, and decided 
that it must have been about the end of a.d. 1847 or the 
beginning of a.d. 1848. From this I concluded that the B4b 
must have been bom not earlier than a.d. 1824, and that he 
was consequently only nineteen years old at the commence¬ 
ment of his mission, as alleged by Gobineau (pp. 142—143) 
and by some of the Babis whom I saw in Kirmdn. Further 
information as to the date of the B&b’s birth, which reached 
me after the publication of my first paper, compelled me to 
abandon this view 1 . Indeed, had I not been unduly influ¬ 
enced by the idea that the B4b was nineteen years of age 
at the commencement of his mission, and had I more care¬ 
fully considered the second of the two passages above quoted, 
I should have perceived that the B4b speaks of his own age 
and that of Muhammad at the beginning of their respective 
missions when their prophetic office was first disclosed to 

mankind. In the ... (Seven Proofs) the B4b also 

describes himself as { y J lc. j a. .,4 . j\ nf 

r'i “of an age which did not exceed five and twenty 

When in Cyprus I one day enquired of Mfrza Yahyd Sabh- 
i-Ezel how old the Bab was at the time of the ‘ manifesta- 
tation.’ He replied without hesitation “ twenty-four, and 
entering on his twenty-fifth year.” Now the date of the 
‘manifestation’ is given in the Persian Bey an (the passages 
will be quoted immediately) as Jamddf-ul-UH 5th a.h. 1260 
(May 23rd a.d. 1844). It therefore follows that the Bdb, 
being at that date, according to his own statement, over 
twenty-four and under twenty-five years of age, must have 
been bom on Muharram 1st a.h. 1236 (October 9th, a.d. 
1820) rather than on Muharram 1st a.h. 1235 (October 
20th, a.d. 1819) as stated at p. 2 of the present work. The 

1 This information will be found at p. 993 of my second 
paper on the Biibis. 


-222 


NOTE C—PROOFS OF BAB S AGE 


correctness of the former date is further corroborated by 
the enquiries kindly undertaken by a friend of mine at 
Shiraz who is himself connected with the B4b’s family (see 
B. ii, p. 993), and I think there can be little doubt that it 
is the true one. 

The first passage in the Persian Bey an where the 
date of the ‘manifestation’ is given occurs in Vahid n, 
ch. 7, which treats of the real meaning of the Resurrection. 
It commences as follows: — 


io daLiill UL) *3 1 v—3U1 

5 - »- 

1 |J^£>L9 ^ jj J)\ ^_sli ^jl 

I J C-^L*3 ^51 J>\ 3ad&LLo 

<0)1 Sc Lq^A^-o <i5CL jJol) aJLo-03 


j [3 j\j> 3 j\ji Old3> <U)I SC *d\ j] j\j) 

OiLi ^j\ 5 j. uOQ jz t J&I j <0)1 Sc 

J3 a j C-9*^ ^ C-vol ^yl 

^ 3 JF 6 ^ J' J 1 ^' jW. 

I B reads i*j. 2 B reads lji«i. 3 B inserts 

4 B omits. 5 Breads^. e B reads 

7 B omits. 3 B om i ts- 0 p omits _ 10 B om ; ts _ 

II B reads i^j. 

12 These four words, essential to the sense of the passage, are 
omitted in my MS. and supplied from B. 


FROM PERSIAN BEYAN. 


223 


<3 ‘till la otsj 4-Ul 33%^ aS^ ^3* ^j> JJ 3 Ji 

^ 3 * t <lll j <^*j ^ 3 * Ol j\ Jbu j 3jj J^VI 

JmJ t.. ,-o.Q^ 3 ^j*a*aC pa L*3 O I ^_3 

s- 

£ 

jk (3°-^° ^ ^ ->J^o ^9 J jb 3^J 

j- 

OaUi »—>^*J U ^1 JL & ^J>3* Jj ^..Jo ^ j A JA 

s- 

aT ‘ ^3^ 3^ 0^9 _^3 A^* »,. ---^ 1 AJU1 3 3^' 3 

^v*/ _jl a&£. 3 l-' i 2 - i 3’- J c*^Lo j\ juj jl J^i 

Ciu aT "a!£L\* 10 J^VI c5aU 9 [^ a*^] 

*- 5 - 

& Jpy* 't > 3jF ^ 3 *■* 3*. C-alii (*3i <JL^ 

> 5 - 

X^j JLi^ ^Ifla) Ij ^u a5^ 1 ^13 0^9 OoLd « ~.oo-^- 


1 B here inserts the following passage :— 

* — 
iy>~ J^o> iy 2* 1 . u*y l T^~ J* ^ OA*> 01 j 

s 

OUj 01 JJ *ajjl U *5" \J,'} J^a. J^fl, jlj l^a. J^J J* 5 

2 B omits. 3 B reads oj. 4 * * B reads jb. 

5 B inserts c Breads ot. 7 Breads 

8 B reads SJ ji. 9 B omits. 10 B reads j^Yl. 

11 B reads <,' * 71 „. 12 B reads »' 7Y ... 13 B reads OJ. 

14 B reads } y and omits } , 


224 


NOTE C—PROOFS OF BAB’S AGE 


JIjl ,JI (jP 

5 - ** 

a^ati JJ1 v_>j) jz. fyf t J_^= jl J XI 

^y jl OL) ■"■"1 a j ^■“^ 1 Ai»l 

isik i ^»lio jA oU 'j3j^ ^ \jt'-) dl*X ^ ‘3^^!. 

' jl) JL5^ j>-l <u1 ^ jj-ftX J_^l jj _j o-l 

# a.3dJ-T j\>zZj\ aS^ J^a — -a ^ftLk 

“ The seventh chapter of the second Vdhid. In explana¬ 
tion of the Day of Resurrection. The quintessence of this 
chapter is this, that what is intended by the Day of Resur¬ 
rection is the day of the appearance of the Tree of Truth : 
but it is not seen that any one of the Shi‘ites hath under¬ 
stood the Day of Resurrection ; rather have they fancifully 
imagined a thing which with God hath no reality. [And 
that which hath no reality with God hath no reality.] But 
what is meant by God and by those who are wise amongst 
the people of truth by the Day of Resurrection is this, that 
from the time of the appearance of the Tree of Truth, at 
whatever period, and under whatever name [or form] (it be), 
until the moment of its disappearance is the Day of Resur¬ 
rection. For example, from the (first) day of the mission 
of Jesus till the day of His ascension was the Resurrection 
of Moses, for during that period the manifestation of God 
[appeared in the form of that Truth, who rewarded by His 
word everyone who believed in Moses, and punished by His 
word everyone who did not believe. For what God regarded 
at that time] was what God beheld in the Gospel. And 
after the (first) day of the mission of the Prophet of God 

1 B reads oi. 2 B inserts 3 B reads jj. 

4 B omits. 6 B inserts . 0 B reads oi ft. 

7 B reads 


FROM PERSIAN BE VAX. 


225 


till the day of his ascension was the Resurrection of Jesus, 
wherein the Tree of Truth appeared in the form of Mu¬ 
hammad, rewarding by his word every one who was a be¬ 
liever in Jesus, and tormenting by his word every one who 
was not a believer in Him. And from the moment when 
the Tree of the Beyan appeared until it (liaappeareth is the 
Resurrection of the Prophet of God which God hath pro¬ 
mised in the Kurin; of which appearance the beginning 
was v:hen two hours and fifteen minutes (had passed) from 
the eve of [Friday the fifth of\ Jamddi-ul- Uld (a.h.) 1260, 
which is the year 1270 of the mission (of Muhammad). 
(This) was the beginning of the Day of Resurrection of the 
Kur'an. And until the disappearance of the Tree of Truth 1 
is the Resurrection of the Kur’in. For of no thing doth 
the Resurrection occur till it reacheth the stage of perfec¬ 
tion. The perfection of the religion of Islim was consum¬ 
mated ere the beginning of this Manifestation, and from 
the beginning of this Manifestation till the moment of dis¬ 
appearance the fruits of the Tree of Isldm, whatever they 
are, will become apparent. And the Resurrection of the 
Bey in is from the (first) appearance of Him whom God 
shall manifest; for to day the Beyin is in the stage of seed, 
but at the beginning of the manifestation of Him whom 
God shall manifest the ultimate perfection of the Beyan 
will become apparent, when He shall gather the fruits of 
the trees which have been planted.” 

The second passage giving the date of the 1 manifesta¬ 
tion ’ occurs in Vahid vi, ch. 13 and runs as follows :— 

— 5- S- 

"j J 1 Jk jj ijl JLi^ J 


v J 3 O* ^1 A**** JLv A Lfl& & l -*■ i ^A 
&A3 A 3j J —j 3 

# JLLaJ Jbu 

1 See note 12 at the foot of p. 219. 

2 B omits. 3 B omits. 4 B inserts 5 B omits. 

s B omits. 7 B inserts a, . 3 B inserts 

B. 15 


226 


NOTE D—MEANING OF ‘ BAB ’ 


“ And after the planting of the Tree of the Kur’an the 
perfection thereof was attained in one thousand two hun¬ 
dred and seventy years. Had the maturity thereof been 
(attained) at two o’clock on the night of [Thursday] the fifth 
of Jamfidi-ul-Ulfi, it (i.e. the new manifestation) would not 
have appeared five minutes later.” 

The above quotations also illustrate what I have had 
occasion to notice in my first Paper on the Bfibis (B. i, 
p. 507), viz. that the Bdb prefers to date not from ike fight 
of Muhammad but from the beginning of his mission, 
which he places ten years earlier. Hence he usually states 
the beginning of his own mission as having occurred not in 
the year 1260 A.H., but “ 1270 years after the mission of 
Muhammad.” Cf. Persian Began, Vahid ii, ch. 7 ; iv, 14; 
iv. i6 ; iv, 18; vi, 7; vi, 8; vi, 13 (bis). 


NOTE D.' 

The meaning of the title ‘Bab,’ 

Every writer who has made mention of the Bdb has 
pointed out that this title assumed by him at the begin¬ 
ning of his mission signifies in Arabic ‘ Gate’ or ‘Door,’ but 
in specifying that whereunto he professed to be the ‘ Gate ’ 
they are no longer in accord. Kazem-Beg says (i, p. 343) 
that one day, falling into an ecstasy, Mlrzd ‘All Muhammad 
“ discovered that he was the Bab, the Gate of Truth,” and 
a few lines lower he says, “ Je ne sais si les paroles du 
Christ: _ ‘ Je suis la porte ’ lui dtaient connues; rnais il 
n’ignorait sans doute pas que Mahomet avait dit: ‘ Je suis 
la ville du savoir et Ali (son gendre) est la porte de cette 
ville Gobineau (pp. 149—150) says, “II annon§a qu’il 
dtait le Bah, la Porte par laquelle seule on pouvait parvenir 
it la eonnaissance de Dieu.” Lady Sheil says (p. 176), 
“this amiable sect is styled Babee, from Bab, a gate, in 


GIVEN IN NASIKHU’T-TAWARIKH. 


227 


Arabic, the name assumed by its founder, meaning, I 
suppose, the gate to heaven.” Watson (p. 348) gives the 
clearest and most correct statement of the meaning of the 
title in question. He says, “ He (Mirzd ‘Ah' Muhammad) 
now gave out that as Ali had been the gate by which men 
had entered the city of the prophet’s knowledge, even so 
lie was the gate through which men might attain to the 
knowledge of the twelfth Imam. It was in accordance with 
this doctrine that he received the distinguishing appellation 
of Bab, or gate; from which his followers were styled 
Babis.” 

As regards the Muhammadan historians, the Nusikhu 
’t-Tawdrikh of Sipihr, which gives the fullest account of 
the Babi movement, and which has served as a basis of 
information to most European writers, says in speaking of 
the beginning of what it calls “the miscliief ( fitna) of 
Mirzd ‘All Muhammad the Bdb ” :— 


uLg>- -I—' ulj>- 

y II J y ju>- i 

JJJ 3 C3 J teofs* Jo vloLc J 

<3 1 , ■ ■ - Q Iq‘. . I ^ 1 ^ 0 ; J ^ J 

j C-flJ J ^Lgj J 3 

jg A ^ yJf\ ^ J a O J vlO^lj 


JL) ^Jl I ^glll 


OcCaA ^oi \) JJL^a 


jL ulj^) jj jl y>- Ijl>- ^ 


\ jA t j\ I (JjjJ J J ^ 

15—2 


228 


NOTE D—MEANING OF ‘ BAB.’ 


Jc l 5_JJ ifiJ ^ A\yl J)L~> OjU-I J .Xfu 

CmI/JJj jcp - l $jjj Ay>- j JA v_»li <Xc.£ 

% ills J jl J)\ ^L> __J »—jL 


“ When H.ljf Seyyid Kizim departed from this world to 
the Eternal Abode, he [Mfrz’d ‘All Mnhammadl carried off 
several of his disciples and retired for vigils and worship to 
the mosque of Kufa, where he abode forty days. All at 
once his disposition swerved aside from rectitude. Then he 
secretly seduced men to his own austerities and doctrine, 
inviting them to devote themselves to him. And in whom¬ 
soever he felt confidence, to him he would say, ‘ I am the 
Gate of God : enter, then , houses by their gates: one cannot 
enter any house otherwise than by the gate thereof. Who¬ 
soever desireth to come to God and to know the religion of 
God cannot do so until he seeth me and receiveth permis¬ 
sion from me.’ Therefore he became known as ‘ Mfrzi 
‘All Muhammad the Bib ’ ; and when a few days had 
passed he was named ‘ the Bib,’ and his own name rarely 
crossed men’s tongues.” 

During the latter part of the reign of Muhammad Shih 
when the Bib, then in captivity at Cliihrfk, was brought to 
Tabriz, and examined concerning his doctrine by a council 
of divines and doctors presided over by the present Shih 
of Persia, then Crown-Prince, he was required to explain 
the title which he had assumed and to state what meaning 
he attached to it. The account given of this examination 
in the present history (pp. 19—21, supra) is brief compared 
to the accounts contained in the supplement of the Ilaw- 
zatii s-Safd, the Tartkh-i-Jadtd, and the Kisasu’ l- JJlama 
(concerning which works see above, Note A). Of the 
proceedings of this council a fuller account compiled from 
the above sources will be found in Note M. For our 
present purpose it is sufficient to observe that when the 
Bib was asked by his inquisitors, “ What is the meaning of 
[the name] Bab ? ” he answered, “ The same as in the holy 
tradition, ‘I am the City of Knowledge and ‘Alt is the Gate 
thereof’.” 


EARLIER USE OF TITLE. 


229 


Von Kremer, in the account of the Bab which he gives 
in his Hcrrsehetidt’n Idivit deg Islet ms, quotes this same 
tradition as the probable source whence Mfrzd ‘Ah Muham¬ 
mad derived his title, and further points out (p. 209) that 
he was not the first to adopt it, one Abu Ja'far Muhammad 
ibn ‘Alt ash-Shahnaghdnf, generally known as Ibn Abf 
Azdkir, having suffered death under the Caliph Ar-Rddkf 
for assuming this same title of Bab and teaching new and 
heretical doctrines which included the tenet of metempsy¬ 
chosis. In his case also the title was explained by Ibn 
Abdns, one of his followers, as signifying “ the door which 
led to the expected Imdm.” So likewise Abu’l-Kasim 
al-Huseyn ibn Biih 1 , a contemporary of ash-Shalmaghduf 
who died a.h. 326 (a.d. 937—938), was regarded by his 
disciples as one of the “ doors leading to the Lord of the 
Age" (Sdhibu z-Zamdn). Lack of space forbids further 
discussion on the history of this title and its employment. 
Those who desire fuller information may consult the autho¬ 
rities referred to by von Kremer, viz. Ibn Khallikdn, ed. 
Wiist, p. 129, Vita 186 ; Baron MacGuekin de Slane’s 
translation of Ibn Khallikdn, vol. i, pp. 436—437, and 
notes on p. 439 ; Hammer-Purgstall, Lift. Gisc/iic/iti der 
An 1 1 nr. vol. v, p. 283 ; and Ibuu’l-Atlifr, vol. viii, p. 217. 

It must be borne in miud that, as is clearly explained 
by Gobineau (pp. 150 and 156) and Watson (p. 348), the 
title of Bab was only provisionally and temporarily adopted 
by Mirza ‘Ah' Muhammad, nor is he now generally so 

-tyled by Ms followers, who call him L| , ^ ('I'Alh-vsc 

■''it/dimv' of Gobineau), jL, A La, ,y A (‘His Highness 

S- 

the Point of Revelation’), ^ !A; ^ ■ A (‘His 


Highness the First Point’), or even 


(‘His Highness my Lord the Supreme’). In the Persian 
Beydn he applies to himself other titles in addition to the 


1 For further particulars concerning this personage, see Note 
0, infra. 


2.‘JO NOTE D—MEAN 1 NO OF ‘ PAR ’ 

second and third of those above enumerated, such as 

.t 

ciia- a tjxf, (the ‘Tree of Truth’), 4 *^ ^jj>- old 
(the ‘ Person ’ or ‘ Essence of the Seven Letters,’ because 

his name, Jc » contains seven letters), and the like. 

But amongst the BehA’ls there is a tendency (very evident 
in the present work, where the term Bab is used throughout, 
and no mention is made of the fuller development of doc¬ 
trine and exaltation of rank which marked the later period 
of MlrzA ‘Ah Muhammad’s mission) to suppress the higher 
titles implying a supremacy which they would reserve for 

BehA, and to speak of the BAb as His 

Highness the Evangelist’). In reading the present history, 
the fact that it represents throughout the view of the 
BehA’ls, not of the original BAbls or the Ezells of to-day, 
must never be lost sight of. When, in the words of (lobineau 
(p. 156), MlrzA ‘All Muhammad “ddclara qu’il n’dtait pas le 
Bab, comine on l’avait cru jusqu’alors, comme il l’avait pens<5 
lui-mOme, e’est-h-dire la Porte de la connaissanoe dcs veritds, 
mais qu’il Atait le Point, c’est-A-dire le gi'ndrateur meme do 
la vtritd, une apparition divine, une manifestation toute- 
puissante,” then, to continue the quotation, “ le titre de 
Bab, ainsi devenu libre, pouvait ddsormais rdcompenser le 
pieux ddvouement de l’un de.s ndopliytes,” and it was on 
MullA Hnseyn of Bushraweyh that it was bestowed. Ac¬ 
cordingly by Subh-i-Ezel this illustrious champion of the 

new faith is always spoken of as ,_, while in the 

Tarikh-i-Jadid he is called , ‘His Excellency 

the Gate of the Gate.’ 

In his earlier writings (e.g. the Commentary on the 
Hum-i- Yusuf, for specimens of which see Rosen’s MBS. 
Arabes, pp. 179—191) MlrzA ‘All Muhammad repeatedly 
uses the term Bab and apparently applies it to himself. 
In the Persian Beydn, which was composed during his 
imprisonment at MAM and embodies his fully developed 
doctrine, he continues to use the term, but no longer limits 


IN PERSIAN BEYAN. 


231 


it to himself, though still occasionally employing it as his 
own title, as, for instance, in the following passage in 
Vahid ii, ch. 1:— 


LI oLi 

■lx) . Sb Alll * ■)L.i ** I i i fl ^ L' {qja jr ‘c^r 

5. 

flsA)A ol> ^ OLa .3 ^9 (Jl^ 

^ iij.Xc Ah'V O.AI9VI A 

Jjli JliU jLaiVI ^!_jl VI j Jij U 

^ 0*^1 ahl (J^ «ia^ta oLi 1 ^^15^ ul aV”* 


# 


<ul 


)_)l) £~JI sh)l-I oLi 


“God demanded in His own speech, ‘Whose book is the 
Kur’in ? ’ All the believers said to Him, ‘ It is the Book 
of God.’ Afterwards it was asked, ‘ Is any difference seen 
between the Furkfin [i.e. the Kurin] and the Beyin ? ’ 
The spiritually-minded answered, ‘No, by God, all is from 
our Lord ’: and none are mentioned but those endowed 
with discernment. Then the Lord of the World [thus] 
revealed:—‘That Word is by the tongue of Muhammad 
the Apostle of God, and this is my Word by the tongue of 
the Person of the Seven Letters, the Gate of God’.” 

In other passages, however, the term is employed (often 
in the plural) in a more general sense. Thus the last four 


1 B reads «jl v l <f. 2 B reads 3 j> II. 

3 Breads j 3 i *r ". 

6 B reads o-ii 3 . 


4 B omits. 
0 B omits. 


232 


NOTE D—MEANING OF ‘ BAB ’ 


chapters of the first Vahid, consisting, as it would appear, 
of mere titles uncominentated and undeveloped, stand as 
follows :— 


<A$dl 3} JjVI jfic. ‘Lll 

£ 

ui _jl) 1» ljij> j Jjjl 

* 3 3 *~ t> 


a£jj\ 3 -* 3 ^^ *—dl 

51! JIT 

i ' L' 3 ^ l^al 1 3 ** 3 ^^ LI 1 w'Lll 

5li df 

■ * Ij I 3 ^ t _]3 ^ ! 3>~ 1 . 'yA LI 1 »■—> LI 1 

511 ^ 

“ Thu sixteenth chapter of the first Vahid. Concerning 
this, that the First Gate (Bub) hath returned to the world 
with everyone who believed in him truly or otherwise.” 

“The seventeenth chaj)ter...&c. Concerning this, that 
the Second Gate...” &c. 

“ The eighteenth chapter...&c. Concerning this, that 
the Third Gate...” &c. 

“ The nineteenth chapter...&c. Concerning this, that 
the Fourth Gate...” &c. 

In one of my interviews with Subh-i-E/.el I asked him 


IX PERSIAN BEY AX. 


233 


who were intended by these ‘Babs’ or ‘Gates,’ and he 
answered that Sheykh Ahmad Ahs.l’i and Haji Seyyid 
Kazim of Resht [see Note E, infra, and also B. ii, pp. 884— 
885 and 888—892] were two of them. Bnt this wonld 
only signify that in them reappeared, or ‘ returned to the 
world,’ two of the four original ‘ Gates.’ And by these 
can only be meant those four persons who, during the 
period of seclusion of the twelfth Imdm known as the 

“Lesser Occultation” (l ; „ acted as intermedi¬ 

aries between him and his followers. These four were, 
according to the t. tl l ac, (1) Abu ‘Umar ‘Othniin ibn 

Sa'id ; (2) Abb Ja'far Muhammad ibn ‘Othmbn, son of the 
above; (3) Huseyn ibn Buh [see Note 0, infra, and the 
beginning of this note, p. 229]; (4) Abu 1-Hasan ‘Ah ibn 
Muhammad Simari. 

So also in Vahid ii, ch. iv, this sentence occurs : — 


Ja— aLj I ^Aji^ aLj O jiens j 

aLj & A &S>- iLj 1 Jr 3 flkli a Aj*A>- 

\ji_j • • • • Av_ ^aLj JA 

a L ^aIj a b ^ ig..~1 aL bfy—' ^ j J *kj 4^ 


* 


1) A L> 


j jJj-C- ‘—’^k A lj J 


“ For God hath assimilated refuge in Himself to refuge 
in His Apostle, and refuge in His Apostle to refuge in His 
executors (i.e. the IiMms), and refuge [hi His executors to 

refuge] in the Gates (Abwab or Babs) of His executors. 

For refuge in the Apostle is identical with refnge in God, 


1 Breads y tL®jl 2 B omits. 3 Breads y tL^y. 

4 B reads O • 6 B inserts o_i. 


234 


NOTE E—THE SHEYKHfS. 


and refuge in the Imhms is identical with refuge in the 
Apostle, and refuge in the Gates is identical with refuge in 
the Im&ms.” 

So likewise in other passages “Gates of the Fire” 
(jUi vjyj) ar e spoken of as identical with “Letters of 
Denial” (ju yjijy*-), both terms signifying such as 
vehemently oppose the Truth and lead men to hell. 


NOTE E. v 

The Sheykhi's, and their doctrine concerning the 
‘Fourth Support.’ 

The founder of the Sheykhi school, with which in its 
origin the B.4bi movement is so closely connected, was 
Sheykh Ahmad of Ahs& (often, but apparently erroneously, 
written Lahsh) in the province of Bahreyn. The following 
is a brief account of his life, for which I am indebted to the 
kindness of one of my Persian friends in Teheran. The 
genealogy therein contained purports to be based on an 
account written by the Sheykh himself for his son Sheykh 
Muhammad Takl. 

Sheykh Ahmad was the son of Sheykh Zeynu’d-Din 
Ahsd’i, son of Sheykh Ibrahim, son of Sheykh Sakr, son of 
Sheykh Ibrahim, son of Sheykh D&ghir, son of Sheykh 
Ramadhhn, son of Sheykh Bishid, son of Sheykh Dihtrn, 
son of Sheykh Shamrukh of the tribe of Sakr, one of the 
most important tribes of the Arabs. From Sheykh Sharn- 
rukli to Sheykh Ramadhhn the family were ostensibly not 
of the Infinite (Shi'ite) faith, but conformed outwardly to 
the practices of the Sunnites. 

According to my correspondent’s statement, the year of 
Sheykh Ahmad’s birth is represented by the chronogram 


SHEYKH AHMAD AHSA.T. 


235 


(AH. 1166 — AD. 1752—53). 


I think, how¬ 


ever, that it should be 


juj! 


L if * 3 ''’ 


“ the water-courses 


overflowed.” This sentence yields the date 1157 ah., which 
agrees with the other particulars given, and also conveys 
an intelligible meaning, neither of which conditions, so far 
as I can see, are fulfilled by the first chronogram. The 
year of his death (a.h. 1242 = ad. 1826—27) is contained 
in the following chronogram :— 


" U ^ 1 Cf-'d (Jf - Cj j > 

“ Thou hast victoriously attained unto Paradise, 0 Ahmad 
son of Zeynu d-Diri! ” Sheykh Ahmad was eighty-five 
years old at the time of his death. 

From his youth upwards Sheykh Ahmad was pious, 
devout, and ascetic in his life. At the direction of his 
spiritual guides he quitted his native country and went to 
‘Irbk (Kerbelh and Aejef), where he took up his abode and 
occupied himself in teaching and diffusing religious know¬ 
ledge. He soon acquired great fame, and mauy students 
gathered round him. His fame continuing to increase, he 
was invited by Fath-‘Alf Shah, Prince Muhammad ‘Ah 
Mfrza JRuknu d-Dauda, and other eminent personages, to 
visit Persia. He accordingly came to Teherdn ; thence he 
proceeded to KimHnshkhin, and thence to Yezd, where he 
abode for twelve years. He performed the pilgrimage to 
Mecca several times, and on the last occasion of doing so 
died two stages from Medina, where he was buried in the 
cemetery called Bakf‘ [-ul-Gharkad. See Lane’s Arabic- 
English-Lexicon, Book L Part i, p. 235]. 

The account of Sheykh Ahmad Ahsa’f contained in the 
Kisasul- Ularnd differs somewhat from that above given. 
Thus it is asserted that he came direct from Bahreyn to 
Yezd where he abode some time ; that from Yezd he went 
to Kirmdu.-hahin, where he received yearly the sum of 700 
tumdns from Fath-'Alf Shdh’s son Muhammad ‘Ah' Mirz5 


1 See Note A, pp. 197—198, supra. 


236 


NOTE E—THE SHEYKHfS. 


Ruhm’d-Dawla ; and that thence he went to KerbeM 
where he finally took up his abode. It would appear, 
however, that he again visited Persia towards the end of his 
life, and that on this occasion he passed through Kazvfn, 
where he paid a visit to Hhjf MulM Muhammad Takf 1 . 
The latter questioned him concerning his views on the 
resurrection, and, after a violent altercation, declared them 
to be heretical. In consequence of this many other divines, 
who had hitherto regarded Sheykh Ahmad almost as a 
saint, began to look askance at him or even to display open 
hostility, so that he was compelled to leave Kazvfn. He 
intended to proceed to Mecca, but died on his way thither 
at Basra. 

The chief points wherein Sheykh Ahmad’s doctrine is 
regarded as heterodox are stated as follows. He believed 
that the body of man was compounded of parts derived 
from each of the nine heavens and the four elements ; that 
the grosser elemental part perished irrevocably at death; 
and that only the' more subtle celestial portion would 
appear at the resurrection. This subtle body he named 

^ G O * 


Lfi t (the word Huwarkilyd being supposed to be 
of Greek origin) and believed to be similar in substance to 


the forms in the “World of Similitudes” (J|^ ^lc). 
Similarly he denied that the Prophet’s material body had, 
on the occasion of his night-journey to heaven (^|^), 

moved from, the spot where it lay in a trance or sleep. He 
was much given to fasts, vigils, and austerities, and believed 
himself to be under the special guidance of the Im&ms, 
especially, as it would appear, the Imkrn Ja'far-i-Skdik. 
He regarded the Imdms as creative forces, quoting in 

support of this view the expression ^ 

“ God, the Best of Creators," occurring in Kur’&n xxiii, 14 ; 
“for,” said he, “if God be the Best of Creators He cannot 
be the sole Creator.” He also adduced in support of this 

1 The maternal uncle and father-in-law of Kurratu’l-Ayn, 
see Note Q, infra, and pp. 197—198, supra. 


WORKS OF SHEYKH AHMAD. 


237 


view the tradition wherein the following words are attributed 
to ‘All 

.-.Ij-Jl ^!U- lil “I am the Creator of the 
heavens and the earth.” He even went so far as to assert 
that in reciting the opening chapter of the Kur’hn (fj j.. 

the worshipper should fix his thoughts on ‘Ali as 

he repeats the words HU “Thee do we worship.” 

Sheykh Ahmad composed a number of works, amongst 
which the following are enumerated by the author of the 
Kisasul- TJlama :— 

jjf i. jujU- OjLj Commentary on the Ziydrat- 

i-JdmVa , in four vols. According to Subh-i-Ezel’s state¬ 
ment it is in this work that the doctrine of the subtle body 

(Llajyt, ^ or J1 h Jg) which survives the dissolu¬ 
tion of the material frame is elaborated. 

JSLuJI &js*\ Answers to questions. 

a. * ^ Commentary on the ‘ Arskiyya of 

Mulld Sadra 1 . 

y\ ;• „ Commentary on the Masha'ir of 

Mulld Sadra. 

- S. 

syu Commentary on the Tabsira-i-Al- 

lamcf. 

1 Concerning Mulli Sadrd and his doctrines see Kote K, infra. 

2 Concerning 1 Alldma (‘the Sage’), i.e. Jemillu’d-Din Hasan 
ibn Yusuf ibn ‘Ah' of Hilla, see a footnote on Note M, infra. 
The full title of the work here mentioned appears to be 

t y i j!l fisS-l j (“The Enlightenment of students on the 

ordinances of Religion.”) 


238 


NOTE E-THE SHEYKHfS. 


^ j 5 |y The Fawa id and Commentary 

thereupon. 

Sheykli Ahmad AhsA’f was succeeded at his death by 
his disciple HAjf Seyyid KAzim of Resht, of whose life the 
following brief account was supplied to me by the same 
friend to whom I am indebted for the biography of Sheykh 
Ahmad given at the beginning of this note. His family 

were merchants of repute. His father was named AkA 
Seyyid KAsim. When twelve years old he was living 
at Ardabil near the tomb of Sheykh Saff’ud-Dfn Is-hAk, 
the descendant of the seventh ImAm MhsA KAzim and 
the ancestor of the Safavf kings. One night in a dream 
it was signified to him by one of the illustrious pro¬ 
genitors of the buried saint that he should put himself 
under the spiritual guidance of Sheykh Ahmad AhsA’f, who 
was at this time residing at Yezd. He accordingly pro¬ 
ceeded thither and enrolled himself amongst the disciples 
of Sheykh Ahmad, in whose doctrine he attained such 
eminence that on the Sheykh’s death he was unanimously 
recognized as the leader of the Sheykhf school. He died 
at Baghdad ere he had attained his fiftieth year a.h. 1259 
(a.d. 1843—1844). The date of his death is contained in 

the following chronogram: ^j^]| jjo ._» “The moon 

of guidance hath disappeared.” His works are said to 
exceed 300 volumes. 

Up to this point the Sheykhfs were a united body, for 
the succession of HAjf Seyyid KAzim would seem to have 
been approved and accepted by all. This unanimity was 
no longer to continue. Seyyid KAzim had not explicitly 
nominated a successor ; indeed according to the BAbf his¬ 
torian he had hinted that the transitional state of things 
under which he and his master Sheykh Ahmad had assumed 
the guidance of the faithful was with his declining life 
drawing to a close, and that a brighter light was about to 
shine forth from the horizons of the spiritual world. Let 
the BAbf historian, the author of the Tdrihh-i-Jadid, take 
up the tale, and describe in the words of his informant the 
closing scenes of the life of Seyyid KAzim. 

“ When HAjf Seyyid KAzim had but recently departed 


>z_*ra off urs. 


ths -pe. * Amtee at Tie scjRBDr >cmee i;r:t j. Aid 
Xiyc alc rear-i Her ire Hat He are ie~Td 

pay Hd ixil' H jcsis.'cr rad. HrH: He Her tv':' -r 
Tiiee ynAre rc rd> tH vredy reecriraed is Hsorcise.. :<;H 

-*£V< £LL iH»~ T uL-^Tun TC 'HSST Hd T^t- TC’ilLjfs^C. 

i^-VC. Xltf- SOC’IiS '£ . v ^ J^OrUJTiZ}^ £Z.C TOftT ? T"t;nt ri ~r 
Aid eexiiecsiirii: Tie rxAiTes rc tie Mast-t rc Tie IHce-i- 
saHcl receaT?d_y .edanrar Hat V v.Hd 're a y;-xH Hat 
ie vrcdd src re -recsed H Tie eanHr; re -rei. Aid Hat V 
vredd. TBrcveter. re rc Tie rare rc Hijii.iL HneHiea. 
rev. re vrcui -sat. ~j *0 / n /tf Ho ~~ o. r >1.1 j-j: esscH 
HHc Tie ri#5 yrciney vriri V made v.H He meiHc 
c tkcHhc HiHire'nr Aid Hm-maa-ra x vHe re vaj 
pCTnimr rrrm. He a.~er Hare Ti Texineyi Aid SxHdad 
re vas HtTcTTirieeT ry rce rc ids mice Aic rise-Hes. jene 
r rcec. ;c ri< rscec idsecruss Aic yxTi_r> rem xee Tceses.* 
n Hat tat 'em Hddeody ii irt': -.1 Terre. HI ~cH 
'TiiriTi. made nrceseaxATarc. Hx<.-— I lx.-; s ; v.- j, -nsec. 
Tim. -i.~Te t>;clt Hs'TersQre. <.i recer<T:Li Termssrc. re 
receaiid Tie .Ham.. viecs-XTem ieyyd ixin atosstsc 

T. m VLA,, XT. .1. ceeX Aic. -i..— Hie iiTiCT C*rTATI. L ,~C TTIj 
nxm e He. HiT tit derarnxr; Hex H-s v.dd -H it 
raid ii)L 1 mx-c it; deseed Hie reTn-.-i-^ vde He-; 
rc-reem vece nxed ddesreesed all itktH at H 3 > riTelierriee. 
rxT ie Tirxe-i rre rare r. vlt e Tie£n im juxei He ne rc 
iLj roe .in n Tie w.c-jl rae r-icue Ti at roi Aid He e 
ij iter 3 :.ttk-j_ *' ry m ye njjTed alc tt: cried reiixee 
c tit HiTi _ 1 ye i, : ,7 nee. lesre Tiir i H-cddi: Aid 
He Tne dte jr..r.ui at .rear ' ’ 

" HH s Aj I iiATr ieAii :t ici Hat; eirdi i-M.iTTAir 
rc H a l a t . azc Heyrrii, H.a - Afscar rc Sa n Hiix 
vd; vree TtveeiT n tHai Ajeecnriy Hreed rrm He i'.cie 
rerjviiA rr ilii.Hi T-r AicamH iHrnnii v.r ' I Timer 


- .is iltjst re a s .-u- scieyini em Jin: vn 
i-Tcscroinrtre as- a yeree>mrc rc Hr r-drex r c V urc :ci~- 
raariy mrcrmec H n rnic i.-vn Hr ^utr.<3cc nerirrs:- 
rr.'CL. ri; vn He - Hr reaese rc Hr ~.tr < inH- vm; icrer 
THflrtn. ti Tacctl di:. cHeyiuri Are zsr see rc Tiiyi 
jTra- rc" Tt:cr. rce rc Tie Terse ic-Src.; xHrcec-Ts aic rceadHrc 
iQArryrs- rc ie rail. H ^see Xrce TT. .i.H \ s ic irtc'rc 

.TTiDIKd 


240 


NOTE E—THE SHEYKHfs. 


heard as follows :— 1 The late Seyyid specially promisedme 
that I should myself apprehend the Manifestation, saying, 
“Thou shalt be there and skalt apprehend." Now the 
utterance of these words and good tidings by him [Seyyid 
KAzim] as here described is a matter of notoriety and a 
thing universally admitted amongst his intimates, being 
authenticated by several letters from well-known persons to 
others who accepted the new Manifestation also 1 . Indeed 
some of those [who were] present in that assembly are still 
alive, and confess to having heard that announcement from 
the late Seyyid. Mullfi Huseyn of Bushraweyh, one of the 
most distinguished of divines, who was moreover intimately 
acquainted with the late Seyyid, made urgent enquiry as to 
the manner in which the Manifestation should come to 
pass. The latter, however, only replied, ‘ “ Permission is 
not accorded unto me to say more than this 2 .” But from 
whatever quarter the Sun of Truth shall arise it will 
irradiate all horizons and render the mirrors of believers’ 
hearts capable of receiving the effulgences of the lights of 
wisdom.’ At all events after his return from Surra-man-ra’a 
the revered Seyyid departed this life as he had foretold.” 

Whatever credence we may be disposed to attach to 
this narrative, there is no doubt that the Sheykhis were, in 
general, anxiously expecting the appearance of someone 
who should assume the leadership of their party. A number 
of the late Seyyid KAzim’s immediate disciples repaired 
directly after his death to the mosque at Kfifa, and there, 
with fasting, vigils and prayers, sought for God’s guidance 
in the choice of a spiritual director. Having completed 
their religious exercises they dispersed each in his own 
way. MuM Huseyn of Bushraweyh proceeded to Shfr&z, 
and on his arrival there paid a visit to Mfrzfi ‘All Muham¬ 
mad, with whom he had become acquainted at KerbeH. 
To him first of all did the young prophet announce his 

1 “The new Manifestation” may mean only the 

dispensation inaugurated by the Bdb, but the force of the “also” 
(f») which follows leads me rather to conjecture that the dispen¬ 
sation of Behd is intended. 

2 This quotation is from the beginning of the first book of the 
Masnavt 


KABfM KHAN OF KIRMAN. 


241 


divine mission, adducing in proof thereof his Commentary 
on the Sura of Joseph, and showing other signs whereby 
Mulia Huseyn, after a mental struggle which lasted several 
days, became firmly convinced that the Master so eagerly 
sought for and so earnestly desired had at length been 
found. No sooner was he himself convinced than, with 
that fiery energy which so pre-eminently distinguished him 
even amongst the eager active spirits who were soou to 
carry the new doctrine throughout the length and breadth 
of the Persian land, and cause the echo of its fame to 
reverberate through the civilized world, he hastened to 
apprise his friends and comrades of his discovery. Thus 

did he become the “Gate of the Gate” ,[,), the 

“First Letter” (j^| the “First to believe” 

(^al ^ Jo|). The rapidity with which the new doctrine 

spread was wonderful, representatives of all classes hastening 
to tender their allegiance to the young Seer of Shfiriz, hut 
it was from the old Sheykln party that the most eminent 
supporters of the new faith were for the most part derived. 

It must not be supposed, however, that all the followers 
of the late Seyyid Kdzim accepted the new doctrine. A 
considerable number, headed by Hfijf Muhammad Karim 
Khan of Kirnrin, utterly declined to admit the Bab’s pre¬ 
tensions (for so they regarded his claims), and these became 
the bitterest and most violent of his persecutors. Of those 
doctors who heaped insult on the Bdb during his first 
examination at Tabriz, and those who two years later 
ratified his death-warrant in the name of religion, several 
were Sheykhis. Hence it is necessary to recognize clearly 
the difference between the relations of Bhbfism to the old 
and the new Sheykhi school. From the bosom of the former 
it arose, and, in great measure, derived its strength; with 
the latter it was ever in fiercest conflict. Of Sheykh 
Ahmad Ahsd’f and Seyyid Kizim of Resht both Bhbfs and 
Sheykhis speak with reverence and affection ; but HfLjf 
Muhammad Karim Kirin and his followers are as odious in 
the eyes of the Bdbfs as Mfrzd ‘All Muhammad the Bdb 

b. 16 


242 


NOTE E—THE SHEYKHfa 


and his adherents are execrable in the opinion of the modern 
Sheykhls. The Bdb stigmatized HAji Muhammad Karim 


Ivh4n as “the Quintessence of Hell-fire” 

and “the [infernal] Tree of Zakkurn ” (see B. ii, pp. 

910—911), while HAji Muhammad Karim Kh&n wrote at 
least two treatises (one called “the crushing of Falsehood,” 

,J1=UI cJl&il) refutation and denunciation of the B^bi 

doctrines. Of the bitter enmity which subsists between 
these two sects I had ample evidence during the two months 
which I spent at Kirmdm in the summer of 1888, and on 
more than one occasion when representatives of both parties 
happened to visit me simultaneously their scarcely disguised 
animosity, which seemed ready at the slightest opportunity 
to burst forth into open conflict, caused me the liveliest 
disquietude. 

I trust that I have succeeded in making clear the 
relations which exist between the BAbfs on the one hand, 
and the old and new Sheykhfs on the other; for a proper 
appreciation of these is essential to a clear understanding 
of the history of B&biism. Indeed we cannot consider that 
we have thoroughly fathomed the drift and purport of the 
BAbf movement until the writings of Slieykh Ahmad Ahsd’f 
and Hdjf Seyyid K4zim of Resht shall have been submitted 
to careful and minute examination and study. This, how¬ 
ever, is a labour still unaccomplished, and, with the exception 
of one point to be noticed immediately, I shall say no more 
about the Sheykhf doctrines in this place. Some further 
information concerning them will be found in Kazem-Beg’s 
articles on the B&bfs (Journal Asiatique, 1866, 6me sfrie, 
tome vii, pp. 457—464); in von Kremer’s Herrschenden 
Idem des Islams (pp. 206—208); and in my second article 
on the B&bfs in the J. R. A. 8. for 1889 (pp. 884—885 and 
888—892). 

The point of doctrine above mentioned as demanding 
some explanation (for it is alluded to in the present text) is 


that of the “Fourth Support” (^| j ^ J) ■ What I 
shall say concerning it is derived from notes of a conversa- 


THE ‘FOURTH SUPPORT.’ 


243 


tion which I had in June 1888 with a Sheyklu doctor of 
Kirmdn named MulM GhuUm Huseyn. I asked him to 
explain to me wherein the doctrine of the Sheykhls chiefly 
differed from that of other Shiites. His answer was in 
substance as follows:—“The BH&sarfs [i.e. non-Sheykhf 
Shiites] hold that the ‘Supports’ or essential principles of 

religion J^j), are fice, to wit (1) Belief in the 

Unity of God (j^a) ; (2) Belief in the Justice of God 


(J Jc) J (3) Belief in Prophethood (cjy ); (4) Belief in the 

Im&mate ; (5) Belief in the Resurrection (jLl.). 

Now two of these (Nos. 2 and 5) we refuse to admit as 
separate principles, for why should we specify belief in the 
Justice of God as one of the essentials of faith aud omit 
belief in the Mercifulness of God, the Wisdom of God, the 
Power of God, and all the other Attributes ? These, more¬ 
over, as well as belief in the Resurrection, are really 
included in the third principle, for belief in Prophethood 
involves belief in the Prophet, and this again involves belief 
in his book, wherein these two so-called principles are set 
forth and whence only they are known. Of the five ‘ prin¬ 
ciples ’ of the BJHsarfs, therefore, we only accept three, c'tz. 
(1) Belief in the Unity of God ; (2) Belief in Prophethood ; 
(3) Belief in the Imhmate; but to these we add another, 


which we call the ‘Fourth Support’ ( |j ^J), viz. 
(4) that there must always be amongst the Shiites some 

5 - 

one perfect man (whom we call J^lS^ f. ‘ the perfect 


Shiite’) capable of serving as a channel of grace ( kb.J j 


between the Absent ImJm and his church. Such is 


)ur doctrine of the ‘Fourth Support,’ and it is evident that, 
A'hereas four supports are under all circumstances necessary 
hr stability, a greater number than this is unnecessary.” 

As so explained, the ‘Fourth Support’ is a term applic¬ 
able rather to that article of faith which declares that there 
nust always exist in the Church of the InHms some visible 


16—2 


2U 


NOTE E—THE SHEYKHIS. 


head who enjoys their special spiritual guidance and serves 
to convey their wishes and their wisdom to all true Shi'ites, 
than to the actual personage who fulfils this function. Yet 
outside the Sheyklif circle, both amongst the B&l&sarfs and 
the Bhbfs, it certainly bears the second meaning as well; 
and it is commonly asserted that H4jf Muhammad Karim 
Khhn regarded himself, and was regarded by his followers, 
as being this ‘Fourth Support’ or Channel of Grace from 
the Spiritual World. It is evidently this second meaning 
which the term bears in the present text, and if it bore it 
from the first it is evident that there was originally very 
little difference between the pretensions of Mfrzd ‘Alf 
Muhammad the Bhb and those of Hhjf Muhammad Karim 
Khhn, since both, in the first instance, claimed to be neither 
more nor less than intermediaries between the absent Imhm 
and his Church, exactly in the same sense as were the four 
original ‘ Gates ’ (Abwcib, or Bubs ) who served as a con¬ 
nection between the Twelfth I in dan and his followers during 
the period of the ‘Lesser Occultation.’ [See end of Note 
D, supra .] 

As regards the actual condition of the Sheykhfs at the 
present day, their head-quarters are still at Kirrndn, near 
which city, in a little village called Langar, situated two or 
three miles from Mdhhn (the burial-place of the great 
dervish Shdh Ni'matu’ll&h), several of the sons of Hdjf 
Muhammad Karim Khdn still reside. During my stay at 
Kirrnhn I visited Langar and was permitted to sit for half 
an hour at the feet of ‘the Masters’ (Akaydn) as they are 
called by their followers. The elder brothers were at 
Kerbeld. at that time (where, I believe, they were very 
coldly received, being, indeed, prevented from preaching in 
the mosque as they desired to do), but two younger brothers 
were engaged in expounding the doctrines of Sheykh Ahmad 
to an appreciative audience of heavy-turbaned votaries. 
At the conclusion of the lecture I had some conversation 
with them, but, though I had no reason to complain of lack 
of courtesy on their part, I cannot say that I was greatly 
impressed with their wisdom. After Kirrndn I believe that 
Tabriz contains more Sheykhfs than any other city in 
Persia, but they are to be found in most of the large towns. 
They are generally regarded by orthodox Shi'ites with 
considerable dislike and suspicion. 


NOTE F—SUNDRY BIOGRAPHIES. 


245 


NOTE F. ' 


Additional Information concerning some of the 
Persons mentioned on p. 5. 


Concerning several of the persons mentioned in the 
passage to which this note refers, the information at pre¬ 
sent at my disposal is deplorably scanty. Such as it is, 
however, I set it down, hoping that others may be able in 
the future to supplement these meagre notes with further 
details. 

Giulia Huseyn of Bushraweyh (‘ The Gate of the Gate,’ 
._iUI *_)L Concerning this illustrious personage we 

have the fullest information. The Nmikhu’t-Tawurikh de¬ 
votes some 10 pages (each containing about 600 w T ords) to 
his history, and the Raiczatu’s-Safd gives an almost equally 
detailed account of his career. Gobinean and Kazem-Beg 
both treat of his life, work, and gallant death at Sheykh 
Tabarsf very fully, and in the present work a sufficient 
summary thereof is contained. Some account of his con¬ 
version will be found in Note E above. Nothing further 
need be added here except that, so far as I can learn, his 
mortal remains still repose in the little inner room of the 
shrine of Sheykh Tabarsl where, at the direction of MnM 
Muhammad ‘All B&rfurushl, they were reverently laid by 
the hands of his sorrowing comrades in the beginning of 
the year a.d. 1849. 

Mirza Ahmad of Asghand is mentioned in the Tartkh- 
i-Jadid in the following passage :— 

^j\s- ._.131 )L j\ jtu 


(_5J 


" -J • O . > O -- 

v . fi .lkj As* I l olA j I ^ vlh J 2 1 


246 


NOTE F—SUNDRY BIOGRAPHIES. 


<_£jt9 j\ Ja»-I I J SI 3 ojA C t&j. 

i - 

I^jj^jla d*?!^ j*~w ^y>" j* Li ^jLS^I jl 

# Jo ^Jj jL^ial 


“ In short, after a while His Excellency 1 the Gate of the 
Gate ’ [i.e. Mu lid Huseyn of Bushraweyh above mentioned] 
set out for Khurdsdn. And after that there emanated from 
the Source of Command [i.e. the Bdb] an epistle to confer 
honour on the faithful, wherein it was made incumbent 
upon them to proceed to Khurdsdn in the case of this being 
possible and their being able. And in the epistle addressed 

to Akd Mfrzd Ahmad Azkandf, who was one of the chief 
disciples of the late Seyyid [Kdzim of Resht], he [the Bdb] 
foreshadowed the catastrophe of Mdzandardn.” In only one 
other passage in the Tarikh-i-JadZd can I find any reference 
to Mlrzd Ahmad of Azghand, and this, consisting of a mere 
list of the names of learned and pious persons who believed 
in the Bdb and “most of whom attained the lofty rank of 
martyrdom,” throws no further light on the matter. I cannot 
find any other mention of this Mfrzd Ahmad in any of the 
documents at my disposal. 

Mulld [ Muhammad ] Sddik, entitled “ the Holy ” 
or “the Holy one of Khurdsdn” ( to, 
jLj^>.)> was > according to the Tarikh-i-Jadid, one of 

the first converts gained by Mulld Huseyn to the new 
faith. He was, previously to his conversion, a mudarris, 
or professor, at one of the colleges of Isfahan. On the 
arrival of Mulld Huseyn in that city (the first visited by 
him on the missionary journey which at the command of 
his master he undertook) Mulld Sddik sought and obtained 
an interview with him, listened to his arguments, examined 
the sacred books of the new creed, and, after a brief but 
severe mental struggle, wherein love of truth finally tri¬ 
umphed over fear and prudence, embraced the doctrines of 


NOTE F—SUNDRY BIOGRAPHIES. 


247 


the B4b. We next find him some months later (Sept. 23rd 
or 24th, A.D. 1845) at ShMz, suffering the penalty of his 
zeal as described in the text. Expelled from Shfrftz, he 
seems to have made his way to M&zandarau ; at all events 
we find him amongst the number of the besieged at Sheykh 
Tabarsf, and after the capitulation he was one of those 
reserved from the general massacre to grace the triumphal 
entry of Prince Mahdi'-Kuli ZMi'rzd. into Bdrfurush. Here 
again fortune so far favoured him that he was saved by 
being sold into slavery 1 from the direr fate which overtook 
almost all of his companions. What hefel him after this 
I know not, but from the manner in which he is referred 
to in the Tanlh-i-Jadid it would appear that he was no 
longer alive at the time when that work was composed. 

Sheykh Abu Turab of Ashtnhurd is only twice alluded 
to in the TurUh-i-Jadtd, and I can find no further account 
of him elsewhere. In the second of these passages his name 
is merely mentioned in the list of eminent men converted 
to the new faith of which I have already spoken. In the 
first it is stated that he was married to the sister of MulM 
Huseyn of Bushraweyh, a woman of extraordinary virtue 
and piety, who, from association with the celebrated Kur- 
ratu’l-‘Ayn [see Mote Q, infm\, had attained to the highest 
degree of excellence and learning. Although the Sheykh 
Abu Tur4b here mentioned is described as Kazvhu, not as 
Ashtahurdt, I think that the same person is intended in 
both passages. 

Mullet Yusuf of Ardabtl. See Kazem-Beg ( Journal 
Asiatique, sixiiune sdrie, tome vii, pp. 357, 358, 467, 468, 
473, 477, 486, and 522). ilulld Yusuf was one of the 
Bib’s most energetic missionaries, and was deputed to 

preach the doctrine in Azarbaijin. Through his instru¬ 
mentality the majority of the inhabitants of MfMn were 
converted. He afterwards attempted to join the Bfibfs at 
Sheykh Tabarsf, but on his way thither fell into the hands 
of ilahdf-Kulf Mfrzi, who detained him as a prisoner till 
the conclusion of the siege, when, in company with several 
of the Bibf chiefs reserved from the general massacre to 
grace the Prince’s triumph, he was led captive into Bdr- 

1 See, however, note 2 at the foot of p. 129 supra. 


248 


NOTE F—SUNDRY BIOGRAPHIES. 


t'urush. There, according to M. S4vruguin’s account quoted 
by Kazem-Beg (he. cit., p. 522), he was blown from the 
mouth of a cannon. The remainder of Kazem-Beg’s account 
differs from that given in the Tarikk-i-Jadid, in that it 
represents him not only as reaching the Castle of Sheykh 
Tabarsf, but as taking a prominent part, in the defence 
thereof. 

Mulld Jaltl of Urhmiyya and Mulld Mahdi. of Kand 
are merely mentioned in the list of illustrious martyrs con¬ 
tained in the Tdrtkh-i-Jadid. 

Of Skeyhh Sa‘td the Indian I can find no other men¬ 
tion. 

Mulld ‘ Alt of Bistain, according to the Tdrikh-i-Jddid, 
was one of those who, on the death of Hdjf Seyyid Kdzim 
of Resht, assembled in the mosque at Kx'ifa to fast and pray 
for guidance. Snbli-i-Ezel in December 1889 wrote for me 
a short account of the history of the Bdbf movement, which 
at some future date I hope to publish. In this occurs the 
following passage:— 


lT 


JO) 


dS^ lia^i Jc v_>h>- 


J^OLI 


“ His Excellency Mulld, ‘Alf Bistdmf, who was noted for 
his sanctity (for he is_‘the Holy One of Khurdsdn’), set out 
towards Turkey, but in Baghdad they took him and impri¬ 
soned him. Then, at the decision of the Mufti, , they sent 
him off towards Constantinople, but martyred him by poison 
at a place near Baghdad called Bad-rd’f.” In one of the 
interviews which I had with §ubh-i-Ezel during my stay at 
Famagusta in March 1890 he communicated to me the 


XOTE G-BAB'S FHjGJUMAGE. 


following additional particulars:—" Mulls "Ah of Bispam 
was The fitst martyr. stud The only one who died by the 
hands of the Osrnanh Turks. His martyrdom occurred 
in The second or third year of The " Manifestation' a. h. 

—§. ab. lS4f—7h He was arrested at Baghdad' and 
east into orison. All the jeadvs of Baghdad. headed hy 
Mahmud ilfendi and Sheykh Muhammad Hasan . signed 
his death-warrant. save one. Mnhsin or Hasan hy name, 
who refused. saving That he was donkifiil as to the rlght- 
fnlness of so doing. Subsequently the Bah addressed these 
words to the above-mentioned Mnhsin or Hasan in the 

BmA -Vowor- ( q 1 . .- :—"Beeanse yon donbted 

and declined to take part in this murder, therefore hath 
God decreed that in the Hay of Besurreotion the hre shall 
not tonch yon.' ” 


XOTE G. * 


Tke Bab's riLtamtACT to Mham axt nirms to Sbiflas. 

As the accounts hitherto published of the Ban's move¬ 
ments drainer the earlier period of hrs miss: on are somewnat 
contradictory, it has seemed to me advisable to embody in 
The present note all that I have been able to learn on tons 
matter, together with the conclusions which may t«e fairiy 
deduced from the facts at present available. 

First of all let ns enumerate briefly the facts which 
seem to be snmciently established by good evidence. 

il' Mum "Ah Muhammad afterwards the Bab. was 
torn at Shuar either on Mnharram 1st ah. liof Oct. ?th_ 
Ait IrdfO'. or on Mnharram 1st like Got. Anh. a.t. Irlf". 
most probably .for the reasons advanced in Xote 0. p. 221. 
SMfwer i the former. 

3 ProbaNy the same Sheykf. Mr.b.ammad Kasan who ;s 
snred in the iffiof r-;-J c,i.;c see B. ii. p. SSO . 


een- 


250 


NOTE 0—ISAIi’S I'lf/ilUMAOB. 


(2) Whil.st In; was .still of tender ago lie lost Ids father^ 
Seyyid Muhammad lii'/A, and was placed under the wire ol 
lii.s maternal uncle, Mlr/A Seyyid ‘All (supra, [). 2). 

(3) On attaining years of discretion (probably, as 
Kazem-Beg states at p. 335 of his lirst article, when about 
fourteen or fifteen years old) he was sent to Bushire to help 
in his uncle’s business (supra, p. 2). 

(4) Disinclined by nature to the calling for which he 
was destined, he proceeded at, some time antecedent to the 
year a.ii. 1259 (in which year Seyyid KAzim died, see p. 238, 
supra) to KorbelA, where he resided for some time (two 
months, according to the TurSlk-i.-Jadut), occasionally 
attending the lectures of llAjf Seyyid Kfizim of Besht. 

(5) In A.n. 1258 (a.o. 1842) when in his twenty-third 
year be married (B. ii, p. 993). There is no positive evi¬ 
dence to show whether this marriage took place at Shlr&z or 
KerbelA, but the former hypothesis appears more probable. 
By this marriage he had (according to a statement made 
by Subh-i-Ezel) one hoh named (if my memory serves me 
aright) Ahmad, who died in infancy. The loss of this child 
is said to be alluded to in the (JoiiuiirnUivij on the Sura of 
Joseph. 

(6) On JaniAdf-ul-Ul4 5th, a. a. 1200 (May 23rd, A.n. 
1844) MlrzA ‘All Muhammad—then “twenty-four years of 
age and entering on his twenty-fifth year” as Subh-i-Ezel 
states, or, in his own words, “at an age which did not exceed 
five and twenty” (see p. 221, supra )—first became clearly 
conscious of the divine mission laid upon him, and (ap¬ 
parently without much delay) began to announce himself as 

the Bfdi. If by the ‘manifestation’ ( ^ p.) we are to under¬ 

stand that period at which the viewH of the young Seer first 
became definitely formulated rather than that at which they 
were first made known to others, it is of course possible 
that some little while elapsed between the ‘manifestation’ 
and its disclosure. This hypothesis is supported by the 
narrative of the TurUJi-i-Jadid, according to which Mu lid 
Hitseyn of Bushraweyh (who was, as is unanimously ad¬ 
mitted, and as his titles ‘the First Better’ and the ‘First 
who believed’ imply, the earliest convert) came to Shlr&z 
shortly after the death of Seyyid Kfizim, visited Mlrzh ‘All 


NOTE G—BAB’S PILGRIMAGE. 


251 


Muhammad (with whom he had been previously acquainted 
at Kerbela), and, during this first visit, was surprised by his 
former fellow-student demanding of him ‘ whether he saw in 
him the signs which must characterize Seyyid Kdzim’s suc¬ 
cessor ?’ (see B. ii, pp. 902—903). On the other hand it is 
clear that not more than a month or two can have elapsed 
between the time of the ‘manifestation’ and its disclosure, 
firstly, because the beginning of the Bdbf propaganda is 
placed by both of the Musulmin historians in this same 
year of a.h. 1260; secondly, because seven months after the 
‘manifestation’ (as will be shown immediately) the Bib, 
having laid the foundations of his religion at Shlriz, was 
away performing the pilgrimage to Mecca. 

IVe have now reached the point to which this note 
specially refers—the Bab’s pilgrimage to Mecca. Concern¬ 
ing this Gobineau says simply (pp. 141—145), “II fit tres- 
jeune le pblerinage de la Mecque...Il est bien probable que 
ce fnt dans la ville sainte elle-meme qu’il se ditaeha absolu- 
ment et definitivement de la foi du Prophrfe, et qu’il comjut 
la pensce de miner cette foi pour mettre a sa place tout 
autre chose.” Kazem-Beg says (i, p. 344), “ Apres avoir seme 
bon gre mal gre quelques mauvais grains dans cette terre de 
Chiraz si fertile en prbjugbs et en superstitions, le Kerbelai 
Seid Ali-Mohammed se rendit en pblerinage 5 la Mecque.” 
In this instance Kazem-Beg is undoubtedly right; it was 
after, not before, the manifestation that the Bab went to 
Mecca. The Xdsilkut-Tan:arikh is clear on this point. 
“To proceed with the narrative,” it says, “when the Bab 
had laid the foundations of such an edifice, he, according to 
his promise, set out for Mecca the venerable.” The promise 
alluded to in this passage is thus noticed on the preceding 
page: “Since tradition affirms that His Highness the 
Ki’irn (i.e. the Imim Mahdi) shall come forth from Mecca 
the venerable, he (the Bib) used to tell his disciples that 
next year he would announce his claim in Mecca and come 
forth with the sword.” A statement of Subh-i-Ezells to 
the effect that the manifestation was in Shlriz (not in 
Kerbela, as stated in the Ximkhu’t-Tairdrtkh), that Mulli 
Huseyn first believed, and that soon after this the Bib set 
out on the pilgrimage to Mecca, taken in conjunction with 
the above testimony, seems to prove conclusively that the 


252 NOTE G—bab’s pilgrimage. 

pilgrimage-journey took place shortly after the ‘mani¬ 
festation.’ 

Now since, as we have seen, the ‘manifestation’ was on 

Jamidf-ul-Uli 5th a.h. 1260, and since the pilgrimage 
must be performed in the month of Zi’l-Hijji (the last 
month of the Muhammadan year), it follows that Kazem- 
Beg’s statement (i, p. 346) that “at the end of the year 
1260 (1844) he (i.e. the Bib) returned from Mecca to 
Bandar-Bushire, where he was arrested in the month of 
October, by order of the Nizdmu'cl-Dawla Huseyn Khin, 
governor of Shfriz,” is erroneous. For, according to the 
Ndsikh ut- Taivdrfkk, the horsemen sent to Bushire to 
arrest the Bib set out from Shfriz on Sha'bin 16th, and 
returned, bringing with them their prisoner, on Ramazan 
19th. The latter of these dates is confirmed by the 
Ilawzatiix-tiafa; while the TdHkh-i-Jaded, after mention¬ 
ing that the Bib’s return to Bushire occurred in a.h. 1261, 
says that he was brought before Huseyn KMn on the eve 
of Ramazin 21st. Though neither of the Musulmin 
historians mentions the year 1 , it is evident that a.h. 1261 
is intended, for in Ramazin a.h. 1260 the Bilb had not 
yet started for Mecca. We may therefore add to the facts 
previously stated about the Bibs earlier movements— 

(7) That towards the end of the year a.ii. 1260, and 
presumably in the month Zi’l-Ka‘da of that year (November, 
a.i». 1844), he set out from Shfriz for Mecca. 

(8) That he remained at Mecca at any rate till Zi’l- 
Hijjfl 13th a.h. 1260 (December 24th, a.h. 1844) for the 
completion of the rites incumbent on pilgrims. 

(9) That he returned by sea some time during the first 
half of the year a.h. 1261 (a.h. 1845) to Bushire, whence he 
sent missionaries to Shfriz, he himself remaining at the 
former place. (See supra , p. 5.) 

(10) That on Sha'bin 2nd a.h. 1261 (August 6th, 
a.d. 1845) strong measures were adopted by Huseyn Khin 
against these missionaries. (See supra, pp. 5—6.) 

(11) That on Sha'bin 16th a.ii. 1261 (August 20th, 
1845) horsemen were sent from Shfriz to arrest the Bib at 
Bushire. 


1 Compare the remarks on pp. 186- 187, supra. 


NOTE H—SEYYID YAHYA OF DARAB. 253 

(12) That these horsemen re-entered ShMz with their 
prisoner on ltamazdn 19th a.h. 1261 (September 21st, 
a.d. 1845), and that on that same day (according to the 
Rawzatii s-Safd), or on the evening of the following day 
(according to the Tarlkh-i-JacUd), the Bfib was brought 
before Huseyn Khdn. 

There is not at present sufficient evidence to determine 
definitely the following points :— 

(1) At what age the Bdb lost his father. 

(2) At what age he first left Shiriiz and went to 
Bushire. 

(3) How long he remained at Bushire engaged in 
commerce. 

(4) When he went to KerbeH, how long he remained 
there, and whether he married before, during, or after Iris 
sojourn there. 

(5) Whether he returned directly to Bushire after per¬ 
forming the rites of the pilgrimage at Mecca and visiting 
Medina, or whether he remained some few months in 
Arabia. 

The B4b was accompanied on the pilgrimage by Il.lji 
Muhammad ‘All Bdrfurushi (Kazem-Beg, i, p. 344, note; 
confirmed by Subh-i-Ezel), and was (according to Subh-i- 
Ezel) joined later by Hiji Suleyman Khan. 


NOTE H. 

Aka Seyyid Yahya of Darab and the NxrIz 
Insurrection. 

Gobineau makes no mention of the Niriz insurrection. 
Kazem-Beg gives a long account of it, occupying fifteen 
pages (ii, pp. 224—239), which contains neither much more 
nor much less than the Nusikh u’t-Taivdrikh. His error 
as to the date of the Zanj4n siege (see supra, p. 187) has 
led him to give a wrong date for this event likewise. 
Akfi Seyyid Yahy4’s death—the closing catastrophe of the 
Niriz insurrection—occurred, not, as he implies, early in 
a.d. 1850, but on Sha'b&n 28th a.h. 1266 (July 9th, a.d. 


254 NOTE H—SEYYID YAHYA OF DARAB. 

1850, see supra, p. 45, note 1). The Rawsatu s-Safa 
contains a much briefer account of the matter, which agrees 
in the main with those above alluded to. The Tdrikh-i- 
Jadtd, on the other hand, differs considerably from the 
Musulm&n histories, and supplies us with much new 
matter. As the versions embodied in the latter are ren¬ 
dered sufficiently accessible to the European reader by 
Kazem-Beg’s narrative, I shall confine myself here to giving 
a brief presentation of the account according to the B&bf 
tradition. 

Seyyid Yahy&’s father Seyyid Ja'far, snrnamed Kash ft 
or Kashslidf (‘the Discloser’) because of his skill in the 
exegesis of the Kur’&n and the visions which he claimed 
to have, seems, according to all accounts, to have been 
universally respected and revered. Before the events with 
which we are concerned took place he left his native town 
of ItArdb and settled in Burujird. His son Seyyid YahyA 
would seem to have resided at Teher&n for some time 
previously to the B&b’s appearance, but for how long does 
not appear. At all events, shortly after this took place he 
(at the command of Muhammad Shdh as stated at p. 7 of 
the present work, at the request of his disciples and 
followers according to the Tdrikh-i-Jadtd) proceeded to 
Shfr&z with the express object of enquiring into the B&b’s 
claims; and was present, according to the Ni'mklm’t- 
Tairiinlli, at the BAb’s examination before Huseyn Kh&n 
on Ramazan 21st A.H. 1261 (Sept. 23rd, a.d. 1845). Al¬ 
though, if we are to give credence to the Musulm&n 
historian’s assertions, the BAb scarcely emerged from this 
ordeal with flying colours, Seyyid Yahyil was sufficiently 
impressed by what he saw of the young reformer to desire 
fuller opportunities of conversing with him. The usual 
result followed. After a brief period of hesitation and 
doubt, Seyyid Yahyd eagerly embraced the new faith. A 
long account of his conversion is given in the Tdrtkh-i- 
Jadtd, which, interesting as it is, lack of space compels me 
to omit. 

Seyyid Yahy& does not seem to have remained in ShMz 
long after his conversion. The present history (p. tt) states 
that he “hastened to Burujird to his father Seyyid Ja'far”; 
the Tdnkh-i-Jadid describes him as “setting outforYezd”; 


NOTE H—SEYYID YAHYA OF DAKAR 2-55 

while the X.hiJrku’t-TururiJh assert* that after the Bab’s 
fight to Isfahan he was informed by Huseyn Khan that 
" his farther sojourn in Bars was undesirable.” and that 
accordingly he betook liimself to Yezd. Whatever his 
immediate movements on quitting Sluraz may have been 
(and it is not improbable that he may have visited many 
towns besides those mentioned to preach the new faith, 
being, as would appear, commissioned by the Bab so to dol 
he would seem to have again visited Teheran, and there to 
have remained for <ome considerable time. Snbh-i-Ezel. in 
reply to a question which I addressed to him as to the cha¬ 
racter of Aka Seyyid Yahya and the truth or falsity of the 
charge of perfidy brought against him by a certain writer 
Kazem-Beg. ii. p. Ad", wrote thus:—‘The virtue and 
perfections of His Excellency Aka Seyyid Yahya were 
beyond all limits and bounds. He was not -ltd: as that 
Historian lias described 1 bear witness v God and His 
Sibrir that this 'historian] has written downright false¬ 
hood. M 'st of the people of Persia admitted ids virtue 
and perfections. I myself in the day- of my youth met 
'aim several times at night in my own house and elsewhere, 
and witnessed the perfection of his virtue- and endow¬ 
ments." 

The information at our disposal is insutricien: to enable 

ns to trace Seyyid Yuliya's movements from the period of 
his conversion in the autumn of ad. 1S4o till we find him 
involved in the troubles at Yezd in May Iso". If the re¬ 
iterated assertions of the T'mln- to the effect that 

he proceeded directly from Shiraz to Yezd. returned directly 
from Yezd to Slnraz and Ymz. and also visited Teheran, 
are to be credited, we must suppose that he visited Yezd 
twice at least during this peri i. At all events in May 
l>o" we rind him in that city, busily engaged in preaching 
the Bail doctrines, and surrounded by a cor.stderav.e runner 
of followers. The governor of Yezd, Aka Khan, at length 
considered it advi-nble to interfere, and sent men to arrest 
Sewid Yahya, who retired with s me of h - follower- to 
the citadel and prepared to defend himself An unsuc¬ 
cessful attack on the insurgents’ position resulted in a loss 
f thirty lives to the be-ivgers and seven to the Babis. 


256 NOTE H—SEYYID YAHYA OF DARAB. 

Seyyid YahyA, however, does not seem to have been 
altogether satisfied with his position. One night he said, 
“ If anyone could lead out my horse so that I could go 
forth to put an end to this matter and convey myself to 
some other place, it would not be a bad tiling.” A youth 
named Hasan, distinguished by a singular devotion to 
Seyyid YahyA, at once volunteered to make the attempt, 
and persisted in his purpose in spite of his master’s warning 
that he would be taken and slain. This actually befel. 
Hasan was captured by the enemy and brought before the 
governor, who ordered him to be blown from the mouth of 
a gun. So little did this terrible sentence affect the brave 
youth that he requested that he might be bound with his 
face towards the cannon so that he might see the match 
applied. In spite of this untoward event Seyyid YahyA 
succeeded in effecting his escape from Yezd in company 
with one of his disciples. He first made his way to ShfrAz, 
whence he proceeded to Nfrfz. After his departure, the 
BAbfs at Yezd were soon subdued by the governor, who 
punished some with death, some with imprisonment, and 
some with fines. 

No sooner had Seyyid YahyA reached Nfrfz than he 
again began his propaganda, undeterred by the remon¬ 
strances and threats of the governor Zeynu’l-'Abidfn KhAn. 
The latter finally called upon the people of Nfrfz to assist 
him in forcibly expelling the disturber. Seyyid YahyA. 
being apprised of this, repaired to the mosque where his 
father had been wont to preach, and addressed to the 
people there assembled an affecting discourse, wherein he 
reminded them of their former love for himself, declared 
that his only object was to make them partakers in that 
faith which had been to him a source of such great happi¬ 
ness, and concluded by conjuring them by the veneration 
in which they held his father’s memory not to suffer them¬ 
selves to be made the instruments of the governor’s malice. 
Having finished his discourse he left the town accompanied 
by seventeen of his followers, and took up his abode at an 
old ruined castle in the neighbourhood. 

Seyyid YahyA was not suffered to remain long undis¬ 
turbed. His foes soon discovered his retreat and proceeded 
to lay siege to it. At first they were unsuccessful, Seyyid 


SURRENDER OF THE BABES. 


257 


Yahyd Laving apparently been joined by a large number of 
supporters (three hundred according to the Musulmln his¬ 
torian) ; and indeed the Bdbfs gained at least one decided 
victor}' over their foes. But in a short while the besiegers 
were re-inforced by troops sent from Shiraz at the command 
of Firuz Mirza, the new governor of Far-, and co mm anded 
by Mihr ‘Alt Khan Shtja'ul-Mulk of Yur and Mustafa- 
Kuh Khan Kara-giizlu. The arrival of these troops greatly 
dispirited the besieged ; many of the less ardent deserted, 
and in a short time the occupants of the castle were re¬ 
duced to seventy. 

In spite of the defections from their ranks, the Babis 
(according to the Tartkh-i-Jadid) continued to defend 
themselves with such vigour that the besiegers were fain 
to have recourse to treachery similar in character to that 
whereby Sheykh Tabarsi and Zanjan were tinally subdued. 
They sent a message to Seyyid Yahyd asking him to come 
to their camp and hold a peaceful consultation with the 
royalist leaders, and assuring him with oaths registered on 
the Kurin that no harm should befal him at their hands. 
■Seyyid Yahyi, in spite of the remonstrances and warnings 
of his followers, acquiesced in the proposed arrangement, 
and forthwith betook himself to the besiegers’ camp. Fie 
was at first received with courtesy and treated with all 
respect, but when, on the following morning, he attempted 
to leave the tent which had been assigned to him, he was 
prevented by the sentinels from so doing. The Babis, 
becoming aware in some way of the insult offered to their 
chief, made a sudden sortie and succeeded in greatly dis¬ 
comfiting their foes. Thereupon the officers of the besieging 
army hastened to Seyyid Yahyd’s tent and remonstrated 
with him on the action of his followers, reminding him 
that he had agreed to co-operate with them in striving to 
bring about a peaceful settlement. Seyyid Yahyd in turn 
reproached them with wanton violation of good faith in 
confining him to his tent, which conduct on their part, he 
assured them, was the sole cause of what had now occurred. 
The royalist officers apologized for the insult offered, which, 
they declared, they had in no wise sanctioned, and finally 
prevailed on Seyyid Yahyd to write to his followers in¬ 
structing them to lay down their arms, evacuate their 

17 


B. 


258 NOTE H—SECOND RISING AT NfRfZ. 

fortress, and retnrn to their homes. The Bfibfs faithfully 
obeyed the commands of their chief, but no sooner were 
they disbanded and scattered than they were seized by the 
soldiers and bronght in chains to the camp, while their 
houses were given over to plunderers. 

The besiegers, having now gained their object, readily 
forgot their oaths and plighted troth. Seyyid Yahyd was 
strangled with his own girdle by one whose two brothers 
had been killed during the siege, and the other Bfibfs like¬ 
wise died by the hands of the executioner. The heads of 
the victims were stuffed with straw’, and, bearing with 
them these grim trophies of their prowess, together with 
some forty or fifty Bib! women and one child of tender age 
as captives, the victorious army returned to Slifrfiz. Their 
entry into that city was made the occasion of general 
rejoicings; the captives were paraded through the streets 
and bazaars and finally brought before Prince Ffruz Mlrzi, 
who was feasting in a summer-house called Kuldh-i-Fi- 
rangt. In his presence Mihr ‘All Khin, Mfrzfi Nairn, 
and the other officers recounted the details of their victory, 
and received congratulations and marks of favour. The 
captive women were finally imprisoned in an old cara- 
vansaray outside the Isfah&n gate. What treatment they 
experienced at the hands of their captors is left to our 
conjecture. Twelve Babfs who had escaped from Nfriz 
to Isfahan were there captured and sent to Shfrfiz where 
they were executed. Thus ended the first Nfriz insur¬ 
rection. 

The second insurrection occurred about two years later. 
A number of B&bfs took refuge with their wives and chil¬ 
dren in the mountains about Nfriz, and for a long while 
offered a vigorous and successful resistance to those who 
strove to dislodge them. They even attacked the town and 
killed the governor Zeynu’l-'Abidfn Kh&n—the chief author 
of their sufferings—while he was at the bath. Finally 
troops were sent from Shiraz by the governor Tahmfisp 
Mfrzfi, and these, aided by the tribesmen of Diirab and 
Sfibunfit, succeeded at length in stamping out the insurrec- 

1 Concerning this disgusting practice compare Eastwick’s 
Diplomat^& Residence in Persia, vol. ii, pp. 55—56. 


PROPHECIES FULFILLED. 259 

tion. The fate of the captives was in every respect similar 
to that which had befallen their predecessors. 

The author of the Tdrikh-i-JaMd in concluding this 
narrative takes occasion to point out how literally was ful¬ 
filled in these events the prophecy contained in a tradition 
referring to the signs which shall mark the appearance of 
the Im4m Mahdf:— 

J w 

wJyi 1 3 t «,**•'Q-Q i ] 1 'f ' 

* J 

J il J dilaj ij, 

j Oj-9j>a _o Uj.tfl.3 

3 1 3 O' 0 LP 5 

* lfl»- 

“/« him [shall be] the perfection of Mom, tlw precious¬ 
ness of Jesus, and the patience of Job; his saints shall be 
abased in his time, and their heads shall be exchanged as 
presents, even as the heads of the Turk and the Deylamite 
are exchanged as presents; they shall be slain and burned, 
and shall be afraid, fearful, and dismayed; the earth shall 
be dyed with their blood, and lamentation and wailing shall 
premil amongst their women; these are my saints indeed."' 

When I was at Yezd in the early summer of 1888, I 
became acquainted with a Bdbf holding a position of some 
importance under government, two of whose ancestors had 
taken a prominent part in the suppression of the Kfrfz 
insurrection. Of what he told me concerning this the 
following is a summary taken from my diary for May 18th, 
1888:— 

“ My maternal grandfather Mihr 'All Khan Shujd‘u’1- 
Mulk and my great-uncle Mfrzd Na'fm both took an active 

1 This tradition, called ^jo., is also quoted from the 
Kdfi (one of the principal compilations of Shi'ite traditions) in 
the Ikan. 


17—2 


260 


NOTE H—NIRIZ INSURRECTION. 


part in the Nfrfz war —but on the wrong side. When orders 
came to ShMz to quell the insurrection, my grandfather 
was instructed to take command of the expedition sent for 
that purpose. He did not like the task committed to him 
and communicated his reluctance to two of the ‘ Ulema, who, 
however, re-assured him, declaring that the war on which 
he was about to engage was a holy enterprise sanctioned by 
Religion, and that he would receive reward therefor in 
Paradise. So he went, and what happened happened. 
After they had killed 750 men, they took the women and 
children, stripped them almost naked, mounted them on 
donkeys, mules, and camels, and led them through rows of 
heads hewn from the lifeless bodies of their fathers, 
brothers, sons, and husbands towards Slffrdz. On their 
arrival there, they were placed in a ruined caravansaray 
just outside the Isfahan gate and opposite to an Irndm- 
zdde, their captors taking up their quarters under some 
trees hard by. Here they remained for a long while, 
subjected to many insults and hardships, and many of them 
died. 

“ Now see the judgement of God on the oppressors; for 
of those chiefly responsible for these cruelties not one but 
came to a bad end and died overwhelmed with calamity. 

“ My grandfather Mihr ‘All Khhn presently fell ill and 
was dumb till the day of his death. Just as he was about 
to expire, those who stood round him saw from the move¬ 
ment of his lips that he was whispering something. They 
leant down to catch his last words and heard him murmur 
faintly ‘Bubt! Bubt! Bubt!’ three times. Then he fell 
back dead. 

“My great-uncle Mfrzd Na'im fell into disgrace with 
the government and was twice fined, 10,000 tumcins the 
first time, 15,000 the second. But his punishment did not 
cease here, for he was made to suffer diverse tortures. His 
hands were put in the el-chek' and his feet in the tang-i- 
Kdjdr'; he was made to stand bare-headed in the sun 

1 The torture called el-chek consists in placing pieces of wood 
between the victim’s fingers, binding them round tightly with 
cord. Cold water is then thrown over the cord to cause its 
further contraction. 

2 The tang-i-Kdjdr or ‘ Kajdr squeeze ’ is an instrument of 


NIRIZ a BAR I STROXGHOLD. 


261 


witli treacle smeared over his head to attract the flies; and, 
after suffering these and other torments yet more painful 
and humiliating, he was dismissed a disgraced and ruined 
man.” 1 

AkA Seyyid YahyA was, as Subh-i-Ezel informed me, 
not more than forty years old at the time of his death. 
A certain BAbf named Biyuk Akd used to say jestingly, 
“I like a handsome ‘Commander of the Faithful’ like 
Seyyid Yahyd, not an ugly old man bent double with age 
like MuM Sheykh ‘Alf.” 

Major-General Sir Frederick Goldsmid was kind enough 
to call my attention to the following passage in Lovett’s 
Surveys on the road from Shiraz to Bam (Journal of the 
Royal Geographical Society, 1872):— 

“It (i.e. Nfrfz) is divided into three parishes or mahal- 
las; that to the South, termed the ‘Mahalla-i-Bdbi’ is well 
known to be peopled almost entirely by BAbfs, who, though 
they do not openly profess their faith in the teachings of 
Seyyid ‘Alf Muhammad the Bdb, still practise the principles 
of communism he inculcated. It is certain, moreover, that 
the tolerance which was one of the precepts inculcated by 
the B4b is here shewed, for not only was I invited to make 
use of the public hammdrn, if I required it, but quarters 
were assigned to me in a madrasa.” 

Is it in the least degree probable that, if Seyyid YahyA’s 
conduct had been such as Kazem-Beg describes it, Nfrfz 
should have continued so long one of the strongholds of 
that faith whereof he was the apostle? 


torture resembling the ‘ boot ’ once used in England, for the 
introduction of which (as its name implies) Persia is indebted to 
the dynasty which at present occupies the throne. 

1 Another yet more striking instance of Divine vengeance was 
related to me in the same connection, but I omit it as not 
bearing on the present subject. The belief prevalent amongst 
the BAbfs, that signal punishment befalls those who are most 
active in persecuting them, is strangely supported not only by 
the above instances but by the fates of the Amir-Nizam (Gobineau, 
pp. 5253—254), of Mahmud Khdn the KaZdntar (Gobineau, p. 295), 
of Sheykh BAkir, and others (B. i, pp. 491—492). 


262 


NOTE I—THE Bill's ESCAPE 


NOTE I. ‘ 

The BAu’s escape prom SiiIrAz to Ispahan. 

According to the TiirU'h-i-Jadhl the B.4b, after his 
examination before Huscyn Klein on lianiaziln a 1st, a.h. 
1261 (Sept. 23rd, a.d. 1845), was confined, not, as stated in 
this history (p. 6), in the house of his uncle ITAjf Seyyid 
‘Alt, nor, as assorted by the Musuhmln liistorians, in 
prison, but in the house of ‘Abdu’l-Hamfd Klein the 
Ddriujhd or chief constable of Sldriiz. That for some 
portion of the six months which elapsed between Ids arrest 
and his escape to Isfahan the Bill) was an inmate of the 
house of this official would appear certain, for Snbh-i-Ezel, 
whom 1 questioned on the subject, affirmed this to have 
been the case, adding, in answer to further questions as to 
how strict was the custody in which lie was Kept, that the 
ratrza-t/nravs or religious recitations, of which the con¬ 
stable’s house was frequently the scone, afforded oppor¬ 
tunities to the Biilds of seeing and conversing with their 
Master. 

That some attack on the Bill/s house such .as that 
described at p. 10 of the present work did take place 
appears to be proved by the following passage from one of 
the BAb’s works, for which 1 am also indebted to Subh-i- 
Ezel:— 

II Li ^ O** 1 aL) Ai^y>- 1^1^ A 

■Jt aJc AhJ j \ b \\ L LiJi 

“IIin party (ottered in unto my home, on the 1 Night of 
Worth ” and took what they eo/dd of that which my Jjrrd 
ha.th canned me to possess t at the command of the ruler of 
Furs, upon whom he the enrxe. of God!” 

1 The Leylatvil-kadr (“Night of Worth” or “Decrees”) is 
generally supposed to bo the night between tho 23r(l and 24th 
of Itamaziln. (See Sale’s translation of the Kurkin, note on 
sum xcvii.) 


FROM SHfRAZ TO ISFAHAN. 


26a 


The account of the Bdb’s escape from Shiraz contained 
in the Tdrikh-i-Jadtd differs somewhat from that here 
given, and is in substance as follows. When the plague 
broke out in Shiraz the son of ‘Abdu’l-Hamld KMn was 
amongst those stricken by that awful malady. ‘Abdu’l- 
Hamld Khan in his distress and anxiety appealed to the 
Bfib, entreating him to pray for the youth’s recovery. 
This shortly took place; whereat the grateful father sought 
out his illustrious guest, and, with profuse expressions of 
thankfulness, assured him that he might consider himself 
free to go where he pleased. According to the Musulm&n 
accounts (which, together with a note containing a very 
pertinent criticism on their intrinsic improbability, will be 
found in Kazem-Beg’s first paper, pp. 348—349) Minfichihr 
Khdn Mu'tamadu d-Daicla, the governor of Isfahan, sent 
horsemen to Shlrdz expressly to deliver the Bfib from his 
captivity and bring him to Isfahan. It is but fair to add 
that Subh-i-Ezel also attributed the B4b’s release directly 
to Minuchihr Khfin’s efforts. 

Of the Bab’s journey to Isfahan in company with Ak.i 

Huseyn of Ardistdn and Aka Seyyid K&zim of Zanj&n 
(who died shortly after reaching Isfahan) the Tdrikh-i- 
Jadid gives a detailed account on the authority of Hfijl 
Mlrzd Jdnl of K&shdn, who had heard it from the above- 

mentioned AM Muhammad Huseyn himself. The most 
noteworthy feature of this account is its evident tendency 
to invest the Bab’s slightest actions with a miraculous 
character. 

The B4b probably reached Isfahan early in the summer 
of a.d. 1846, since, according to both the Musulmfin his¬ 
torians, his captivity at Shiraz lasted six months, and since, 
according to the present history (p. 11), the hot weather 
(which seldom sets in till the beginning of May at the 
earliest) had already begun ere he left Shiraz. On ap¬ 
proaching Isfahan he addressed a letter to the governor 
Minuchihr KMn asking permission to enter the city and 
craving protection. Of this letter Kazem-Beg (i. p. 352 
and note) gives a translation, which, as it appears to be 
derived from authoritative sources, I here reproduce :— 
“ Poursuivi par tous, persbcutti, j’accours me placer sous 


264 


NOTE J—THE CONFERENCE 


votre Agide ; j’.attends votre response an senil de la capitale, 
et n’y entrerai pas avant d’avoir obtenn 1’assnrance de 
votre protection.” 

During the first forty days of his sojourn in Isfahan the 
BAb was, as stated at p. 11 of the present work and also in 
the Tm-tkh-i-JadUl, the guest of the Im4in-Jum‘a, who 
at first treated him with great respect, and at whose re¬ 
quest he wrote the Commentary on the Suratii’l-’Axr. Of 
this work I have been fortunate enough to obtain a MS. 
quite recently. [See infra at the end of Note U]. 


NOTE J. ' 


Tiie conference at Isfahan. 

Of the circumstances which led to the conference, and 
the considerations which induced the majority of the clergy 
invited to take part in it to absent themselves therefrom, 
the TdrH'li-i-JmlUl gives the following account. Although 
the ‘Ulamd of Isfahan headed by the ImAm-Jum‘a had at 
first behaved towards the BAb with respect, and expressed 
themselves favourably with regard to him, they began after 
a while to be alarmed at his increasing influence over the 
governor Minuchihr Kb An. Alarm presently passed into 
hatred : they began to speak ill of him whom they had 
professed to admire, and even destroyed certain books which 
he had composed at their request. Minuchihr KhAn on 
hearing this was greatly incensed, and bitterly reproached 
these divines with the fickleness of their conduct. “At 
first,” he said, “you praised and admired. What has 
happened now to cause you to become so hostile and 
envious and induce you to speak so ill ? There is no sense 
in denunciation without investigation or enquiry. If you 
are in truth searchers and strivers in matters of faith and 
religion, then choose one of three places—the ImAm-JunTa’s 
house, my house, or the Masjid-i-ShAh—and hold discussion 
with him [the BAb]. If he can establish and prove the 
truth of his claim so as to persuade and convince you, 


AT ISFAHAN. 


2G5 


admit it, so that the clergy of Persia may not oppose and 
resist it without reason, or turn away from the truth 
without cause. If he cannot succeed in establishing his 
claim, then do you be the first to rebut it, so that this 
mischief may cease, and mankind may be set at ease. But 
it is a condition that I myself be present and that only one 
person at a time speak, for if once wrangling begins and 
clerical tricks are resorted to, the matter will not be under¬ 
stood.” 

The clergy agreed to this proposal, and selected the 
Masjid-i-Shdh as the scene of the conference. On the 
appointed day Mir Seyyid Hasan Mudarrk, Hijf Mulli 

Hasan ‘All of Tiisirkdn.Akd Muhammad Mahdf Kalbdsf, 
aud other members of the clergy who were to take part in 
the discussion met at the house of Hiji Muhammad Ja'far 
of Firs, intending to proceed with him to the Masjid-i-Shih. 
Hiji Muhammad .Ja'far, however, who was the oldest and 
most learned of those present, expressed a strong opinion 
to the effect that they would act most wisely in refusing to 
take any part in the projected discussion with the Bib, 
“for,” said he, “if you prevail over him you will add but 
little to your reputation, seeing that he is confessedly un¬ 
learned and untrained in science; while if he prevail over 
you, you will be for ever shamed and disgraced. Under 
these circumstances it is best that we should sign a declara¬ 
tion stating that we are convinced of the heretical character 
of his doctrines, and refuse to have any further dealings 
with him.” Tliis expedient was, after some discussion, 
unanimously adopted, and the declaration was sent to 
Minfichihr Khin, who was greatly incensed thereat. 

That some of the clergy who had been invited to take 
part in the discussion refused to attend is a fact vouched 
for by both of the Bibf historians, though as to the names 

of the absentees they are not in complete accord, Aki 
Muhammad Mahdf, for instance, being specially designated 
in the present work (p. 12) as having been present at the 
conference. The Ndsikhu ’t-Tawarikh gives a totally 
different account of the matter, including a report of the 
discussion. This account is in substance as follows. 

Mintichihr Khin, anxious to test the Bib’s wisdom, one 


266 


NOTE J—THE CONFERENCE 


night invited to his house several eminent members of 
the clergy of Isfahan, amongst these being Mfrzd Seyyid 
Muhammad Imam-Jum'a, Aka Muhammad Malidl Kalb&sf, 
and Mfrzd Muhammad Hasan of Nur. Shortly after these 
had arrived the UAb entered and was placed in a seat of 
honour. The following colloquy then took place :— 

AM Muhammad Mahdt. —“Persons who follow the 
path of Religion belong to one of two classes : either they 
themselves deduce and determine religious questions from 
history and tradition, or else they follow some competent 
authority ( mujtakid 

Bab: —“ I follow no one, and moreover I regard it as 
unlawful for each one to act after his own fancy.” 

A. M. M. —“To-day the Gate of Knowledge ( Bcib-i- 
‘ ilm ) is shut, and the Proof of God 1 2 absent. Unless you 
hold converse with the Imdm of the Age and hear the 
explanation of questions of truth from his tongue, how can 
you attain certainty and be assured ? Tell me, whence 
have you acquired this knowledge, and from whom did you 
gain this assurance ? ” 

Bab. —“You are educated in tradition and are as a 
child learning the alphabet. The ‘ Station of Praise and 
of the Spirit’ is mine. You cannot speak with me of what 
you know not.” 

Mirzd Hasan (the Platonist and follower of Mulld 
Sadrd). —“ Stop at this statement which you have made ! 
We in our terminology have assigned a station to ‘ Praise 
and the Spirit,’ wliereunto whosoever attaineth is conver¬ 
sant with all things ; from him nothing remains concealed, 
and there is nothing which he knoweth not. Do you 
recognize the ‘Station of Praise and of the Spirit’ as such, 
and does your nature thus comprehend all things ? ” 

Bdb ( without hesitation ).—“ It is even so. Ask what 
you please.” 

M. If. —“ One of the miracles of the Prophets and 
Saints was, as it appears, the [instant] traversing of the 

1 He who follows is called mukallid, and he who leads, 
mzijtahid. Everyone belonging to the former class is at liberty 
to select his own guide from the latter. 

2 i.e. the Twelfth Imdm. 


AT ISFAHAN. 


267 


earth. Tell me now, that I may know, how the earth can 
be thus traversed. For instance, His Holiness Jawdd' 
(upon him be peace) lifted up his foot in Medina and put 
it down in Ths. Whither went the space which was 
between Medina and Tus ? Did the ground between these 
two cities sink down, so that Medina became contiguous to 
Tus ? And when the Imdm (upon him he peace) reached 
Ths, did the earth again rise up ? This cannot have been, 
for how many cities are there between Medina and Tus, all 
of which must in that case have been swallowed up and 
every living thing therein destroyed! And if you say that 
the lands [between them] were agglomerated so that they 
became amalgamated, this too is impossible, for in that case 
how many cities would have been obliterated or would have 
passed beyond Medina or Tus, whereas [in fact] no part of 
the earth was altered or moved from its place. And if you 
say, 1 The Imdm flew, and leapt with his mortal body from 
Medina to Tus,’ this likewise agreeth not with sound 
reasonings. Say also how ‘All the Prince of Believers 
(upon him be peace) was in one night—nay, in one moment 
—a guest in forty [different] houses. If you say, ‘ It w r as 
not ‘Ali, but a simulacrum [of him] appeared,’ we admit it 
not, for God and the Prophet lie not, neither was ‘All a 
juggler. And if it was in truth he, how was it so ? So 
likewise it is [stated] in tradition that the heavens moved 
swiftly in the time of Sultan .Jabir, but had a slow motion 
in the time of the Im&ms. Xow firstly how r can there be 
two sorts of motion for the heavens ? And secondly the 
Omeyyad and ‘Abbdsid Kings were contemporary with our 
Imdms (upon them be peace), so that the heavens must at 
one time have had both a slow and a sw ift motion. Discover 
this mystery also.” 

Bdb .—“ If you wish, I will explain these difficulties 
verbally; if not, I will write [their solutions] with fingers 
and pen on paper.” 

M. //.—“The choice is yours. Do whichever you 
please.” 

Then the Bdb took pen and paper and began to write. 

1 Jawdd, (“the Generous”) is one of the titles assigned to the 
ninth Imdm, Muhammad Takl. 


268 


NOTE K—MULLA SADRA, 


At this moment supper was brought in. Mhzd Hasan 
picked up the paper on which the Bfib had written a few 
lines, and, after glancing at it, said, “ It appears that you 
have begun a homily, and have only written an. exordium 
of praise to God and a few words of prayer, without ac¬ 
quainting us with that which we desired to know.” Here 
the discussion dropped, and after partaking of supper each 
one returned to his own home. 

Whatever may be the truth about this conference and 
the behaviour of the clergy of Isfahan towards the Bfib, one 
fact is clearly proved by all accounts, namely, that from 
first to last Mintichihr KMu shewed himself a sincere and 
faithful friend to the B&b. Whether, as stated by Subh-i- 
Ezel, he wrote to Muhammad Shfih telling him that “it 
was unseemly for the Government to engage in a quarrel 
with a private individual,” and offered all the money at 
his disposal and even the rings on his hand to the Bfib; or 
whether, as asserted by the Tarikh-i-Jadid, he even went 
so far as to offer to place 50,000 troops at the B&b’s 
disposal, march on Teheran, and compel the King to 
accept the new faith and bestow the hand of one of his 
daughters on its founder, must remain doubtful; but this 
much at least is certain, that almost the only period of 
comparative peace and comfort enjoyed by the B4b from 
the beginning of his mission till his martyrdom was the 
year which he passed in Isfahan under the protection of 
the wfise and powerful Georgian eunuch. 


NOTE K. ‘ 

Mulla Sadr.v and His Philosophy. 

Gobineau in his Religions et Philosophies dans I’Asie 
Gentrale (pp. 81—91) has given so admirable an account of 
the life of this great philosopher and of the part played by 
him in the revival of metaphysical learning in Persia that 
any very detailed notice of his career on my part would be 
superfluous. I shall therefore confine myself to reproducing 


HIS LIFE AND PHILOSOPHY. 


269 


a brief sketch of his biography as it was related to me by a 
most learned and amiable scholar—himself a pupil of Hdjl 
Mu 11a Had! of Sabzawdr, whose fame as a metaphysician 
has almost eclipsed that of the illustrious Mulld Sadr4— 
with whom it was my privilege to study for some time in 
Teherdn. This account agrees in the main with Gobineau’s, 
but differs in some few points. 

Mulld Sadrd’s father was a rich merchant of Shlr'dz, but 
though he had reached an advanced age he had no child to 
whom he might bequeath his wealth. This caused him 
much sorrow, and he prayed earnestly to God that a son 
might be vouchsafed to him, making a vow that if his 
prayer were granted he would bestow a tuman a day in 
alms on the poor. Shortly after this, that which he so 
earnestly desired came to pass, and a son—afterwards the 
great Mulld Sadrd—was born to him. From an early age 
the boy gave indications of extraordinary talent and virtue. 
When his father died, he decided, after consulting Iris 
mother, to give the greater portion of the wealth which he 
had inherited to the poor, reserving only what was suffi¬ 
cient for his modest needs. He then left Shlrdz and took 
up his residence in Isfahan, which was at that time un¬ 
rivalled in Persia as a seat of learning. On his arrival 
there he enquired who were the best teachers of philosophy, 
and was answered that they were three—Mir D4m4d, Mir 
Fandariskl, and Sheykh Behd. To the first of these he 
forthwith presented himself, and asked advice as to the 
course of study which he should pursue. “ If you want 
sheer ideas,” replied Mir Ddmdd, “go to Mir Fandariskl; 
if you want merely eloquence, go to Sheykh Behd ; if you 
want both, come to me.” Mulld Sadrd accordingly attended 
with diligence the lectures of all three, but chiefly those of 
Mir D4m4d. After a while Mir D4m4d, wishing to make 
the pilgrimage to Mecca, bade a temporary farewell to his 
students, and instructed each of them to compose during 
his ahsence a treatise on some branch of Philosophy. On 
his return he asked to see the results of their labours. 
These he glanced over in private, and all of them he laid 
aside after a cursory inspection save the treatise composed 
by Mu 114 Sadrd under the name of fthawahid-i-Rububiyya 
(‘Evidences of Divinity’)—a treatise to this day most 


270 NOTE K—MULLi. SADRA’S PHILOSOPHY. 


highly esteemed in Persia. A few days after, as he was 
riding through the streets attended by his disciples, he 
called Mulld Sadrd to him and said :—“ Sadrd jdn ! 
Kitdb-i-mard as meyan burdt /” (“My dear Sadrd, yon 
have done away with my book ! ”), meaning to signify that 
the pupil had superseded the teacher. Shortly after this 
Mulld Sadrd, having completed his studies, went to Kdshdn, 
and thence, after a while, to Knm, in the mountains around 
which city he long lived a secluded and studious life, 
troubled occasionally by the malice and hostility of the 
mulld s. 

Gobineau says (loc. cit., p. 89) that Mulld Sadrd’s phi¬ 
losophy was simply a revival of Avicenna’s and contained 
nothing new; but this, as lie himself remarks, is not the 
general opinion in Persia. The following three points, as 
1 was informed, constitute the chief original features of 
Mulld Sadrd’s system :— 

(1) The aphorism 

>jH i_p*^ 3 1 Jai,..; 

“ The elementary Reality is all things, yet is no one of 
them.” 

(2) The doctrine of “ the Union of the Intellect with 

the Intelligible” L (Jslc aIsciI), according to which 

the clear apprehension of an idea implies and involves the 
establishment of a kind of identity between it and the mind 
which apprehends it. 

(3) The doctrine of “the Incorporeality of Imagina¬ 
tion’ ’ (JU a j)—a doctrine involving the important 

consequence that Reason (or the development of that prin¬ 
ciple which stands above Imagination in the evolution of 
the spiritual faculties) is not a necessary condition of im¬ 
mortality, and hence that not infants only but even animals 
possess a spiritual part which survives the death of the 
body. 

Mulld Sadrd composed a great number of works, whereof 
the As/dr (‘Treatises’), in two large volumes, and the Sha- 


NOTE L—BAB’S JOUBXEY TO MAKE. 


271 


wall id- i-R ub (ib iyya (‘ Evidences of Divinity’) mentioned 
above, are the most important. His influence on Persian 
thought has been great; and his relations with the later 
developments thereof—especially with the Sheykhi school 
(concerning which see Xote E supra )—merit a much more 
careful study than they have yet received. 


XOTE L. 

The Bab at Make and E'hihrik. 


The Bab was accompanied on his journey to Makit by 
his amanuensis Aka Seyyid Huseyn of Yezd, Mulla Sheykh 
‘All ‘Jenab-i-Aztni, Mulla Muhammad 'Mu‘ulUm-i-XurV 
(afterwards killed at Sheykh Tabarsi) 1 , and an escort of 
twelve horsemen under the command of Muhammad Beg 
Chuparjt. A full account of this journey, on the authority 
of Haji Mirzd Jam' of Kashdn, who had it directly from the 
aforesaid Muhammad Beg, is contained in the T'rnkh-i- 
Jadtd. The substance of this account is as follows:— 
When Muhammad Beg was ordered to conduct the Bab 
to Tabriz and there deliver him over to Bahman Mtrza the 
governor, he was so averse to undertaking this charge that 
he feigned illness in hopes of being excused so thankless a 
task. His orders, however, were peremptorily repeated, 
and he was obliged to set out. He had been instructed 
not to take the Brib into the towns which they must pass 
on the road, and accordingly on approaching Zanjdn he 
called a halt at a stone caravansaray situated outside and 
at some distance from the city. In spite of this, no sooner 
did their arrival become known than numbers of the in¬ 
habitants came out in the hopes of being able to get a 

1 This is according to Subh-i-Ezel’s statement. According to 
the Taril-h-i-Jadkl his companions were, besides the escort, 
Aka Mirza ‘Abdu’l-tVahhab, Mulla Muhammad, Aka Seyyid 
Huseyn the amanuensis, his brother Aka Seyyid Hasan of Yezd, 
and Seyyid Murtaza. 


272 


NOTE L—BAB’S JOURNEY TO MAKU. 


glimpse of the JMb. Muhammad Beg, being occupied with 
other business, took no heed of what was passing, while the 
other men who composed the escort only offered such oppo¬ 
sition to the entry of each group of eager visitors as sufficed 
to procure for themselves a gift of money. Presently an 
urgent message was brought from Ashraf Khfin the governor 
of Zanjdn (who was greatly alarmed at the popular excite¬ 
ment caused by the Bfib’s proximity to the town) ordering 
Muhammad Beg at once to start again and proceed to some 
spot further distant. Muhammad Beg accordingly informed 
the B&b, with many apologies and expressions of regret, that 
he must prepare to resume his journey without delay, to 
which, with a single expression of surprise and regret at the 
governor’s harshness, he submitted, and they pushed on to 
a brick earavansaray two farsakks beyond Zanjfin. At 
Mflhn the Bfib’s arrival was the signal for a similar de¬ 
monstration of enthusiasm on the part of the populace, 
and some two hundred persons who had come out of mere 
curiosity were converted to the new faith. 

Before Tabriz was reached Muhammad Beg too began 
to experience that marvellous fascination which the B&b 
exerted over almost everyone with whom he came in con¬ 
tact, and ere the journey was completed he had become 
an avowed believer in the divine mission of the captive 
whom he was conducting into exile. Of those disciples 
who accompanied the Bfib on this journey two only—Ak4 
Seyyid Huseyn and Seyyid Murtaza—allowed it to appear 
that they were his companions. The others used to follow 
at some distance behind, and only on halting for the night 
did they seek to find some pretext for approaching then- 
beloved Master. In spite of these precautions, Muhammad 
Beg, whose faculties were perhaps quickened by his own 
recent conversion, did not fail in time to discover what 
they wished to keep secret from him, for of the change 
which had been wrought in his opinions and feelings they 
were not yet aware. One day, however, he opened his 
heart to them, declaring that when he reflected on the 
service in which he was engaged he felt himself to be worse 
than Shimr and Yazfd, and expressing the warmest admira¬ 
tion for the patience, sweetness, gentleness, and holiness of 
the Bfib, “for,” said he, “had he chosen to give the slightest 


NOTE L—THE BAB AT MAKE". 


273 


hint to the people of Zanj&n or Milan that they should 
effect liis deliverance, they would not have given us time to 
draw our breath ere they had effected their object.” 

Muhammad Beg was in hopes that he might be appointed 
to accompany the Bib to Maku—his ultimate destination— 
and this hope he communicated to the Bab. who, however, 
replied that this was by no means a thing which he desired, 
for that in that journey there would be harshness and cruelty 
shewn wherein he would not that Muhammad Beg should 
hear any part. When they had come within a stage of 
Tabriz the Bab requested Muhammad Beg to go on in 
advance and announce his approach to Bahman Mirza, to 
whom he also sent a message praying that he might not be 
sent to Maku hut might be allowed to remain in Tabriz. 
To this message the Prince merely replied that it had 
nothing to do with him, and that the instructions given at 
the capital must be complied with. Much distressed at 
being the bearer of such unwelcome tidings, Muhammad 
Beg returned to meet the Bab, whom he brought in to his 
own house at Tabriz. There the Bab remained for several 
days until the fresh escort which was to conduct him to 
Makti arrived. Then the Bab sent Muhammad Beg with 
a second message to the Prince, again renewing his request 
for permission to remain at Tabriz. To this message also 
Bahman Mirza turned a deaf ear; and such was Muhammad 
Beg’s chagrin, and so great the sorrow which he experienced 
on parting from the Bab (whose new escort would suffer no 
further delay in starting), that he fell ill of a fever which 
did not quit him for two months. 

Ao sooner had Muhammad Beg recovered his health 
than he set out for Maku to visit the Bab. On his arrival 
there he fell at the Bab's feet, entreating him to overlook 
and condone any fault of which he might have been guilty. 
The Bab answered that he was not willing that even his 
enemies should suffer, much less his friends, and that he 
freely forgave all who had wittingly or unwittingly trespassed 
against him He then enquired concerning the details of 
the disgrace which had befallen two of those who had 
sliuhted him—Ashraf Khan and Bahman Mirza—with 
which Muhammad Beg forthwith proceeded to acquaint 
him • and, on hearing the indignities to which Ashraf Khan 

IS 


B. 


274 


NOTE L—THE BAB AT MAKtJ. 


had been subjected by the relatives of a woman whom he 
had seduced, lie expressed sorrow that so severe a punish¬ 
ment should have overtaken him. 

The confinement to which the BAb was subjected at 
M&kh was by no means an excessively rigorous one. Not 

only his amanuensis AkA Seyyid Huseyn, but also (ac¬ 
cording to Subh-i-Ezel) Mullk Sheykh ‘Alf, and apparently 
others amongst the most earnest and devoted of his 
followers, were constantly with him, while many others 
flocked to Mdkii from all parts of Persia and were per¬ 
mitted to hold almost unrestricted converse with their 
Master. Besides this, continual correspondence was carried 
on between the Bdb and his most active apostles, in spite 
of the instructions given to ‘All Khdn the warden of Mdkii 

Castle by the Prime Minister HAjf Mfrzd Afotsf to the effect 
that no such correspondence was to be permitted. Whether 
‘Alf Kh&n found himself unable to prevent this corre¬ 
spondence (at any rate without risking a popular tumult), 
or whether he simply connived at it either from indolence, 
indifference, or partiality for the BAb, does not very clearly 
appear. It would at any rate seem that he always treated 
his prisoner with the utmost respect and deference, toiled 
daily up the steep road from the village to the Castle 
(which stood on the summit of a neighbouring hill), and, 
when questioned by his friends as to the opinion which he 
had formed of the B£b, would reply that, although he was 
not clever enough to understand his sayings, he was con¬ 
vinced of his greatness and holiness. 

During his sojourn at M,4kh the BAb composed a great 
number of works, amongst the more important of which 
may be especially mentioned the Persian Beydn and the 
‘ Seven Proofs ’ (Dalail-i-Sab‘a), both of which contain 
ample internal evidence of having been written at this 
period (B. ii, pp. 912—913). Indeed, if we may credit a 
statement made in the Thmkh-i-Jad'id on the authority of 
MfrzA ‘Abdu’l-Wahh&b, the various writings of the B&b 
current in Tabriz alone amounted in all to not less than a 
million verses! The Prime Minister himself, ILijf Mfrzd 
Ak&sf, was made the object of a homily entitled “The 

Sermon of Wrath ” “ which,” says the author 


275 


NOTE L—THE BAB AT CHIHRIK. 

of the TurflA-i-Jadft 7, “if anyone will peruse, he shall 
understand the true meaning of inward Strength and 
Power." Whether this document reached the eyes of him 
for whom it was intended and roused him to take further 
steps for the more effectual isolation of its author is 
uncertain : but at all events fresh instructions of a more 
peremptory character were despatched by the Prime 
Minister to the Warden of M;ikii commanding him at once 
to put a stop to the interchange of letters between the 
Bab and his followers. Ah' Khan replied that he was 
absolutely unable to do this; whereupon orders were issued 
by the Prime Minister for the removal of the B;lb from 
Maku to Chihrik. ‘Ah' Khan, though his own action had 
brought about this transference, communicated the an¬ 
nouncement thereof to the Bab with every expression of 
distress and concern, but the latter sternly cut short his 
apologies saying, " Why dost thou lie ? Thou didst thy¬ 
self write, and dost thou excuse thyself?" So the Bab was 
taken to Chihrik and placed in the custody of Yahya Khan. 

The Ttjvikh-i-Jadfd, ever disposed towards the mar¬ 
vellous if not the miraculous, relates that Yahya Ivhau 
saw the Bab in a dream a short time before his actual 
arrival at Chihrik, and that this dream he related to 
Jenab-i-' Azfm (Mulhi Sheykk ‘All), declaring at the same 
time that should the Bab’s appearance prove to be such as 
he had seen in his vision he would know for a surety that 
tliis was indeed the promised Im.im Mahdi. On the Bab’s 
arrival Yahya Kh;in went out to meet him and beheld his 
face even as the face in the dream. Thereupon, being 
greatly moved, he bowed ltimself in reverence before the 
Bab, and brought him in with all honour into his own 
house, neither would he sit down in his presence without 
permission. In consequence of the impression thus pro¬ 
duced on Yahya Khiin, the Bab, in spite of Haji Mirzd 
Aka si’s stringent orders, was not much more isolated from 
his followers at Chihrik than he had been at Maku. 

Subh-i-Ezel’s version is quite different, and is not only 
much more probable in itself, but also rests on much better 
authority, since through his hands passed the greater part 
of the correspondence which was carried on with the Bab. 
According to this version, the Bab’s confinement at Chihrik 

IS—2 


27G 


NOTE L—THE BAB AT CHIHRfK. 


was of the most rigorous kind, and it was only tvith the 
greatest difficulty that letters could be conveyed to or from 
him. Some of the expedients resorted to for this purpose 
were described by Mulffi Sheykh ‘All to Subh-i-Ezel and 
by him to me. Sometimes the letter to be conveyed to the 
Bib was carefully wrapped up in a waterproof covering, 
weighted, and sunk in a vessel filled with mast (curdled 
milk), which vessel the BAbl messenger would pray the 
guards to convey as a trifling present to the captive. 
Sometimes the letter was enclosed in a candied walnut of 
the kind called jusghand. The bearer, on his arrival at 
Chihrlk, would enter into conversation with the sentries, 
offer them a share of his juzghands, and finally, having 
sufficiently ingratiated himself with them, request them to 
carry a handful of sweetmeats to their prisoner. If they 
consented to do this, the walnut containing the letter was 
dexterously slipped into the handful destined for the B&b. 

A passage from M. Mochenin’s memoir quoted by 
Kazem-Beg (i. p. 371) would seem, however, to imply that 
even at Chihrlk the Bdb was permitted to address those 
who came to hear and see him. “ The concourse of people,” 
he says, “ was so great that, the court not being spacious 
enough to contain all the audience, the greater number 
remained in the street listening attentively to the verses 
of the new Kur’&n.” But at all events the B&b was 
subjected to a closer and more rigorous confinement at 
Chihrlk than he had been at Md,ki\. Hence he used to call 

the former “the Grievous Mountain” (jjjA and the 

latter “the Open Mountain” Jjs-). His gaoler at 

Chihrlk was moreover a coarse and unsympathetic creature, 
to whom Akd Seyyid Huseyn of Yezd gave the name of 

“Fierce and Terrible” (^IjA ik^lc) 3 . 

The last point which requires discussion is this :—of 
the three and a half years which elapsed between the death 

1 It will be noticed that the numerical value of the word j,ji 
(318) is the same as that of the name Chihrlk (jj^p-) for which 
it stands. 

2 Kudan, lxvi. 6. 


NOTE II—BAB EXAMINED AT TABRIZ. 


277 


of Minuchihr KMn (Rabl'ul-Avval a. h. 1263 = Feb.— 
March a. D. 1847) and the execution of the B4b (Sha'b&n 
27 th a.h. 1266 = July 8 th a.d. 1850) what portion was passed 
by the B4b at M<4ku and Chihrlk respectively? As the B&b 
did not leave Isfahan till after Minuchilir KMn’s death, 
we may, allowing for the time consumed in travelling and 
probable delays, assume that he did not reach Md,ku much 
before June a.d. 1847. Kazem-Beg says that he remained 
there six months ere he was transferred to Chihrlk, where, 
if this statement be correct, he must have arrived about 
the beginning of a.d. 1848. From Chihrlk he was brought 
to Tabriz to undergo his first examination (see subsequent 
note) during the life of Muhammad Sh4h, who died on 
Sept. 4 th , a.d. 1848; and from Chihrlk he was again brought 
to Tabriz in July a.d. 1850 to suffer martyrdom. It would 
therefore seem that of the last three years of the Bdb’s 
life six months (from June to December, a.d. 1847) were 
spent at M4ku, and two years and a half (January a.d. 
1848—July a.d. 1850) at Chihrlk. 


NOTE M. 

The first examination of the Bab at Tabriz. 

Of what took place in this assembly we have four 
accounts besides that which is contained in the present 
work, whereof two—those contained in the Rawsatu 
Sa/d and the Kisasu ’l- Ulamd —are almost identical. 
The version contained in the Ndsikhu ’t-Tawurikli is sub¬ 
stantially a mere condensation of these, and contains little 
new matter, though the order of the proceedings is some¬ 
what differently given. The account contained in the 
Tdrikh-i-Jadid is relatively very brief, and in the main 
agrees with what is stated in the present work. B&bl 
tradition, in short, supplies us with no detailed narrative 
of this event, the reason for this being apparently that the 
assembly in question was held with closed doors, and that 


278 


NOTE M—BAB EXAMINED AT TABRIZ. 


the Bdb (so far as we can tell) was unsupported by the 
presence of a single friend. 

As to the credibility of the Muhammadan version, 
Kazem-Beg has some very pertinent remarks in his first 
article (pp. 360—363). While fully sharing the doubts 
which he expresses as to the historical value of this version, 
I have nevertheless thought it worth reproducing in this 
place, believing that, whether it be true or false, it will not 
be found altogether uninteresting as a specimen of the 
method of judicial enquiry adopted by an Ecclesiastical 
Court in Persia. I have in the main followed the account 
given in the Rawzatu ’s-Safd and the Kisasu ’l- Ulamd, 
except in a few cases where a question or answer seemed to 
be more clearly put in the Ndsikhu ’t-Tawdnkh. 

In the Ndsikhu ’ t-Tawdrikh this conference is described 
as having taken place in the year a.ii. 1263. If this were 
so 1 , it must have been at the close of that year (which ended 
on December 8th, a.d. 1847), inasmuch as the B&b was, 
according to all authorities (including Dr A. H. Wright of 
Urtimiyya), brought to Tabriz from Ghihrik, whither (as I 
have attempted to shew in the previous note) he was not 
transferred much before the beginning of a.d. 1848. 

The chief persons who took part in this examination of 
the B4b were :— 

Ndsiru ’d-Din Mirzd, now King, then Crown-Prince, 
of Persia, who was at this time about sixteen years old, 
and on whom the government of Azarbaijdm had only 
recently been bestowed; Ildji Mulld Mahmud entitled 
Nizdmu’l-' Ulamd, the young Prince’s tutor; Mulld Mu¬ 
hammad Mdmak&nt entitled Hujjatu’l-Islam, an eminent 
Sheykhl divine; Hdjt Murtazd-Kult Mar and! entitled 
‘Ilmu ’l-Hitdd; Hdji Mirzd ‘Alt Asghar the Sheykhu’l- 
Islam ; jind (according to the present work) Mirzd Ahmad 
the Imam-Jum‘a. Shortly after these had assembled the 
Bdb was brought in, and (according to the Musulmdn, but 
not the Bfibl, accounts) was motioned to a seat of honour. 
The following dialogue then ensued :— 

Hdjt Mulld Mahmud. —“The command of His Im¬ 
perial Majesty the King is that you should set forth your 

1 But see remarks on pp. 186—187 supra. 


NOTE M—BAB EXAMINED AT TABRIZ. 


279 


claims in the presence of the doctors of I slim, so that the 
truth or falsehood thereof may be established. Although 
I myself am not one of the learned and only occupy the 
position of an attendant, I am free from prejudice, and my 
conversion will not be without importance. Now I have 
three questions to ask of you. Firstly, are these books 
composed in the fashion and style of the Kur’&n, of Epistles, 
and of Prayers, and disseminated through all parts and 
regions of Persia yours, and did you compose them, or do 
men [wrongly] attribute them to you ?” 

Bab .—“ They are from God.” 

H. M. M. —“ I am no great scholar : if they are yours, 
say so ; and if not, don’t.” 

Bab.— 1 They are mine.” 

H. M. M. “The meaning of your saying ‘They are 
from God ’ is that your tongue is like the Tree on Sinai 1 3 — 

* _j\ 1)1 JtiL I 

* L?" 

^ Aw j I l&^ j \ 

# <bl Xc ji 

Bab .—“ Mercy be upon you!” 

H. M. M .— “They call you ‘ Bab.’ Who gave you this 
name, and where did they give it ? What is the meaning 
of ‘ Bab ’ ? And are you content with this name or not ?” 

Bab .—“ God gave me this name.” 

H. M. M .— “Where? In the House of the Ka'ba, or 
in the ‘Holy House ,’ 4 or in the ‘Frequented House ’?” 5 

1 i.e. The Burning Bush. C'f. Kur’an xxvii, 7—9; and xxviii, 
29—30. 

2 “ If [to say] ‘ I am the Truth ’ (i.e. God) be right in a tree, 

Why should it not be right in some favoured man 1 ” 

3 See note 1 at the foot of p. 23 supra. 

4 Jerusalem. 

5 See KuP£n lii, v. 4, and explanations in the commentaries. 


280 


NOTE M—BAB EXAMINED AT TABRIZ. 


Bdb. —“Wherever it was, it is a divine name.” 

H. M M.—“ In that case of course you are content 
with a ‘divine name.’ What is the meaning of ‘ Bcib’V’ 

Bab. —“The same as the word ‘Bdb’ in [the tradition]— 

# ^ !+[«!! duAa 111 

JL M. M. —“ Then you are the ‘ Gate of the City of 
Knowledge ’ ? ” 

Bdb. —“ Yes.” 

//. M. M.—“ Praise be to God ! For forty years have 
I journeyed seeking to meet with one of the ‘ Gates,’ and it 
was not granted to me. Now, praise be to God, you have 
come to me in my own country, even to my very pillow! 
If it he so, and I can but assure myself that you are the 
‘ Gate,’ give me, I pray, the office of shoe-keeper!” 

Bdb. —“Surely you are Hhji Mull,1 Mahmud?” 

H. M. M .—“ Yes.” 

Bdb.— “Your dignity is great; great offices should be 
bestowed upon you.” 

H. M. M .—“ I only want that office, and it is sufficient 
for me.” 

The Prince .—“ We too will leave and deliver over this 
throne to you who are the ‘ Gate.’ ” 

II. M. M .—“As the Prophet or some other wise man 
hath said— 

# 0L0VI ^ 1 c. j oI-bVI pjc oLJc ^l*jl 

I ask, then, in Medicine, what occurs in the stomach 
when a person suffers from indigestion ? Why are some 
cases amenable to treatment ? And why do some go on to 
permanent dyspepsia or syncope, 1 2 3 or terminate in hypo¬ 
chondriasis?” 

1 “ I am the City of Knowledge and ‘All is its Gate (Bdb).” 

2 “ Knowledge is twofold—knowledge of bodies, and know¬ 
ledge of religions; ” i.e. Medicine and Theology are the only two 
branches of science which are really worthy of attention. 

3 oLti, swooning or syncope. For fainting-fits in connection 
with dyspepsia, see Avicenna’s K&ntm (Rome, a.d. 1593), vol. i, 
p. 440. 


NOTE M —BAB EXAMINED AT TABEfZ. 281 

Bub. —“I have not studied Medicine.” 

The Prince. —“If so he that you are the ‘Gate of Know¬ 
ledges,’ yet say ‘I have not studied Medicine,’ this is quite 
incompatible with your claim!” 

H. 31. 31. — (To the Prince) “It is of no consequence, 
for this is hut the art of the veterinarian and is not included 
amongst sciences; so that herein is no incompatibility with 
Bab-hood.” (To the Bab) “Theology consists of the sciences 

of ‘Principles’ (Jj-s>l) and ‘Applications’ The 

science of ‘Principles’ has a beginning (IxJ and a con¬ 
clusion (aL>). Say then: are [the Divine Attributes of] 
Knowledge, Hearing, Seeing, and Power identical with the 
[Divine] Essence, or otherwise?” 

Bab .—“Identical with the Essence.” 

H. 31. 31. —“Then God is multiple and composite; the 
Divine] Essence and the [Divine] Knowledge are two things 
ike vinegar and syrup which have yet become identical; 
God is] compounded of [the Divine] Essence plus Know- 
edge, of [the Divine] Essence plus Power, and so on. 
besides this, the [Divine] Essence is ‘without Opposite, 
without Antithesis.’ But Knowledge, -which is identical 
with the [Divine] Essence, has an opposite, which is Igno¬ 
rance. Besides these two objections, God knows, the Prophet 
knows, and I know: w T e [therefore] partake in Knowledge. 
We also have a ‘ground of distinction’; for the Knowledge 
of God is from Himself, while our knowledge is from Him. 
Therefore God is compounded of a ‘ground of distinction’ 
and a ‘ground of identity.’ But God is not composite.” 

Bob. —“ I have not studied Philosophy.” ( The Prince 
smiles, but preserves silence.) 

H. M. 31. —“The science of ‘Applications’ is elucidated 
from the Book and the Code 1 , and the understanding of the 
Book and the Code depends on many sciences, such as 
Grammar, Rhetoric, and Logic. Do you who are the B4b 
conjugate Kala ?” 

Bcib .—“What KdlaV' 


1 i.e. the KuEdn and the Traditions. 


282 


NOTE M—BAB EXAMINED AT TABRIZ. 


II. 31. M .—“ Kala, yakulu, kawlan.” (Begins Jo say 
the past tense after the fashion of a school-hoy — “Kala, 
Mia, Min; kdlat, kdlatd, kidnctThen, addressing the 
Bab) “Do you say the rest.” 

Bab. —“I learned it in childhood, but I have for¬ 
gotten it.” 

H. 31. M. —“Give the derivatives of Kala.’’ 

Bab. —“How give the derivatives?” 

H. 31 31 (after giving some of the derivatives )—“Now 
give the rest. ” 

Bab. —“I told you, I have forgotten.” 

II. 31 31. —“Explain this verse of the Glorious 
Kur’an:— 


# ^ is>• OJ1 JLI1 

and tell me also what is the construction of li ys~ 
* 

L o la J 1” 

Bdb.—“ I don’t remember.” 

H. 31 31 —“ What is the meaning of this tradition :— 

# aJ>-I^JI ^**11 liholla IjilL O4J1 i ? 

Bdb. —“ I don’t know.” 

II. 31. 31 .—“ Explain the meaning of this tradition of 
what passed between Ma’rnun the Caliph and His Highness 
Riz4 the eighth Indm :— 


1 “It is Ha who maketh you to behold the lightning, a fear and 
a hope.” Kur’an, xiii, 13. 

2 “ May God curse the eyes, for verily they have acted unjustly 
towards the one eye.” I regret to say that I have failed to 
ascertain by whom and on what occasion these words were 
uttered or to what they allude. 


NOTE M—BAB EXAMINED AT TABRIZ. 


283 


wJUajl ^Jc. ilj>- La Ojjaio 1 

# la ciw9 Lsbl ^jJ JI 9 LjLj JIs LAul il JlH 

What was the nature of the argument employed by Kiz& 
(on him be peace), and what the point of Ma’mun’s objec¬ 
tion and of Rizd’s reply thereto ? ” 

Bob.—" Is it a tradition ? ” 

H. M. M. —“Yes.” ( Cites authorities.) “The cir¬ 
cumstances under which the Suratu ’l-Kawthar was re¬ 
vealed were, as is well known, the following :—His Highness 
the Prophet was passing by. ‘As said, ‘ This is the child¬ 
less man ! ’ Shortly afterwards he died, leaving no children. 
His Higlmess the Prophet was grieved, and so this Sura 
was revealed for his consolation. Tell me now, what was 
the nature of the consolation which it contained?” 1 2 

Bab .—“Were these indeed the circumstances under 
which it was revealed ? ” 

1 “ Ma’mhn said, ‘ What is the proof for [the right to] the 
Caliphate of thine ancestor ‘All ibn Abi Tdlib'i’ He [i.e. Riza] said, 
‘ The sign of ourselves.’ He [i.e. Ma’mun] said, ‘ If it were not for 
our wives!’ He [i.e. Riza] said, ‘If it were not for our sons/’ 
Then Ma/tm&n vias silent.” By his first answer the Imam Riza 
means that the right of ‘All and his descendants to the Caliphate 
is sufficiently proved by their being what they are and connected 
as they are with the Prophet, Ma’mun objects, ‘Yes, that is all 
very well, but we too are related to the Prophet on the female 
side;’ to which objection the Imdm Riza replies, ‘But our 
connection is in the male line;’ for connection in the male line 
is a much closer tie, as expressed in the following verse from an 
old Arab poet for which I am indebted to my friend Mr Khalil 
Khayy&t of Beyrout:— 

^ JptiVl Jb -f *Ul ij&Jr ; till y ht.1 y. 

“ Our sons’ sons are our sons, but as for our daughters 
Their sons are the sons of strange men.” 

This, at least, appears to me to be the explanation of the 
tradition. 

2 Concerning the circumstances under which the Sfiratu 
’l-Kawthar was revealed see Ibn Hish&m’s Life of Muhammad, ed. 
Wiistenfeld, p. 261. 


284 


NOTE M—BAB EXAMINED AT TABRfZ. 


H. M. M .—“ Yes.” (Cites authorities.) 

(The Bab asks for time to think.) 

II. M. M .—“ In the days of our youth we used, accord¬ 
ing to the dictates of our age, jestingly to repeat this 
sentence of ‘Allama\ whereof I desire yon now to explain 
to me the meaning :— 

-rTJ J ^ -? J* 0 

* JM\ j .1 | I | I 

Why should this be so ? ” 

Bab. — (after reflecting for a while) “ Is this sentence 
from ‘A llama ?” 

The audience (unanimously ).—“ Yes ! ” 

II. M. M .—“ Suppose it is not ‘Alldmas hut mine, do 
you nevertheless explain its meaning. After all you are 
the ‘ Gate of Knowledge ’! ” 

Bdb.—“ I cannot think of anything.” 

II. 31. 31 .—“ One of the miracles of the Arabian Pro¬ 
phet is the Kur’&n, and the miraculous character thereof is 
derived from its fasdhat and its baldghat. What is the 
definition of fasdhat and baldghat ? Is the relation which 
subsists between them tabdyun, tcisdwt, ‘umum wa khmus 
min ivajh, or ‘umum wa khusus-i-mutlakl” 1 2 3 

1 The title of 'Alldma (“the very erudite”) is used by the 
Shifites to designate one of their great theologians named Hasan 
ibn Yusuf ibn ‘All of Hilla. According to the Kisasu’l-‘Ulamd 
he was born on Ramazan 19th, a.h. 648 (December 15th,'A.D. 1250), 
and died on Muharram 11th, a.h. 726 (December 18th, a.d. 1325). 
No less than seventy-five of his works are enumerated. 

2 “ Si vir cum hermaphrodito, hermaphroditus cum muliere rern 
habet, ab hermaphrodito requiritur ut aqud se pwrget , non vero a 
viro et muliere . 

3 Fasdhat and baldghat both signify in general “ eloquence,” 
but the former especially denotes correctness of diction and 
chasteness of style, the latter moving and affecting language which 
reaches the hearts of the hearers or causes the speaker to reach 
his object. (See Lane’s Arabic-English Lexicon, s.v. n, and £*».) 


NOTE M—BAB EXAMINED AT TABRfZ. 


285 


Bab .—“ I don’t know.” (The audience manifest signs 
of anger and impatience.) 

H. M. M .—“ If you were in doubt between two and 
three [inclinations in prayer] what would you do ? ” 1 
Bab. “ I would assume two.” 

Mulla Muhammad Mdmakdm :—“0 impious one! 
You do not even know what to do in cases of doubt in 
prayer, and yet you claim to be the Bab ! ” 

Bab .—•“ I would assume three.” 

The “ four relations ” recognized by Muhammadan logicians and 
here enumerated are in detail as follows:—(1) TasdvA (“ Equi¬ 
valence” or “Co-extensiveness”), as “man” and “endowed with 
articulate speech.” (2) Tabayun (“Diversity”), as “man” and 
“stone.” (3) l UmU/m, wa khus&s i-mutlak (“Relation of genus 
and species absolutely”), as “animal” and “man.” (4) 'Umdin 
via khusds min wajh (“ Relation of genus and species under one 
asjsect ”), as “ animal ” and “ white.” 

1 This question, with what immediately follows it, refers to the 
duty incumbent on a Musulruan who, while engaged in the 
performance of one of the prescribed prayers, becomes conscious 
of a doubt as to whether he has duly fulfilled some one or more 
of its essential elements, e.g. as to whether he has performed two 
or three inclinations ( rak l a). Every possible case of doubt is 
provided for in that section of Muhammadan jurisprudence 

which is entitled J ;jui concerning which see Querry’s 

Droit Musulman (Paris, 1871) vol. i, pp. 107—109. The general 
rule is thus stated at p. 21 of the catechism called Svial ii Jawdb 
(“ Questions and answers”) composed by Hajf Seyyid Muhammad 
Bcikir of Isfahan and printed at Teherin in a.h. 1247 (a.d. 1831 — 
2):—•“ He who is doubtful assumes the [performance of the] act 
concerning which he doubts, whether it relates to the number of 
inclinations (rak'a) or not; except in cases where [the per¬ 
formance of] the act concerning which he douhts would cause 
nullity [of the prayer], when he assumes its omission. If, then, 
he be doubtful whether it is two or three inclinations [which he 
has performed], he assumes three; if he be doubtful whether he 
has performed the inclination or the prostration or not, he 
assumes that he has performed them; and if he be doubtful 
whether he has performed the recitation ( kard'at ), he assumes 
that he has performed it. But [on the other hand] if he be 
doubtful whether he has inclined twice or once he assumes that 
he has inclined [only] once; and if he be doubtful whether he has 
performed four inclinations of prayer or five, he assumes that it 
is four.” 


286 NOTE M —BAB EXAMINED AT TABRfZ. 

31. 31. 31. “ Evidently if it is not two you must say 
three.” 

II. 31. M. “ Three is also wrong. Why did you not 
ask whether it was in the morning or evening prayer that 
I was in doubt, and whether it was after the inclination or 
before the inclination, or after the completion of two pros¬ 
trations ? ” 

M. M. M. —“You ought to give thanks, for had he 
said ‘ I would assume two ’ (inasmuch as engaging in an 
indubitable duty demands fulfilment of that indubitable 
duty) what would you have done then 1 ?” (To the Bab) 

“Did you write:— I. , _ • , . I . l I ? 2 3 

Is this expression yours or not?” 

Bab. “ Yes, it is mine.” 

31. 31. 31 .—“Then in that case you were the leader 
and they were followers, and you must be superior to 
them?” 

Ildji 3Iurtazd-Kuli 3Iarand1. —“ The Lord of the 
Universe has said :— 


^ cm ols LI ^ 


1 If 1 have rightly understood this rather obscure expression 

j zt\j. J»i) it means that the undertaking 

of an obligation such as prayer necessitates and requires the due 
discharge of all that is properly involved therein, without which 
it is null and void. Hence if it were necessary in a case of doubt 
such as is indicated above to assume that only two inclinations 
had been performed (or, in other words, to assume the minimum 
instead of the maximum), then all persons who had followed the 
rule ordinarily received would have been guilty of numerous sins 
of omission for which they would be held responsible. 

2 “ The first to believe in me was the Light of Muhammad and 
[the Light ofl ‘Alt.” 

3 “And know that whenever ye seize anything as a spoil, to 

God belongs a fifth thereof, awl to Ilis Apostle .” Kur’in, 

viii, 42. 


NOTE M —BAB EXAMINED AT TABRIZ. 


while you in your Knran say aI' 1 . On what authority, 
and whyi" 

Bab. —" A third is the half of a fifth. What difference 
does it make f 

(The audience laugh',. 

H. II. - A", .I I. — " In how many ways is nine divisible ?" 

(The Bab alee* no ane-rm). 

II. II. II. 


' 4 4 V »X>- 


I am not tied down to words; shew me a miracle suit¬ 
able to your claims, so that I mat' become your follower, 
and on my submission many will set their footsteps within 
the circle of devotion to you, for I am well known as 
learned, and the learned man will never follow the 
ignorant.” 

Bab. —“ What miracle do you desire l" 

II. II II .—"His Majesty the King Muhammad Shah 
is sick. Kestore him to health.” 

Tr.< Prince. —" Why go so far : Are not you present ? 
Let him exert an influence over your being and restore you 

1 "A Air.’ Atwcfi” As a matter of fact the ordinances 
contained in the Persian -Be . e ; relative to the disposal of spoils 
taker from infidels do not accord with the statement here made, 
which 'is probably quite hctiticus. They will be found in 
ro.i:',;' v. A. vi. and are in substance as follows:— x l', One-dfth of 
the spoils, together with whatever is incomparable in value or 
beauty, beings to fhe Bib. If he be no longer alive it is to be 
held in trust :. r " Him whom God shall manifest." 2' Of what 
remains the warriors who have won it take what suffices for their 
needs. 3 The residue -is given to the poor, all of whom, so far 
as possible, are to he made partakers in the bounty. Should 
anythin; still remain over, it may be expended on burning or 
repairing shrines etc. 

- “Boic long these writ and this conceal men: of ::<:apharf 
I >.-.x’..Id bum, bum, and acquiesce in at I. ~ning." 

Masnavt ed. •Alan d-Dawla, p. 143, line S'. 


288 


NOTE M—BAB EXAMINED AT TABKfZ. 


to youthfulness, so that you may ever continue in attendance 
on our stirrup. We too, on witnessing the accomplishment 
of this miracle, will resign this throne to him.” 1 2 3 

Bdb. —“ It is not in my power.” 

H. M. M .—“ Then honour is not rendered without 
some reason. 0 dumb in the realms of words and dumb in 
the realms of ideas, what virtue then do you possess ?” 

Bdb. —“I can utter eloquent words” ( Recites) 

ol1 ah a<^c!1 

{pronouncing the last word with final fat-ha). 

Prince (smiling ).— 

# L*^ *_all j la La j 

■m' Llo I if ^ f 

Bdb. —“My name ‘All Muhammad corresponds with 
Babb” (Lord). 4 

//. M. M .—“ Every ‘All Muhammad and Muhammad 
‘All corresponds with Babb. Besides in that case you 
should claim to be the Lord rather than the Bdb.” 

Bdb. —“I am that person for whose appearance ye 
have waited a thousand years.” 

IT. M. M .—“That is to say you are the Mahdl, the 
Lord of Religion ? ” 5 

1 There is something almost ludicrous in the eagerness where¬ 
with the Crown-Prince interposes to check the miracle designed 
to restore his dying father to health. 

2 “ Praise be to God who created the heavens.” 

3 “ That which forms its plural in alif and td is pointed with 
kesra alike in the objective and in the dependent cases.” This 
sentence is from the well-known versified Arabic Grammar 
called the Alfiyya , and will be found on p. 19 of Dieterici’s 
edition of that work (Leipsic, 1851). 

4 The sum of the letters in ‘Alt Muhammad is 202, which is 
also the numerical equivalent of Rabb. 

'•> i.e. the Twelfth Imdm. See Note 0 infra. 


NOTE M—BAB EXAMINED AT TABRIZ. 289 

Bab .—“ Yes.” 

H. M. M .—“The same in person, or generically ?” 

Bab. —“ In person.” 

H. M. M. —“ What is your name, and what are the 
names of your father and mother ? Where is your birth¬ 
place ? And how old are you ? ” 

Bab. —“ My name is ‘All Muhammad ; my mother was 
named Khadfja and my father Mlrzd Riz.i the cloth-seller; 
my birth-place is Shfr&z; and of my life, behold, thirty- 
five years have elapsed.” 1 

II. 31. M .—“The name of the Lord of Religion is 
Muhammad ; his father was named Hasan and his mother 
Narjis; his birth-place was Surra-man-Ra’a; and his age 
is more than a thousand years. There is the most complete 
variance. And besides I did not send you.” 

Bab .—“Do you claim to be God?” 

H. M. 31 .—“ Such an Imam is worthy of such a God.” 

Bab. —“I can in one day write two thousand verses. 
Who else can do this ? ” 

H. 31. M .—“ When I resided at the Supreme Shrines I 
had a secretary who used to write two thousand verses a 
day. Eventually he became blind. You must certainly 
give up this occupation, or else you too will go blind.” 

The conference then broke up, and the Bd,b was taken 
back to the house of Muhammad K4zim Kh&n the Farrdsh- 
bdsM. Next day he was again brought before the Prince 
and the doctors, who sentenced him to the bastinado. The 
Muhammadan historians admit that the farrashes were 
still, in spite of what had taken place at the examination 
on the previous day, so strongly inclined to sympathize 
with the B4b that they positively refused to take part in 
administering the punishment decreed, the execution of 
which therefore devolved on the servants of H4ji MulM 
Mahmud and the Slieyku ’1-IsMm. It is of course asserted 

1 Kazem-Beg (i, p. 334, note 4) bases the calculation whereby 
he arrives at the date of the Bdb’s birth on this passage, which, as 
a matter of fact, affords a strong proof of the falsity of the whole 
narrative wherein it occurs, since the Bdb’s age certainly did not 
exceed 29 years at this time (see Note C supra). 

B. 


19 


290 NOTE N—BAB’S CLAIM TO BE THE MAHDf. 


by the Musulmin historians that the Bib again recanted 
and revoked all his claims under the chastisement inflicted 
upon him, whereupon he was released and sent back to 
Chihrlk. 

It is difficult to decide to what measure of credence the 
above narrative is entitled. Very probably such questions 
as are there recorded—and assuredly some of them are 
sufficiently frivolous and even indecent—were asked; but, 
even though the Bib may have been unable to answer 
them, it is far more likely that, as stated in the Tarikh-i- 
Jadid, he preserved a dignified silence than that he gave 
utterance to the absurdities attributed to him by the 
Muhammadan writers. These, indeed, spoil their own case; 
for, desiring to prove that the Bib was not endowed with 
superhuman wisdom, they represent him as displaying an 
ignorance which we can scarcely credit. That the whole 
examination was a farce throughout, that the sentence was 
a foregone conclusion, that no serious attempt to apprehend 
the nature and evidence of the Bib’s claim and doctrine 
was made, and that from first to last a systematic course of 
brow-beating, irony, and mockery was pursued appear to 
me to be facts proved no less by the Muhammadan than by 
the Bib! accounts of these inquisitorial proceedings. 


NOTE N. 

The Bab’s claim to be the Imam MahdI. 

The Bib’s original claim was, as has been already ex¬ 
plained in Note D, that he was the ‘Gate’ whereby men 
could communicate with the Ki’irn, Imim-Mahdf, or Twelfth 
Imim. _At a later period of his mission, however, he de¬ 
clared himself to be none other than the Imim himself, and, 
as has been set forth in the previous Note (p. 288 supra), 
it was this claim which he boldly advanced before his 
inquisitors at Tabriz. The advancement of this claim 
certainly marks a very important point in the development 
of the Bib s doctrine, but as Gobineau (p. 159) very acutely 


EVIDENCE OF TARlKH-I-JADfD. 


291 


observes in speaking of Mullh Huseyn’s announcement 
thereof to Mimichihr KMn, “ il faut dire ici, pour prevenir 
toute erreur, qu’en assimilant le Bab au douzitsme Imam, le 
missionnaire cherchait a se faire comprendre de la foule et 
h gagner ses sympathies, absolument comme saint Paul 
lorsquil r^velait aux Ath^niens que le Dieu quhl leur 
annon<jait £tait ce Dieu inconnu auquel ils avaient d£jh 
blev^ un autel. C’dtait des deux parts une fa§on de parler, 
et on verra plus tard qu’il n’y a aucun rapport entre l’idbe 
que les Babys se font du Point, et ce que les musulmans 
pensent au sujet de Tim am Mehdy.” 

From the present history (pp. 20 and 24) it would 
appear that this new claim was publicly advanced by the 
B4b for the first time during his examination before the 
‘Ulam4 of Tabriz at the end of a.d. 1847 or the beginning 
of a.d. 1848. The following passage in the Tarikh-i-Jadid 
affords corroborative evidence of this :— 


AO Ijt 


ijl diol jl Juu 


Ol>* J t £ ^ jjjJw oLc>j1 

ol . 1 j oLji JC.'Ptlj 

OLAlOIo _5 oLa J ol 3 Jo JJ)\ 

j} I Qiaaj IS jlfrkl jlc jlj*lA 

j jloj J >-Ijl JO_^= 


^ Jjl jLo 

“After His Highness [the B4b] had removed to the 

19—2 


292 NOTE N—BAB’S CLAIM TO BE THE MAHDf. 


Castle of Chihrfk, his companions and friends, notwith¬ 
standing the rigorous prohibition of the late f Ih,j f [Mfrzi 

Akisf], still continued to hold intercourse with him in a 
cautious manner, and a number of persons in that neigh¬ 
bourhood attained the dignity of belief and were converted. 
And so long as Yahyi Khin held the office of governor he 
used to observe the utmost respect towards His Highness 
[the Bib], And His Highness [the Bib], having regard to 
the exigencies of the time, the requirements of expediency 
and caution, and the capacity of men, [first] made himself 
known as the Ki’im in Chihrfk ; though some believe that 
[he did so] during the latter part of the period of his 
sojourn at Miku.” 

In the Persian Beyin (of which the greater part, if not 
the whole, was composed at Mikti) I have found two 
passages wherein the Bib identifies himself more or less 
clearly with the Imiin Mahdf. The first of these passages 
occurs in Vahid viii, ch. 17, and runs as follows:— 


i 

["'iJaflJ Jpgik JA d^b>. 

Ol ji k 

JL" A— _2 C-J J) 3 ■ fl ^ j il t^ v* 

I; I L Jh. L iSsil cj* 

j JlAj-aLa JLgjJ j l 5|^I jl 

^ A*■*"’ i> Ja£ j>\ ^jp- JA Jpfl) 

^ L^AjJ OL [ aiaflj] Jj-g-Ia JA l_SA^j J3J Ol J J 


1 B omits. 2 B omits. 2 B omits. * B reads 
6 B reads jaT. 0 b reads 7 B omitSr 


EVIDENCE OF PERSIAN BEVAN. 


293 


~Jjj.i a .-a <ul <j?*y 

^ Aalib ^ O —fe <1)1 J j\ OjJ>* dS'’ 
^-^aSela 6lml d5^ O—dg.w _o jjl ^go'.'- (ji 

^])LJ ^Ja9 Cj kjLc 5 ^yjL iy 

^ftlia) ^ Jj^^L dj^Ae IjdjA- Col JaI] dS^ C—I 

jtUI jlj 10 [JaI] 


diui 


jl Jiu I j_jl 0&-Li 61 (Jibl jl l$J>-I_5 ^ LL> caa> 

ili' 6 U a 5^ 6 LI m [j*i] j^ 18 [cJ] ^Lk 
jJscJI J^eJI jjj j w~i i^oi JU- _j 6LI Ji j_> 15 c—■ I 


# ju 

“ As thou hast heard, at the manifestation of the 
Nukta-i-Furkan [i.e. Muhammad, who was in his time the 
‘ Point of Revelation ’] all those who were believers in the 
Gospel were expecting the promised Ahmad, 16 and thou hast 


I B inserts c . 2 B reads juj. jcfw 3 B reads . 

4 B reads 5 B reads Ul. 6 B omits. 

7 B omits. 8 B omits. 9 B reads tfi. 10 B omits. 

II B reads jj &.\. 12 B inserts 13 B omits. 

14 B omits. 15 B reads ii<" 

16 In Muhammadan tradition Christ is said to have foretold 

s * 

the coming of Muhammad in the words j^-l <<*_.I -t»l i5.m i> Jt 
“One shall come after me whose name is Ahmad”. This tra- 


294 NOTE N—BAB’S CLAIM TO BE THE MAHDf. 


heard what befel that Sun of Truth during the twenty- 
three years of his mission, so that he said, ‘No prophet 
hath been afflicted as I have been afflicted.’ Yet all were 
entreating and craving his appearance, and, in the words of 
Jesus, working for him. Praise be to God that in that day 
thou wast not! But thou wast in the manifestation of the 
Nukta-i-Beyan [i.e. the Bab, the ‘ Point of Revelation ’] 
when all believers in the Apostle of God were expecting the 
appearance of the promised Mahdi; for this tradition is 
from the Apostle of God, and all, simple and gentle, are 
agreed therein. Now there is no doubt that the substance 
of Faith was confined to the Shifites, and that the sect of 
Isldm is this same outward sect whereof the adherents call 
themselves Shifites; while men avowedly call Ffirs the 
‘Abode of Knowledge’: 1 Yet, although the Tree of Truth 
arose, not one of the people recognized it [even] after 
perceiving it. The degree of their remoteness is evident, 
for this sufficeth unto their abasement; yet night and day 
they exclaim ‘speed! speed!’ 2 

The second passage occurs in Vdhid ix, ch. 3, and runs 
as follows:— 


jp j ja\ 3^ j 

^o t , *yi . 1 -?'. '. ft L , \ 


dition is based on the prophecies relating to the coming of the 
napaxXjjror, for which word the Muhammadans would substitute 
U(pik\vt6s, whereof the signification is nearly the same as Ahmad 
or Muhammad. (See Ibn Hishfim’s Life of Muhammad, ed. Wiis- 
tenfeld", pp. 149—150.) 

1 The official title of Shiraz is »wi j\ 3 “The Abode of Know¬ 
ledge ”. 

2 The Shifites, whenever they mention the Imdm Mahdi, add 
the formula 4 *^ «j| “May God hasten his joy!” 

3 B reads tf 4 B omits. 6 B omits. 


EVIDENCE OF PERSIAN BEYAN. 


295 


^ 1 i A u« iA ) ^p 2 j ^*>il ^ J 1 

ul&& d^ls ^jjj [J^-] ^ oLj *dJ2ftj jj$L 


^pj did lwA>- l)^*'uHmajI $^Cy& c£jp o 

a ; 

^ 4Jli I J^-ww ^ J^3 1 *AJLaJ v*3poLo OI ^pj ^pLo1 
aJklLa W-Jjao 4 iil ^>ixJ^ 

j 3* disA [,j;i as"*] •x.'^ j^flj js^ /i ian ,_n 

v_9^peto i_£A>-l ajlj j£>- OL) ^dJaflj dS^ C^ul 4bl a ^Jaj 


“ Consider with due attention, for the matter is very 
strait, even while it is more spacious than the heavens and 
the earth and what is between them. For instance, if all 
those who were expecting [the fulfilment] of the saying of 
Jesus had been assured of the manifestation of Ahmad [i.e. 
Muhammad], not one would have turned aside from the 
saying of Jesus. So likewise in the manifestation of the 
Nukta-i-Beydn [i.e. the BJb] if all should be assured that 
this is that same Mahdf [whose comiug was] promised, 
whom the Apostle of God foretold, not one of the believers 
in the Kur’4n would have turned aside from the saying of 
the Apostle of God. So likewise in the manifestation of 
Him whom God shall manifest behold the same thing, for 
should all be assured that he is that same ‘ He whom God 
shall manifest ’ whom the Nukta-i-Beydn foretold, not one 
would turn aside.” 


1 B reads *J| Jj«^j. 2 B inserts tS'. 3 B omits. 

4 B reads jjjA*;. 5 B reads |j^.. 6 B adds | Jm 

7 B omits. 8 B omits. s B reads j , 


296 


NOTE O—CERTAIN SHI‘ITE BELIEFS. 


NOTE 0. 

On certain points of ShiTte doctrine referred to in 

THE TEXT. 

1. The Occultation of the Twelfth Imam. The cardinal 
point wherein the Shi'ites (as well as the other sects in¬ 
cluded under the more general term of Im&mites) differ 
from the Sunnites is the doctrine of the Imdmate. Accord¬ 
ing to the belief of the latter, the vicegerency 
of the Prophet is a matter to be determined by the choice 
and election of his followers, and the visible head of the 
Musulm&n world is qualified for the lofty position which 
he holds less by any special divine grace than by a com¬ 
bination of orthodoxy and administrative capacity. Accord¬ 
ing to the Imdmite view, on the other hand, the vicegerency 
is a matter altogether spiritual; an office conferred by God 
alone, first by His Prophet, and afterwards by those who so 
succeeded him, and having nothing to do with the popular 

choice or approval. In a word, the Caliph (ajnU-) of the 
Suunfs is merely the outward and visible Defender of the 
Faith: the Im&m of the Shi'ites is the divinely-ordained 
successor of the Prophet, one endowed with all perfections 
and spiritual gifts, one whom all the faithful must obey, 
whose decision is absolute and final, whose wisdom is super¬ 
human, and whose words are authoritative. The general 
term Imdmite is applicable to all who hold this latter view 
without reference to the way in -which they trace the 
succession, and therefore includes such sects as the Btikiris 
and Isma'iMs as well as the Shi'ites or “ Church of the 

Twelve” (aj jLs- v^&ju), as they are more specifically 

termed, with whom alone we are here concerned. According 
to these, twelve persons successively held the office of Im4m. 
These twelve are as follows :— 

1. ‘All ibn AM Tcdib, the cousin and first disciple of 
the Prophet, assassinated by Ibn Muljam at Kiifa, a.h. 40 
(a.d. 661). 


OCCULTATION OF TWELFTH IMAM. 297 

2. Hasan, son of ‘Alf and Fdtima, born a.h. 2, poisoned 
by order of MuAwiya I. a.h. 50 (a.d. 670). 

3. Huseyn, son of ‘Alf and F&tima, born a.h. 4, killed 
at Kerbeld on Muharram 10 th , a.h. 61 (Oct. 10 th , a.d. 680). 

4. _ ‘Alt, son of Huseyn and Shahrbdnu (daughter of 
Yezdigird Jhe last S&sknian king), generally called Imam 
Zeynu l- Abidin, poisoned by Walid. [See also note 3 on 
p. 139.] 

5. Muhammad Bdkir, son of the above-mentioned 
Zeynu’l-'Abidin and his cousin Umm ‘Abdi ’llkh the 
daughter of Imiiin Hasan, poisoned by Ibrahim ibn Walid. 

6. Jafar-i-SMik, son of Innlni Muhammad Bkkir, 
poisoned by order of Mansur the ‘Abbdside Caliph, [See 
note 3 at foot of p. 24.] 

7. Musa Kasim, son of Imdm Ja‘far-i-Sddik, born 
a.h. 129, poisoned by order of Hdrunu ’r-Rashid a.h. 183. 

8. ‘ AK ibn Musci er-Rizd, generally called Imdm Rizk, 
born a.h. 153, poisoned near Ths in Khurasan by order of 
the Caliph Ma’mhn, a.h. 203, and buried at Mesh-hed, 
which derives its name and its sanctity from him. 

9. Muhammad Taki\ son of Im&m Riza, born a.h. 195, 
poisoned by the Caliph Mu'tasim at Baghdad a.h. 220. 

10. 'Alt Nakt, son of Imdm Muhammad Taki, born 
a.h. 213, poisoner! at Surra-man-Ra’a a.h. 254. 

11. Hasan 'Askari, son of Imam ‘All Naki, born a.h. 
232, poisoned a.h. 260. 

12. Muhammad, son of IrriAn Hasan ‘Askari and 
Narjis Khktun, called by the Shi‘ites “ Imam Mahdi", 
“Hujjatu ’lldh” (“the Proof of God”), “Bakiyyatu ’Uah” 
(“the Remnant of God”), and “ Ka’im-i-dl-i-Miihammad” 
(“He who shall arise of the family of Muhammad”). He 
bore not only the same name but the same kunya —Abu’l- 
Kdsim—as the Prophet, and according to the Shi‘ites it 
is not lawful for any other to bear this name and this 
kunya together. He was born at Surra-man-Ra’a, a.h. 
255, and succeeded his father in the InHmate a.h. 260‘. 
The Shi’ites hold that he did not die, but disappeared in 

1 It is worthy of note that the ‘ Manifestation’ of Mirz4 ‘Ali 
Muhammad the B4b took place exactly one thousand years after 
this date. 


298 


NOTE O—CERTAIN SHI'ITE BELIEFS. 


an underground passage in Surra-man-Ra’a, a.h. 329; that 
he still lives, surrounded by a chosen band of his followers, 
in one of those mysterious cities, Jfibulkti and J&bulsfi; and 
that when the fulness of time is come, when the earth is 
filled with injustice, and the faithful are plunged in despair, 
he will come forth, heralded by Jesus Christ, overthrow the 
infidels, establish universal peace and justice, and inaugurate 
a millennium of blessedness. During the whole period of his 
Imdmate, i.e. from a.h. 260 till the present day, the Imfim 
Mahdl has been invisible and inaccessible to the mass of 
his followers, and this is what is signified by the term 

“ Occultation” (c~-i). After assuming the functions of 
Imfim and presiding at the burial of his father and predeces¬ 
sor, the Imfim Hasan ‘Askari, he disappeared from the sight 
of all save a chosen few, who, one after the other, continued 
to act as channels of communication between him and his 

followers. These persons were known as “ Gates” (Jojl 

See Note D, pp. 229 and 233 supra). The first of them 
was Abfi ‘Umar ‘Otlunfin ibn Sa'id ‘Umari; the second 
Abu Ja‘far Muhammad ibn ‘Othmfin, son of the above; 
the third Huseyn ibn Ruh Naw-bakhti (concerning whom 
somewhat will be said directly); the fourth Abu T-Hasan 
‘All ibn Muhammad Simari. Of these “Gates” the first 
was appointed by the Imdm Hasan ‘Askari, the others by 
the then-acting “Gate” with the sanction and approval of 
the Imdm Mahdi. This period—extending over sixty-nine 
years—during which the Im^m was still accessible by means 
of the “Gates” is known as the “Lesser” or “ Minor Occul¬ 
ted ion” (<_£ C~-L). This was succeeded by the “Greater” 

or “Major Occultation” ((_£jf C~c). When Abu’1-Hasan 

‘All, the last of the “Gates”, drew near to his latter end, he 
was urged by the faithful (who contemplated with despair 
the prospect of complete severance from the Imfim) to nomi¬ 
nate a successor. This, however, he refused to do, saying 

A*ili y>\ ah “ God hath a purpose which He will accom¬ 
plish.” So on his death all communication between the 


JABULKA AND JABULSA. 


299 


Im&m and his Church ceased, and the “Major Occupation” 
began and shall continue until the Return of the Im&m 
take place in the fulness of time. Besides these two 
Occultations mentioned in the text, another, called the 

“Least Occupation” (O-i), is recognized by Shi'ite 

theologians. This last, however, refers to the future, and 
indicates a period extending from noon on Friday to the 
morning of Saturday the 10 th of Muharram, during which 
the ImMn will temporarily disappear after his Return. 

2. The mystical cities of Jcibulkd and Jdbulsd. Con¬ 
cerning these I will confine myself to citing two passages 
illustrating the light in which they are regarded by 
Muhammadan cosmographers. The first passage is from 
M. Reinaud’s introduction to his translation of Abu’l-fed&’s 
Geography (Paris, 1848), and occurs at p. cclvii of that 
work. It runs as follows:—“ Thabary, se pla§ant sous un 
autre point de vue, reproduit la Hgende sur la montagne 
de Caf, qui entoure la disque de la terre, et il place deux 
villes aux points est et ouest: Djaboulka h l’orient, et 
Djaboulsa k l’occident.” The second passage which I wish 
to quote occurs in al-Kazvmi’s celebrated work on cos¬ 
mography. The text thereof will be found on pp. 17—18 
of Wfist enfeld’s edition. The translation is as follows:— 

“ Jabaesa. A city in the remotest regions of the East. 
On the authority of Ibn ‘Abbds (may God be satisfied with 
him):—he says, ‘ In the remotest East is a city whereof the 
name is Jbbars, and its inhabitants are of the children of 
Thamud. And in the remotest West is a city whereof the 
name is J&balk, and its inhabitants are of the children of 
‘Ad. And in each one are remnants of these two peoples.’ 
The Jews say that the children of Moses (upon him be 
peace) fled in the fight with Bukht-Nassar [Nebuchad¬ 
nezzar], and God (Exalted is He) caused them to journey 
towards Jdbars and to alight therein. And in that place 
they dwell; none can come unto them nor reckon their 
number. Again [it is related] on the authority of Ibn 
‘Abb&s (may God be satisfied with him) that the Prophet 
(may God look favourably upon him and grant him peace) 


300 


NOTE 0—CERTAIN SHl‘ITE BELIEFS. 


on the night wherein he made the night-journey said to 
Gabriel (upon him be peace), ‘ I wish to see the people 
concerning whom God (exalted is He) hath said, “ Of the 
people of Moses there is a party who are guided in truth, 
and act justly according to the same!” [Kur’An vii, 159]. 

‘ Between thee and them,’ said Gabriel (upon him be peace), 

‘is a journey of six years to go and six years to return; 
and between thee and them is a river of sand which runs 
swiftly as the flight of an arrow and ceaseth not save on the 
Sabbath day; but ask of thy Lord.’ So the Prophet 
prayed, and Gabriel said ‘ Amen ’ 1 ; and God revealed unto 
Gabriel, 1 Grant him what he hath asked.’ So he mounted 
BurAk, who took a few steps, and behold he was in the 
midst of the people. Then he saluted them, and they 
asked him ‘Who art thou?’ He said, ‘I am the un¬ 
lettered Prophet.’ They said, ‘ Yea, thou art he concerning 
whom Moses was given good tidings, and verily the angels 
would take thy people by the hand, were it not for their 
faults.’ ‘ I saw their tombs,’ saith the Apostle of God, 
‘at the doors of their abodes, and I said unto them, 
“Wherefore this?” They answered, “That we may 
remember death morning and evening; for did we not do 
thus, we should only remember it from time to time.’” 
Then he said, ‘ How is it that I see your buildings equal 
[in height] V They answered, ‘ That none of us may over¬ 
look another, and that none may shut out .the air from 
another.’ Then he said, ‘ How is it that I see no King or 
judge amongst you?’ They said, ‘We are just one to 
another and give what is due of ourselves, wherefore we 
need not any to deal out justice in our midst.’ Then he 
said, ‘ Wherefore are your streets empty?’ They answered, 
‘We all sow and all reap, and every man amongst us 
taketh what sufliceth him and leaveth what remaineth for 
his brother.’ Then he said, ‘Wherefore do I see these 
people laughing ?’ They replied, ‘ One amongst them hath 
died.’ He said, ‘Why then do they laugh?’ They 
answered, ‘For joy, because he hath been taken away in 

1 At the suggestion of my friend Mr A. A. Bevan of Trinity 
College I have ventured to read for . 


JABULKA AND JABULSA. 


301 


the belief of the Unity.’ He said, ‘What aileth these that 
they weep?’ They answered, ‘A child hath been born unto 
them, and they know not in what faith he will be taken 
away.’ He said, ‘ When a male child is horn unto you, tell 
me what you do?’ They said, ‘We fast for a month in 
thankfulness to God.’ He said, ‘And if a girl be bom unto 
you?’ They answered, ‘We fast two months in thankful¬ 
ness to God, because Moses hath told us that resignation 
on account of a female child hath a greater reward than 
resignation on account of a male child.’ He said, ‘Do ye 
commit adultery?’ They said, ‘Doth any one do this thing 
whom the heaven stoneth not with pebbles from above, and 
whom the earth swalloweth not from beneath ?’ He said, 
'Do ye take usury?’ They answered, ‘He alone taketh 
usury who believeth not in the provision of God.’ He said, 
‘Do ye sicken?’ They said, ‘We sin not, neither do we 
sicken; thy people are afflicted with sickness only as an 
atonement for their sins.’ He said, ‘ Have ye wild beasts 
and reptiles?’ They answered, ‘Yes; they pass us by and 
we pass them by, and they hurt ns not.’ Then the 
Prophet proposed unto them his Law; and they asked, 
‘How shall we do as regards the Pilgrimage, for between us 
and it is a great distance?’ Then the Prophet prayed, 

‘ and,’ saith Ibn ‘Abb&s, ‘ the earth was rolled up for them 
so that those of them who would perform the Pilgrimage 
might do so with [the rest of] mankind. And when’ 
(saith he) ‘ it was morning, the Prophet told this [to] such 
as were present of his people, amongst whom was Abb 
Bekr (may God be satisfied with him). And he said, 
“Verily it is well with the people of Moses, and God 
(Exalted is He) knew what was in their hearts, and revealed 
‘ Of those whom We hate created is a nation who are guided 
in truth and thereby act with equity.”’ [Kur’An vii, 180.] 
And Abu Bekr fasted for a month and set at liberty a slave, 
because God had not preferred the Church of Moses to the 
Church of Muhammad (may God look favourably upon him 
and grant him peace).”’ Such are the cities of JAbulkfi and 
Jfibulsfi—the Muslim ‘ Land of Cocagne’—wherein, accord¬ 
ing to the Shi'ite belief, the Im&m Mahdl dwells. 

3. Huseyn ibn Huh has been already mentioned in 


302 


NOTE O—CERTAIN SHITTE BELIEFS. 


this note as one of the vicars or ‘Gates’ of the Imdm 
Mahdf. The following note concerning him occurs on 
p. 439 of Baron Mac Guckin de Slane’s translation of Ibn 
Khallik,ln’s Biographical Dictionary (London, 1842):— 
“ Abft’l-Kitsim al-Husain Ibn Huh was a holy shaikh and 
one of the doors leading to the Sahib as Zaman {the lord of 
the time, or last grand Imam, according to the Shiite 
doctrine; see Brazes, introd. p. 65). He was chosen by 
Abil Jaafar Muhammad Ibn Othman al-Omari as his 
lieutenant, and when the latter classed the Shiites according 
to their degrees (of initiation), Abfi’l-Kasirn was authorized 
to enter into his presence the first of them all.—He then 
went to see Ibn as-Shalmaghftni ” [see supra, Note 1), 
p. 229], “and gained over so many proselytes, that the 
vizirs, ex-vizirs, and other persons of high rank rode 
(publicly) to visit him. He continued to be treated with 
the greatest deference till Hamid Ibn Abbas became vizir 
(to al-Muktadir) and ordered him to be arrested. He 
remained in prison for five years, but was liberated im¬ 
mediately after the deposition of al-Muktadir, a.h. 317 
(a.d. 929). From that time till his death, which took place 
a.h. 326 (a.d. 937—8), he never ceased to be highly 
respected, but at the moment in which his influence had 
attained its utmost pitch, and his plans were ripe for 
execution, God preserved (the Khalifat) from his evil 
designs. He had been accused of inviting the Karmats by 
letter to lay siege to Baghdad, but he defended himself 
with great ability, presence of mind, and learning. He was 
a benefactor to the Shiites, and held a very high rank 
among them.—(Ad-Dahabi’s Tctrilch-al-Isldm, No. 646, 
in anno.)” 

4. Ibn Mihriydr. Of this person I can find mention 
only in two works of Shi'ite theology, vis. the ‘Tenets of the 

Shiites’ (ajlAJI JjIcc), and the ‘ Garden of the Shiites’ 
(LlAII in each of which his name is written diffe¬ 

rently. In the first he is called j Lj y\ Ju^> 
and in the second jL ^ jjl *xk y\ In both works 


THE “ GUARDIANS ” AND “ HELPERS.” 


303 


he is mentioned amongst those who, during the period of 
the “Minor Occultation” obtained access to, or corre¬ 
sponded with, the Inrim ; and in both he is described as 
a native of Ahwhz. What “ tradition ” of his is specially 
referred to in the text, I am unable to say. 


5. The Guardians and the Helpers. These constitute 
two grades of a spiritual hierarchy whereof the members 
are called generically “Men of the Unseen World ” 

(w-ill and at the head of which is the “Pole" 

(^Ja9)- Al-Jorj&ni in his Definitiones (ed. Fliigel, p. 266) 


describes the “ Guardians” or “Overseers” ruo as 
follows :—“They are those who have discovered the Inward 
Name so that they look into the hearts of men and discern 
secret thoughts, because for them veils are withdrawn 
from the faces of mysteries. And they are of three kinds:— 
Superior Souls, which are embodiments of [Divine] com¬ 
mands ; Inferior Souls, which are mundane; and Inter¬ 
mediate Souls, which are human essences. And in each 
one of them God (Exalted is He) hath a trust deposited 
which comprisetli mysteries divine and mundane. And 
they are [in number] three hundred.” Concerning the 

“ Helpers” (*1^) he says (p. 259):—“They are forty, and 
they are engaged in bearing the burdens of creatures, 
generally such accidents as human strength cannot cope 
with. And this [they do] by reason of their abundant 
natural pity and mercy, neither do they desist [therefrom] 
save for the sake of another, for no increase of advancement 
is [possible] to them save by this channel.” What is meant 
by the “flight” of these is, as I suppose, described in a 
passage of the 1 Aka idiish-ShVa of which this is a trans¬ 
lation :—“ And amongst them ” [i.e. the signs of the Return 
of the Inrim] “are the Men of the Unseen, who are thirty 
or forty persons who in a week traverse the whole surface 
of the earth, spending each day in a different region. 
Every Friday they appear before His Holiness [the Inrim 
Mahdf] for the Friday prayers.Then, when it is morning, 


304 


NOTE 0—CERTAIN SHIITE BELIEFS. 


they traverse the earth in the twinkling of an eye and 
appear before His Holiness, or else come riding upon a 
cloud and stand in attendance on Him.” 

6. The Conquest of the East and West which will be 
effected by the Imam Mahdf on his appearance, of which it 
is one of the signs, needs no detailed notice. 

7. The Mss of Antichrist. Concerning Anticlirist 
(Dajjal), and the ass on which he is mounted, the 
‘Aka idiish-Sht'a has the following passage:—“ The forty- 
sixth of the signs of the appearance [of the Imim Mahdl] 
is the coming forth of Antichrist. And the name of that 
accursed one is S&’id ibn Sayd. The traditions concerning 
him are various. Some imply that he has existed from the 
time of Adam until now, as it is related in a tradition that 
the Apostle of God went to one of the houses in Medina 
wherein was a babbling madman with his mother. The 
Prophet pointed him out to his companions and said, 

1 0 people, God hath not sent any prophet without filling 
his church with the fear of Antichrist, whom he has 
respited and left until your time. And this man shall 
come forth with a mountain of bread and a river of water; 
and he will appear in a time of famine. Most of his 
followers will be Jews, women, Arabs, and nomads. He will 
enter into all (piarters and regions of the earth save Mecca 
and its two mountains, and Medina and its two mountains. 
And whenever he comes forth he will claim to be God, 
although he is one-eyed and God is not one-eyed.’ And 
in some traditions it hath come down that he was born in 
the time of His Highness [the Prophet]; that he had a 
beard and spoke when he was born; that the Prophet went 
to his house ; that he claimed the rank of a prophet and 
said ‘ I am one sent of God’; that then His Highness [the 
Prophet] commanded an angel which was in the form of a 
great bird to carry him away and cast him into a well 
situated in one of the Jewish villages near Sajistdn or 
Isfahan; and that he is chained [there] till such time as he 
shall receive permission to come forth. And he has an ass 
whereof each step covers a mile (three miles being equal to 
one parasang), and on the body of his ass are white spots 


antichrist and sOFYAN. 


305 


like a leopard. Mow the characteristics of Antichrist are 
these:—tie right eve if crushed; hi? left eve if iu his 
forehead, and glitters as though it were the morning star, 
and in it if a piece of blood, so that it seems to be pervaded 
with blood; between his two eyes it is written that he is a 
misbeliever, so that everyone, whether learned or unlearned, 
can read it: he if a skilled magician, who. by his magic, 
descends into the oceans: with him travels the sun: before 
his face is a mountain of smoke, and behind his back is 
a white mountain, and through [his] magic it seemeth 
iu men's eyes that they are two mountains of water and 
bread, though in truth it is not so. but a mere juggle: he 
traverseth all oceans, and over whatsoever ocean or water he 
I” 5111ivc rh down and eometh forth no more till the 
Pay of Judgement: before him Satan dances, and the devils 
cause him and his ass to appear pleas:: g in men's eyes, and 
this is a mischief for the proving of mankind. And he 
erieth out so that the dwellers in the East and in the 
West, whether of Jinn or of mankind, hear his voice, and 
he saith. • 0 my friends. I am that God who created 
and fashioned the members and parts of the world; 1 
am that God who predestined the affairs of [His] servants 
and guided and directed mankind; I am your Supreme 
Lord. And most of his followers are women, Jews, bastards, 
and musicians. But when he eometh to Ay iLi-i-Ay'd. 
which is a mountain in Syria. His Highness the Ka’im 
shall slay him at the third hour on Friday, and shall 
cleanse the world of the tilth and foulness of tn.at Accursed 
One.’ Many other wonderful tonalities are attributed to 
the ass of Antichrist, as. for instance, that the .instance 
between its ears is a full mile, that each of its hairs 
gives forth ravishing strains of music, and the like, of 
which things the further enumeration appears to be un- 
protitabie and unnecessary. 

>. Ihc iipp~.--.irj; ice o/ Sc/i.an. In enumerating tone 
-inns which shall usher in the return of the Imam Mahon. 

the Akd'idu' sd- S 'a tirst mentions the appearance of $ cyan 
in these words:—"His name is Othman the son of Ataba 
: -he children o: Yaad ibn Mu awiya ibn Ab; Sofyan. 
He is a thick-'.: man with, an ill countenance, a face 

20 


B. 


306 NOTE P—EXECUTION OF “ JENAB-I-KUDDUS.” 

pitted with small-pox, a large head, and blue eyes. He 
has never rendered service to God, nor seen Mecca or 
Medina, and his eyes seem to squint. He will appear 
during the month of Rajab from the direction of Mecca in 
a desert devoid of water and grass, and will send his army, 
which will cause much ruin and act right foully, westward 
and towards Baghdad. He will destroy the region of 
Najaf the Most Noble, and will plunder Medina for three 
days. He will sojourn in Kufa, and will proclaim, ‘Who¬ 
soever shall bring the head of one of ‘All’s sectaries, to him 
mil I give a thousand gold pieces.’ Then men will yield 
one another into the hand of that Accursed One, for all 
the chiefs of that time are base-born. And the time of his 
empire shall be eight months, and in his hands are live 
cities:—Damascus, Homs, Falastin, Ardin, and Falzin. 
The decline of his dominion corresponds with the appear¬ 
ance of the triumph of the Truth, and a great number of 
his army shall sink down in BeydA, which is the name of a 
place near Medina.” A few pages further on in the same 
work the following passage occurs:—“At that time [i.e. at 
the time when the bearded woman Sa'ida and the crusader 
Mazid shall appear] a man shall come forth from the 
direction of Mecca whose name is Sofy&n ibn Harb. 
Perhaps he may be that same Sofy^n who has been pre¬ 
viously mentioned, whose dominion endureth eight months 
and continueth until the empire of the K&’im of the race 
of Muhammad doth appear. And perhaps Harb may be 
his father and ‘Ataba his grandfather.” 


NOTE P. 

The execution of Mull a Muhammad ‘AlI of BArfukush. 

When, in the summer of a.d. 1849, the remnant of the 
brave defenders of Sheykh Tabarsi, beguiled by the 
treacherous promises of Prince Mahdi-Kuli Mirz£, evacu¬ 
ated the fortress which they had held so long and so 
gallantly, and yielded themselves up to the besiegers, they 
were at first received with an apparent friendliness and 


CONDUCT OF THE SATDU’L-ULAMA. 


307 


even respect which served to lull them into a false security 
and to render easy the perfidious massacre wherein all but 
a few of them perished on the morrow of their surrender. 

From this massacre some of the B4bi chiefs were re¬ 
served to grace the Frince’s triumphal entry into Bfirfurush. 
Amongst these the Tamkh-i-Jadid mentions the follow¬ 
ing:—Mullh Muhammad 'All of Bhrfurush, called by the 
Baths “His Excellency the Most Holy” (Jenab-i-Kuddus ); 
Akfi Mlrzfi Muhammad Hasan, the brother of Mullfi 
Huseyn of Bushraweyh; Mullfi Muhammad S4dik of 
Khurfis&n ; I Fiji Mirzfi Muhammad Hasan of Khurdsan; 
Sheykh Ni'matu ’llfih of Arnul; Hfiji Naslr of Kazvin; 
Mulld Yfisuf of Ardabll; and Akd Seyyid ‘Abdu’l-'Azlm 
of Khiiy. 

Jenfih-i-Kuddus (for the sake of brevity I shall make 
use of the title in preference to the name of him who is the 
subject of this note) requested the Prince to send him to 
Teherfin there to undergo judgement before the Shdh. 
The Prince was at first disposed to grant this request, 
thinking, perhaps, that to bring so notable a captive into 
the Royal Presence might serve to obliterate in some 
measure the record of those repeated failures to which his 
unparalleled incapacity had given rise. But when the 
Sahdu’l-TJlamfi heard of this plan, and saw a possibility of 
his hated foe escaping from his clutches, he went at once 
to the Prince, and strongly represented to him the danger 
of allowing one so eloquent and so plausible to plead his 
cause before the King. These arguments were, according 
to the Tarikh-i-Jadid (from which these particulars are 
taken), hacked up by an offer to pay the Prince a sum of 
400 (or, as others say, of 1000) tumans on condition that 
Jen&b-i-Kuddiis should be surrendered unconditionally into 
his hands. To this arrangement the Prince, whether 
moved by the arguments or the tumans of the Sa‘idu’1- 
‘Ulamd, eventually consented, and JeuAb-i-Kuddus was 
delivered over to his inveterate enemy. 

The execution took place in the meyddn, or public 
square, of B4rfurtish. The Sahdu’l-'Ulamfi first cut off the 
ears of JenM-i-Kuddus and tortured him in other ways, 
and then killed him with the blow of an axe. One of the 

20—2 


308 NOTE P—EXECUTION OF “ JENAB-I-KUDDfjS.” 

Saldu’l-'Ulamd’s disciples theu severed the head from the 
lifeless body, and others poured naphtha over the corpse and 
set fire to it. The fire, however, as the B&bfs relate (for 
Subh-i-Ezel corroborates the Tdnkh-i-Jadid in this par¬ 
ticular), refused to burn the holy remains; and so the 
Sa‘ldu’l-‘Ulam& gave orders that the body should be cut in 
pieces, and these pieces cast far and wide. This was done, 
but, as H4jf Mfrzd JA.nf relates, certain BAbfs not known as 
such to their fellow-townsmen came at night, collected the 
scattered fragments, and buried them in an old ruined 
madrasa or college hard by. By this madrasa, as the 
B&bi historian relates, had .Temib-i-Kuddus once passed in 
the company of a friend with whom he was conversing on 
the transitorinoss of this world, and to it he had pointed 
to illustrate his words, saying, “This college, for instance, 
was once frequented, and is now deserted and neglected; 
a little while hence they will bury here some great man, 
and many will come to visit his grave, and again it will be 
frequented and thronged with people.” 

Jemib-i-Kuddiis is said to have foretold his death and 
the manner thereof to several other persons, including his 
wife and her mother; and Subh-i-Ezel told me that he 
had seen at Teheran a letter in his handwriting, taken 
from his pocket when he was buried, wherein the date and 
manner of his death were clearly set forth; also that he 
had previously to the siege of Sheykh Taharsf written a 
letter to MullA Huseyn of Bushraweyh wherein the follow¬ 
ing sentence occurred:— 

^ f T****** 1 t <***& ■ - 3 (jbT 

“It is as though I had buried myself in the earth with 
seventy righteous men.” This letter Subh-i-Ezel had copied 
at Baghdad. 

As for the Sa‘fdu’l-‘Ulam4, he did not escape the 
Divine vengeance ; for, as the Tctrikh-i-Jad'd relates, all 
the vital heat seemed to be withdrawn from his body, and 
even in the midst of summer he used to suffer so severely 
from cold that when he went to the mosque two chafing- 
dishes full of burning charcoal were carried with him and 


NOTE Q—KGRRATU’L-‘AYN. 


309 


placed on either side of him. Yet, in spite of these and 
the thick skin cloak which he wore, he could hardly remain 
long enough to perform his prayers, and used to hasten 
back as soon as he was able to his house, where, enveloped 
in wraps and covered with quilts, he would sit shivering 
over his hurst'. 

Concerning the writings of Jendb-i-Kuddus, see note 1 
at the foot of p. 30 supra. 


NOTE Q. 

Kurratu’l-‘Ayn. 

The appearance of such a woman as Kurratu’l-'Ayn is 
in any country and any age a rare phenomenon, but in such 
a country as Persia it is a prodigy—nay, almost a miracle. 
Alike in virtue of her marvellous beauty, her rare intel¬ 
lectual gifts, her fervid eloquence, her fearless devotion, and 
her glorious martyrdom, she stands forth incomparable and 
immortal amidst her countrywomen. Had the Bfibl religion 
no other claim to greatness, this were sufficient—that it 
produced a heroine like Kurratu’l-‘Ayn. 

In this note I do not propose to repeat facts with which 
everyone who has studied the subject is acquainted, neither 
shall I attempt to re-tell a tale which has been already set 
forth by Gobineau in language far more eloquent than I 
can command. My purpose is merely to add such new 
particulars as I have been able to glean from the Tdrtkh-i- 
Jadfd and from oral tradition. Before proceeding to do 
this, I wish once more to call attention to the graceful poem 
by Marie von Najnffijer whereof Kurratu’l-‘Ayn is the 
heroine (see supra p. 207). 

1 The kursi —much used by the Persians during winter—is, 
roughly speaking, like a large table with very short legs. A 
chafing-dish containing ignited charcoal is placed beneath it, as 
are also the legs of those who sit round it. With a good supply 
of quilts, pillows, and amusing books, it affords the means of 
passing a cold winter’s day very comfortably. 


310 


NOTE Q—KURRATU’L-'AYN. 


The following table, taken in conjunction with the 
remarks on pp. 197—198 supra, will sufficiently serve to 
indicate Kurratu’l-'Ayn’s family relationships:— 

Muhammad el-Burghdnl el-Kazvim. 

I 

i T 

Haji Mulld Muham- Haji Mulld Muham¬ 
mad Takl, called by mad Sdlih. 
the Shi‘ites Shahid- 
i-Thdlitk(‘ TheThird 
Martyr’). 

Mulld Muhammad. = Kurratu’l-‘Ayn. 

The following particulars are derived from the Tcirikh- 
i-Jadid. During the life of Hdji Seyyid Kdzim of Resht 
Kurratu’l-‘Ayn visited Kerbeld, where she became ac¬ 
quainted not only with Seyyid Kdzim himself, but with 
many of his chief followers, including Mulld Huseyn of 
Bushraweyh. When, on the death of Seyyid Kdzim, Mulld 
Huseyn set out for Shlrdz, Kurratu’l-‘Ayn wrote a letter to 
him begging that should he succeed in finding the spiritual 
guide whom they were expecting (see pp. 239—240 supra) 
he would at ouce inform her. This letter Mulld Huseyn 
on Iris conversion placed in the hands of the Bdb, who, 
recognizing the rare qualities and attainments of which it 
gave evidence, included its writer amongst the eighteen 

“Letters of the Living” ( j=- dhlwho composed the 

“ First Unity ” of the Bdbl hierarchy. 

KurratuT-‘Ayn continued for some time at Kerbeld, 
where, seated behind a curtain, she used to lecture and 
preach to the disciples of the late Seyyid Kdzim. The 
governor, becoming aware of this, wished to arrest her, hut 
she hastily quitted Kerbeld without a passport and went to 
Baghdad, where she proceeded directly to the house of the 
chief Mufti\ before whom she defended her creed and her 
conduct with great ability. The question whether she 
should be allowed to continue her teaching was submitted 
first to the Pdshd of Baghdad aud then to the central 
government, the result being that she was ordered to leave 


Hdjf Mulla ‘All, 
who embraced 
the Bdbl doc¬ 
trines. 


NOTE Q—KURRATU’L-'AYN. 


311 


Turkish territory. During her journey from Baghdad to 
Kirmhnshhh and Hamadfin she continued to preach, and 
made several converts to the B4bl faith, amongst these being 
Sheykh S4lih the Arab, Sheykh T4hir, Mull4 Ibrahim of 
Mahall4t, and Sheykh Sulthn the Arab. Certain of the 
B4bls, however, were at first disposed to regard her efforts 
with disapproval, and some of these even wrote to the B4b 
asking whether it was seemly for a woman to preach 
publicly to men. In reply the B4b not only sanctioned her 
preaching and applauded her zeal, but bestowed on her the 
title of Jenab-i-Tahira (“Her Excellency the Pure”), 
whereupon those who had been disposed to censure her 
expressed contrition and penitence, and her high position in 
the B4bl church became uncontested. 

From Hamadhn Kurratu’l-‘Ayn intended to go to 
Teherfin, hoping, it is said, to be able to convert Muham¬ 
mad Sh4h himself; but her father H4jl Mull4 Muhammad 
S4lih, being apprized of this plan, sent servants to intercept 
her and bring her home to Kazvln. Perhaps it was on her 
return thither that she was married to her cousin Mull4 
Muhammad the son of H4jl Mu] 14 Muhammad Takl, hut 
of the date when this marriage was contracted I can find 
no indication. At all events the marriage must have been 
a most unhappy one, for Mull4 Muhammad seems fully to 
have shared his father’s hatred of the Sheyklils and B4bls, 
and finally Kurratu’l-'Ayn refused to live with him any 
longer. 

The position of Kurratu’l-Ayn, sufficiently irksome and 
even precarious already, was rendered perilous in the 
highest degree by the death of her uncle at the hands of 
certain B4bls (see p. 198 supra). Some have hinted that 
Kurratu’l-‘Ayn was privy to this assassination, but of this 
there is absolutely no proof, and we may be sure that, had 
there been any evidence of her complicity, the Musulmhns 
would not have failed to make use of it to rid themselves 
of one who was •well known to be amongst the most zealous 
supporters of the B4b. As it was, she was brought before 
the governor of Kazvln, charged by her husband with 
complicity in the murder of his father, and acquitted. 
Several of the B4bls were arrested and tortured, until 
finally one—Mlrz4 S4lih of Shlr4z, according to the 


312 


NOTE Q—ICURRATtj’L-'AYN. 


Tdrfkh-i-Jadtd, Sdlih Tdhir according to Subh-i-Ezel— 
confessed that he, alone and unabetted, had compassed the 
death of the murdered mujtahid, in proof of which he 
described in detail how the murder had been committed, 
and where the blood-stained knife with which the deed was 
done might be found. This Sdlih was sent to Teherdn 
with several others suspected of complicity, but he succeeded 
in making his escape, fettered as £e was, to Mdzandardn, 
where he was subsequently killed at Sheykh Tabarsl. As 
to the others arrested, the Tdrikh-i-Jadid and Subh-i- 
Ezel are not completely in accord. Both agree, however, 
that Sheykh Sdlih the Arab and Mulld Ibrahim of Mahall&t 
(who, as we have already seen were amongst the first 
proselytes gained by Kurratu’l-'Ayn) were of their number. 
The first of these was killed at Teherdn ; the second was 
taken back to Kazvln, where, in company with another 
(Sheykh Tdhir according to the Tdrtkh-i-Jadfd, Hdjl 
Muhammad ‘All according to Subh-i-Ezel), he was cruelly 
done to death by the populace. These were the first 
Bdbls who were put to death in Persia. The Tdirikli-i- 
Jadid adds the name of another—an old man called Hdjl 
Asadu’lldh—who died of cold and fatigue during his 
conveyance to Teheran. 

Although KurratuT-‘Ayn had been acquitted of all 
share in her uncle’s death, it was clearly impossible for her 
to remain in Kazvln any longer, even had she desired to do 
so, which scarcely seems probable. She accordingly set 
out by way of Teher&n for Khurdsdn, and was present at 
the celebrated meeting of the Bdbl chiefs at Badasht (see 
Gobineau, pp. 180—184). From Badasht she turned back 
with Mulld Muhammad ‘All of Bdrfurush and his party 
towards Mdzandardn. At this point the narrative of the 
Tdrikh-i-Jadtd breaks off, neither is it, in spite of the 
author’s promise, again renewed ; while all other written 
histories are equally silent as to what befel Kurratu’l-‘Ayn 
from the time that she separated from Mull'd, Muhammad 
‘All and his followers to the time when she was brought 
captive to Teherdn and placed in the custody of Mahmhd 
Klidn the Kaldntar. From Subh-i-Ezel, however, I learned 
the following particulars. After separating from the Bdbls 
who went to form the garrison of Sheykh Tabarsl, Kurratu’l- 


HER EXECUTION. 


313 


‘Ayn went to Nfir, where she remained unmolested till the 
final suppression of the Mfizandarfin insurrection. She was 
then delivered up to the government authorities by the 
people of Nfir and sent to Teheran. On her arrival there 
she was brought before Nfisiru’d-Dfn Shfih, who, on seeing 
her, said:— 


I 


wAwl) will ^«.< I &^ I 

“l like her looks: leave her, and let her be.’ 


She was accordingly placed under the custody of Mah¬ 
mud Khfin the Kalantar, and in his house she remained 
till her execution in August a.d. 1852. Her imprisonment 
was not very rigorous, and she was occasionally seen by 
different Bfibfs under various pretexts. Her life, indeed, was 
in no jeopardy till the disastrous attempt on the Shfih’s life 
by certain Bfibfs (see Note T infra and pp. 49—50 supra) 
made the mere profession of the Bfibf faith a crime deserving 
not death only, but the most horrible tortures, and gave 
rise to that reign of terror which has been so vividly 
described by Gobineau (pp. 301—303), Lady Sheil (pp. 273 
—282), Polak (pp. 352—353), and Ussher (pp. 627—629). 
Even then KurratuT-‘Ayn might, by abjuring her faith, 
have escaped death, and exchanged glorious martyrdom and 
immortal fame for a few brief years of life; but this her 
noble spirit scorned to do. That she met the cruel fate 
reserved for her with “ superhuman fortitude ” is a fact to 
which Dr Polak, who actually witnessed her execution, 
testifies in the following words:—“ Ich war Zeuge von der 
Hinrichtimg der Kurret el ayn, die vom Kriegsminister und 
semen Adjutanten vollzogen icurde; die sckone Frau 
erduldete den langsamen Tod mit ubermenschlicher Starke,” 
In what manner death was inflicted I have not been able to 
learn. Gobineau says that she was burned, but that the 
executioner first strangled her; Subh-i-Ezel says that the 
accounts of her death are various, one being that she was 
strangled with the bowstring in the Bfigh-i-Il-Khfinf; 
some with whom I conversed in Persia stated that she was 
killed in the Bfigh-i-Lil^-zfir ; others that she was cast into 
a dry well in the garden of the palace called Nigdristdn, 


314 


NOTE Q—KURRATU’L-‘AYN. 


which well was then filled up with stones. However this 
may be, we have it on Polak’s authority that her death 
was painful and lingering, and that she met it as a heroine 
should do. 

I was anxious to discover from Subh-i-Ezel whether it 
was true, as has often been alleged, that Kurratu’l-‘Ayn 
discarded the veil. His reply, so far as I can remember, 
was as follows:—“ It is not true that she laid aside the 
veil. Sometimes, when carried away by her eloquence, she 
would allow it to slip down off her face, but she would 
always replace it after a few moments.” 

Kurratu’l-'Ayn’s fame as a poetess is great, but during 
my sojourn in Persia I only succeeded in obtaining three 
of the poems attributed to her, viz. two short but very 
beautiful ghazals and a long masnam. Of one of these 
ghazals I published the Persian text with a translation 
into English verse in my second paper on the B&bfs in the 
J. R. A. S. for 1889 (pp. 936—937 and 991). I now give 
the second, which, though its authorship is more disputed, 
certainly savours strongly of BAbf doctrines and modes of 
expression. 


ij J . ^ ^ ^ 'A-.-.JI _JJ 

C 

-*•■0 Jj. ^ J Owl 1 

% ^ to-** 3 _jji J j d.A. 0 " 

Jji J j y>- to ^ ol J ^ys 

1 lil to ^ ^ o ^ -9 j 


HER POETRY. 


315 


~ o ~ = [/ /- J ~ 

<J- C |_5"^ -5 •"■■^- 3 

/■ X 

ijj jjJ=> difl-i rt-jj (_x J l 4 _i^ ^ 4 >- 


LT J_A> i-ljCS""” 3 j> A l_iod~_3 

oLj^” (_)—>- ^ _jl ,_jAc ol* j 

(Jri 

f-> -^j ^ j a j ‘Hr A/?- 'o*^ u-*® ^ ¥ 

V ibjj ¥“'■ (‘^~ l - < _j-““-' 1 


^Lall sjJ^c ajj^S * 4^ 


(Translation.) 

“ The effulgence of thy face flashed forth and the rays of 
thy visage arose on high; 

Why lags the word ‘Am I not your Lord?’ ‘ Yea, that 
thou art’ let us make reply 1 . 

‘Am I not’s’ appeal from thy drum to greet what ‘ Yeas’ 
do the drums of devotion beat; 

At the gate of my heart I behold the feet and the tents 
of the host of calamity 2 . 

1 i.e. “ Why do you hesitate to lay claim to a divine nature 2 
AVere you to do so, all of us would admit your claim.” See 
Kur’dn vii. 171, and B. ii., pp. 917—918 and note. 

2 The following lines from a poem attributed to Nabil express 
a similar idea:— 

ijJ* A" 13j l^j> jAo y>- 

I ^ i_i—^ j At jj i 

“ If one should choose my path to go I will cry to him that 
he well may know 

That none shall escape from grief and woe who is once afflicted 
with love for me.” 


316 


NOTE Q—KURRATU’L-‘AYN. 


That fair moon’s love for me, I trow, is enough, for he 
laughed at the hail of woe, 

And exulting cried as he sank below, ‘ The Martyr of 
Kerbeld am I.’ 1 

When he heard my death-wail drear, for me he prepared, 
and arranged my gear for me, 

He advanced to lament at my bier for me, and o’er me 
wept right bitterly. 

What harm if thou with the fire of amaze should’st set my 
Sinai-heart ablaze 

Which thou first mad’st fast in a hundred ways but to 
shake and shatter so ruthlessly? 2 

To convene the guests to his feast of love all night from 
the angel-host above 

Peals forth this summons ineffable ‘ Hail, sorrow-stricken 
community! ’ 

Can a scale of the fish of amaze like thee aspire to sing of 
Being’s Sea? 

Sit still like Tdhira, hearkening to what the monster of 
‘No’ doth cry 3 .” 


1 i.e. Imdm Huseyn, with whom the Bdb repeatedly declares 
himself to be identical in essence. 

2 i.e. “You first strengthened my heart with knowledge, and 
inspired it with zeal and enthusiasm; then you crushed and 
subdued it with love. Were it not well if you would now 
kindle on it, as on Mount Sinai, that fire whence comes the cry 

dll kl J ‘Verily I am God 1 ?” Cf. Kur’dn xxviii. 30, and vii. 139. 

3 i.e. “How can you, who are but as a scale on some little 
fish which swims wonderingly in the vast expanses of the sea, 
speak fittingly of the Ocean of Being ? Sit still then, as I, 
Kurratu’l-‘Ayn ( Jenab-i-Tdhira ), do, and listen to the roar of the 
monster, whale, crocodile, or Leviathan which continually cries 

kl y\ <ul V ‘There is no God but me’.” Some versions of this 
poem have ^ ^ j ,*,. “Sit still like a parrot” &c. 

at the beginning of the second hemistich of this couplet. 


NOTE K—DERIVATIVE ATTRIBUTES. 


317 


NOTE R. 


On THE BaBI SYSTEM OF FORMING DERIVATIVES. 


One of the peculiarities of style especially affected by 
the Bdb is the emp^unent of all theoretically possible 
derivatives of roots, whether sanctioned by usage or not. 
The number of these derivative forms in Arabic is great, 
but of course no single root is susceptible to all the modifi¬ 
cations which they represent. Custom and authority, as 
well as the intrinsic meaning of each root, limit the number 
of actual derivates employed in any given case to a 
fractional part of those theoretically possible. It would 
appear that the Bab believed some special talismanic virtue 
to reside in each possible form of every Attribute of God. 
Thus in the Persian Beyin ( Vahid, viii., ck. 2), he says:— 


y M»- y dSCil^l j\ dSCl >_)[j ^jl ^aacLo 


jl aAL oLjI iS"” dd ,U 


Nl da 


daj2>. Qj j\ djJ A) j\ if jAA djt?cjl 

Ijljta- dfi j A.a^; [jG 

j j ~X>-j dU-_j __j A>-_»l JAo Cdda-a Ob Aj[y7»-J 

7 

^ Jo- 9 A>- aja a Jb- ada 


1 B reads jj. 

3 B substitutes j ji. 
5 B reads £*» OL. 
7 B reads y. 


7 My MS. reads y .. 

4 B reads zJ *. 

6 B transposes and 


318 


NOTE R—DERIVATIVE ATTRIBUTES. 


“ The quintessence of this chapter is this, that inasmuch 
as the degrees of Unity are fulfilled in seven letters, which 
are the Letters of Affirmation, therefore it hath been ordained 
that, according to the Mystery of the Truth, none shall 
inherit from the dead save seven persons, even as one can 
invoke God by every Attribute in seven degrees of that 
Attribute, as Unissimus, Unator, Unicus, Unus, Unatns, 
Unificiens, Unificatus'.” 

The ‘ Book of Names ’ (L^l of which, according 

to Subh-i-Ezel’s assertion, the extracts from a Bdhf MS. 
published by Dorn in the Bulletin de l’Academie Imperiale 
de St Petersbourg for December 22nd, 1864, form part, 
appears to consist in great measure of these permutations 2 . 

With regard to the derivatives formed as described in 

the text from the root Behd ('L^j), the following passage, 
occurring in a MS. presented to me by Subh-i-Ezel and 
called by him jjiA “the Five States" or “Grades” 

(because it contains specimens of each of the five styles 
into which the B4b divides his writings, concerning which 
see infra, Note U) may serve to give us some idea of what 
the letter in question must have been like. No attempt 
has been made to translate what is hardly capable of 
translation. 


L 'loll 

<131 <13 ij 

^vi ^y\ vi All v «Li ^y\ ^y\ «Li ^ 

VI dJI V <131 VI ill V <1JI 


1 I trust that I may be pardoned the use of such words. 
Only in this way can one convey some idea of the original to the 
European reader unacquainted with Arabic. 

2 See p. 202 supra. 


NOTE S—THE BAB’S LAST MOMENTS. 


319 


aJI V <0)1 ^Jl ^1 VI ill V <0)1 U :JI 
Ol ^ ». J I I^j oL^j <0! uLjJl Jb-I^ll VI 

of! ^ J of! o®^! *V* ^ 5 ^fV. ^ J J 

oL^> <o)l ^ U ^ jVI ^ olj^Jl al^j oL^.> 

joi jj! ’’l^jl t5i jJ.'T” 0^9 ^^1 <0)1 ^9 iLlo -iLa 

*■—■*A<>. V I |_2 , V w)>"l dji^jl jLkL l^Alo ol 

* Ljt; L&L 1 ijij oA* Ail L^Lj ^ ^ j u^l i V j 

This short extract, containing over a dozen derivatives 
of the root in question, not more than half of which, if so 
many, could be supported by previous authority, will suffice 
to give an idea of this style of composition. 


NOTE S. 

The Bab’s last night on earth. 

The account of the Bdb’s condemnation and execution 
contained in the Tdnkh-i-Jadtd agrees in the main with 
the narratives of Gobineau and Kazem-Beg, but adds some 
curious particulars concerning what passed in the prison on 
the eve of the martyrdom. Of this passage I here give a 
translation. 

“They imprisoned him who was athirst for the draught 
of martyrdom [i.e. the Bdb] for three days [after sentence 
of death was passed], along with Akd Seyyid Huseyn [of 
Yezd] the amanuensis, and Akd Seyyid Hasan, -which twain 


320 


NOTE S—THE BAB’S LAST MOMENTS. 


were brothers wont to pass their time for the most part in 
the B&b’s presence. 

“Now before this event the B&b had, for the completion 
of the proof, graciously sent by means of Akd Seyyid 
Ahmad of Tabriz known as ‘the scribe”, MirzA Muhammad 
‘Ali of Tabriz, and two other persons, sundry epistles con¬ 
taining exhortations, admonitions, and declarations of his 
truth to the doctors of Tabriz. At the time when these 
epistles were delivered one of the doctors had desired to 
show contempt and disrespect towards the blessed epistle. 
These forerunners of the field of courage put forward the 
foot of bravery to prevent this, and, their dispute ending 
in strife, were incarcerated in the prison of His Highness 
Prince Hamz<5 MirzA ; where, as is currently reported, two 
of them would seem to have been poisoned, though, ac¬ 
cording to one account, the Prince released them unknown 
to the doctors. But Mirzd Muhammad ‘Ali was incar¬ 
cerated till such time as the B&b was brought to the prison, 
and there obtained the honour of meeting him. 

“On the very eve of the day whereon they martyred 
that gem of created essences [i.e. the BM] he said to his 
companions, ‘Tomorrow they will martyr me with bound¬ 
less shame and dishonour. Let one of you now arise and 
slay me, so that I may not have to suffer all this dishonour 
and humiliation from the adversaries; for it is far pleasanter 
for me to be slain by the hand of friends than by the hands 
of enemies.’ His companions, with expressions of sorrow 
and grief, sought to excuse themselves, save Mfrzd Muham¬ 
mad ‘All, who at once made as though he would obey the 
command. His comrades, however, anxiously seized his 
hand, crying, ‘Such boldness and rashness is not the 
characteristic of true service.’ ‘This act of mine,’ replied 

1 The author appears to have confounded this Akd Seyyid 
Ahmad of Tabriz (who, according to Subh-i-Ezel’s statement, 
disappeared altogether and broke off all communications with 
the B&bis after his escape from Tabriz) with Mulld ‘Abdu’l- 
Karim of Kazvin, who was commonly known amongst the B&bis 
by the name of Mirzd, Ahmad-i-AAri& (‘the Scribe’). There 
seems to be no doubt that they were quite distinct persons, and 
that the title K&tib is wrongly applied to the Ahmad here 
spoken of. Cf. note 2 on p. 41 supra. 


NOTE S—THE EAB’.S LAST MOMENTS. 


321 


he, ‘is not due to boldness, but rather to an excessive 
obedience, being [undertaken] in conformity with bis com¬ 
mand. After carrying out the order of His Highness [the 
Bib], 1 will assuredly pour out my own life also at his 
feet.’ His Highness [the Bib] smiled, and, applauding his 
faithful devotion and sincere belief, said, 1 Tomorrow, when 
they ask of you, renounce [me] and conceal your belief, for 
thus is the command of God now laid upon you, especially 
on Aki Seyyid Huseyn, with whom are the gems of know¬ 
ledge 1 , which he must convey to the people of God and the 
seekers after the way of true guidance.’ The [Bib's other] 
companions agreed, but Mirzi Muhammad ‘All fell at the 
feet of His Highness [the Bib] and began to entreat and 
implore, thus praying with utmost self-abasement‘De¬ 
prive not this thy faithful servant of the blessing of thy 
presence, and graciously grant to this worthless dust and 
mote permission to lay down his life.’ How much soever 
His Highness [the Bib] would have prevented him, he 
continued to pray, crave, and entreat, until [the Bib], 
through the exceeding kindness of his disposition, con¬ 
sented. 

“Now when a little while had elapsed after the rising 
of the sun, they brought them without cloak [‘«6«] or 
coat \kabd\, and having [only] their vests on their breasts 
and their nightcaps on their heads, to the governor’s palace, 

where it was decreed that they should be shot. Aki 
Seyyid Huseyn the amanuensis and Aki Seyyid Hasan his 
brother renounced [the Bib] as they had been commanded, 
and were released, and Aki Seyyid Huseyn bestowed the 
gems of knowledge treasured in his bosom upon such as 
sought for them and were worthy of them, and, according 
to his instructions, conveyed and carried certain secrets of 
the religion to those who were entitled to receive them. 
He [subsequently] attained to the rank of martyrdom in 
Teherin.” (Here follows the account of the execution of 
the Bib and Mirzi Muhammad ‘All, which, as it agrees 
substantially with that given in the present work and in 
other published accounts, I omit.) 

1 i.e. the Bab’s last words, behests, and directions. 

B. 21 


322 


NOTE S—THE BAB’S LAST MOMENTS. 


According to Subh-i-Ezel, the Bfib signified his _ ac¬ 
ceptance of Mi'rzfi Muhammad ‘All’s request that he might 
share in the glorious martyrdom of his Master in these 
words 

“ Verily Muhammad ‘All [shall be] with us in Paradise.” 

If these words be authentic (and there is no reason for 
doubting that they are) they offer a most striking analogy 
to one of the last utterances of Jesus Christ (Luke xxiii. 43). 

Whether the narrative of the TnriH-i-Jadul be alto¬ 
gether worthy of credence or not, there seems no reason to 
doubt that Seyyid Huseyn recanted, not, as Kazem-Beg 
asserts (i. pp. 375—377), from a craven dread of death, 
but in accordance with the command of his master, the 
object of this command being the preservation of the last 
words and writings of the Bfib. When we consider how 
rare was the fear of death and torture amongst the BJbls, 
and how readily Seyyid Huseyn himself met his fate two 
years later (cf. Gobineau, pp. 300—301), it seems most 
improbable that he of all the Bfibls, he, the chosen com¬ 
panion, amanuensis, and intimate friend of the BJb, should 
exhibit so craven a fear. Amongst the Bfibls, at least, no 
stigma of even a temporary and bitterly repented failure 
of courage, such as is supposed by Gobineau, lies on the 
memory of Seyyid Huseyn. It is at least certain that he 
continued to correspond with Suleyman Khfiu and the 
other Bfibl chiefs after the Bfib’s execution. Some of these 

letters, wherein he alludes to Tabriz as (‘the 

Place of the Blow ’) and (‘ the Place of Martyrdom ’), 

were shewn to me by Subh-i-Ezel. From these letters 
and Subh-i-Ezel’s statements it would appear that Seyyid 
Huseyn was kept in custody for at any rate some con¬ 
siderable portion of the two years by which he survived his 
master. 

Of the touching and beautiful letter written by MlrzJ. 
Muhammad ‘All from his prison to his elder brother the 
text will be found at p. 992 and the translation at p. 938 
of my second paper on the BJin's in the J. R.A. 8. for 1889. 


NOTE T—ATTEMPT ON THE SHAH’S LIFE. 323 


NOTE T. 


The attempt on the Shah’s life and the massacre 
of Teheran. 

The attempted assassination of Ndsiru’d-Din Shhh on 
Sunday August 15tli, 1852, though very lightly touched on 
in the present work, is so fully described by the two 
Musulmhn historians, Lady Sheil, Gobineau, Polak, Kazem- 
Beg and others, that I shall confine myself here to re¬ 
producing the substance of what was told me about this 
event by the nephew of one of the three Bdbls actually 
engaged in the plot. This account naturally exhibits the 
Shah’s behaviour in a less heroic light than do the Musul- 
mdn chroniclers Sipihr and Rizd-Kuli Khin, 1 give it only 
for what it is worth, thinking that here, as elsewhere, the 
truth may lie between the two extremes. 

According to this account, then, the Babi conspirators 
were originally seven in number, but four of them drew 
back at the last moment from the projected enterprise. 
The three who actually made the attempt were Mulld 
Fathu’lldh of Kum, Sddik of Zanjdn, and Mirzh Muhammad 
of Nfriz 1 . These three approached the Shdh as he was 
riding out to the chase somewhat in advance of his retinue 
from the Palace of Niydvardn. The Shdh, supposing that 
they had some petition to prefer, allowed them to draw 
near without suspicion. When within a short distance of 
him one of the three Bdbls (apparently the Xlrfzf) drew' a 
pistol from his pocket and fired at the Slidli. Mulli 


1 According to the Xasikhu’t- Ta u-ankh the conspirators were 
originally twelve in number. Of these, the names of four only— 
Sadik of Zanjan, Mlrza ‘Abdu’l-Wahhdb of Shiraz, Mulla Fathu’- 
llah of Kum, and Muhammad Bakir of Najafdbad—are given. It 
is subsequently stated that all save three drew back at the last, 
and that of these three one was “a man of Nlrlz” (presumably 
the same Mlrza Muhammad mentioned above). Lady Sheil 
[op. cit., p. 274) says that four Bdbls took part in the attack. 

21—2 


324 NOTE T—ATTEMPT ON THE SHAH’S LIFE. 


Fathu’lMh of Kum then threw himself upon the King and 
dragged him from his horse on to the ground, meaning, to 
cut his throat 1 . The Shdh, having almost fainted with 
terror, was already incapable of offering any further resist¬ 
ance, when a farrctsh (still li ving, and, thanks to the service 
rendered by him on that day, in the enjoyment of a good 
pension) came up, struck the would-be assassin in the 
mouth, and cut down one of the other two conspirators. 
A moment after, one of the mustawfts arrived on the spot 
and threw himself as a shield on the SMli’s body. The 
Slifih, imagining that it was another assassin, cried out, 
“ Why do you wish to kill me? What harm have I done?” 
“ It is I,” answered the mustawfi, “ all danger is past. 
Fear not.” All danger was in fact over. As soon as it 
was evident that the attempt had failed and that the SMh 
still lived, other retainers, who had at first hung back-, 
hastened forward to bear a part in the seizure of the two 
surviving assassins (for S&dik of Zanj&n had already been 
killed). The two captives, on being interrogated, declared 
that they were B&bls, and that they had made the attempt 
with a view to avenging the blood of their Master. In 
spite of their frank confession, it was at first believed that 
the object of the attempt was political, and that it had been 
instigated by some rival claimant to the throne. S&dik of 
Zanj&n, who was killed on the spot, was described by 
Subh-i-Ezel as a youth of short stature with very small 
eyes. He was the servant of Mulld Sheykh ‘All {‘Jendb-i- 
‘AzCm’) from whom he is said to have received the pistol 
with which he was armed. According to Subh-i-Ezel he 
alone fired at and wounded the Sh4h, but the Nasikhut- 
Tawurtkh states that each of the three assassins discharged 
his pistol. 

With regard to the Shfih’s behaviour, it may not be 
altogether uninstructive to compare with the above account 
the following passage from the Ndsikhnt-Taivdrikh :— 
“ The dust of perturbation settled not on the skirt of the 

1 According to Gobineau (p. 282) the conspirators did not 
succeed in unhorsing the King. See also p. 289 of the same 
work. Lady Sheil, however, {op. cit., p. 274) says that the Sh&h 
was dragged to the ground. 

2 Cf. Polak’s Persian , vol. i. p. 352. 


NOTE T—ATTEMPT ON THE SHAH’S LIFE. 325 

patience and self-control of the King, whose elemental 
material God the Creator had leavened with the liver 
of the lion, the heart of Ardashfr, the ardour of Sh&pur, 
and the majesty of Timtir ; nor did the pellucid stream of 
his mind become troubled by the foulness and tilth of these 
events. Neither did he urge his horse to leap aside, nor 
did he utter a word indicative of alarm or consternation. 
He kept his place on his poplar-wood saddle like some 
mountain of massive rocks,- and, notwithstanding that 
wound, turned not aside in any direction, and carried not 
his hand to his hurt, so that those present in his escort 
knew not that any hurt had befallen the king or that 
he had suffered any wound.” 

KA’Ani of ShirAz, the most famous and the most talented 
of modern Persian poets, has two fomdas in celebration of 
the Shih’s escape from this danger. These will be found 
respectively at p. 26 and p. 254 of the edition of his works 
published at TeherAn in a.h. 1302 (a.d. 1884). Although 
they add no new facts to the sum of our knowledge, they 
agree with the authorities already cited in stating that the 
attempt took place at the end of the month of ShawwAl, 
and that those actually concerned therein were three in 
number. Thus in the first kasida KA’Ani says 


^ i j j' 

ja La! _o 


2 i_] y** j>-\ 

obc 


>jj A 


J' 


j\J j dliLo 


Ar 5 


o.. 


Vv 


“ At the end of ShawwAl the King rode forth to hunt, 
Heaven by his reins and the sun beside his stirrup, 
When suddenly three persons sprang forth from ambush, 
and swiftly hurled 

Fiery darts towards the King, the Lord of [men’s] necks.” 


326 NOTE T—ATTEMPT ON THE SHAH’S LIFE. 


So in the second kasida he says:— 

js" xs. ^ ,j ;j JL 'jJ'y- j~\ 

_j\ Lj LJOC^ |^&LwU 

^y Ojl>* j&l j L j&Li 

Xsljj O ^ ^ li ^ 


1 ft 1 ^ " 3 L. ’ v il ^ ^v—1 j. m 1 

“ Henceforth keep the end of Shawwdl as a festival every 
year; 

Invite the servants of the King from every quarter. 

Ho, say, ‘ Come, 0 beloved! Go, 0 anchorite! Give, 0 
treasurer! ’ 

Ho, say, ‘ Give, 0 cup-bearer ! Play, 0 harper ! Sing, 0 
minstrel! ’ 

Name it ‘the Feast of Sacrifice of the King,’ and, like 
sheep', 

Cut off the heads of enemies in the path of the victorious 
King.” 

Between the attempt on the Shdh’s life and the fearful 
vengeance wherewith it was visited on the B4bls a whole 
month appears to have elapsed, for the executions are 
stated by the Ndsikhlit-Taiv'trtkh to have taken place 
on Wednesday the salkh ( i.e. the last day) of Zi’l-Ka‘da 
a.h. 1268 (September 15th, a.d. 1852). It must not be 
supposed, however, that this month was idly spent by the 
government officials. Messengers were at once despatched 


1 The custom of shewing honour to a great man returning 
home from a journey by decapitating a sheep and throwing the 
bleeding head across his path is still maintained in Persia. 


ARRESTS AND TRIALS. 


327 


to all parts of the kingdom to publish the failure of the 
plot and the safety of the Shdh. The police of Teller,In, 
instructed to make a diligent search for members of the 
obnoxious sect', succeeded in surprising a gathering of a 
dozen Bdbls in the house of Haji Snleym&n Kh&n 2 the son 
of Yahyd KMn of Tabriz, and other arrests soon raised the 
total number of captives to nearly forty. Some few of 
these were able to prove their innocence in a manner 
which satisfied even their judges, little disposed as they 
were towards acquittals. Amongst these the Ndsikku’t- 
Tavurikh mentions five, to wit:—Mirzd, Huseyn ‘All of 
N ur [Belli’n’lHli]; Mirzi Suleymin-KuK; Mirzi Mahmud, 
nephew of the above; Aki ‘Abdu’llih, the son of Aki 
Muhammad Ja'far; and Mirzh Jawid of Khurisin; all of 
whom were committed to prison pending further investi¬ 
gations. 

The majority of those arrested, however, were con¬ 
demned to death; and, according to the list given in the 
Nasikhu t-Tawdrikh, twenty-eight of them expiated their 
faith with their lives. I say ‘ their faith ’ advisedly, for 
some of those doomed to death, such as Kurratu’]-‘Ayn 
and Aki Seyyid Huseyn of Yezd, had long been in strict 
confinement, and could not by any possibility have been 
concemed in the conspiracy. Others, such as Mulli Huseyn 
of Khuris&n, were convicted solely on the evidence of Bibi 
writings found on their persons or in their houses. When 
a verdict of ‘ Not Guilty ’ bids fair to jeopardize the judge’s 
reputation for loyalty, if not to place him in actual peril, 
acquittals in such a country as Persia are hard to win. 

Weak as the evidence of criminality was in many cases, 
there could be little hope of averting the impending 
butchery; for so audacious an attempt demanded a com¬ 
mensurate revenge calculated to strike terror into the 
hearts of all. Efforts were nevertheless made by some of 
the European representatives at the Persian court to induce 
the Shih to content himself with the execution of the 
condemned without subjecting them to the tortures which 
there was but too much reason to apprehend would be 

1 Of. Gobineau, p. 284 et snq. 

■ Xankhv't- Tatntrikh. 


NOTE T—THE MASSACRE 


:>ffs 

suporadded to the death-penalty'. These efforts were fruit¬ 
less. The ShAli’s alarm and auger, far from diminishing, 
were constantly stimulated by the representations of Ids 
ministers, who succeeded in convincing him of the existence 
of a wide-spread disaffection which could only he checked 
by the most stringent measures". Nor was this sense of 
dread confined to the King: it reacted on those who had 
inspired it, until, in (Jobineau’a words, “On ne sava.it plus 
snr quel terrain on se trouvait, et, faute de realites qu’on 
nc saisissait pas, qui fuyaient devant toutes los reeherches, 
on voyait error an tour de soi one multitude de. fantdmes. 

L’epouvante devint gfnerale an camp du roi_En face, on 

avait une quarantaiim de captifs muets ; mais par derriere, 
savait-on ce qui s’agitait?”“ 

Then, because of this great fear, was devised that 
devilish scheme whereby all classes of society should bo 
made to share in the bloodshed of that fatal day. It was 
suggested that if the responsibility for the doom of the 
captives rested solely on the Shith, the Prime Minister, or 
the ordinary administrators of the law, these would become 
thereafter targets for the vengeance of the B&bls. If, on 
the other hand, a partition of the prisoners were made 
amongst the different classes; if a representative body of 
each of these classes wore made responsible for the execution 
of one or more Babfs; and if it. were further signified to 
the persons thus forced to act the part of executioners that, 
the Sloth would be able to estimate their loyalty to himself 
by the manner in which they disposed of their victims 1 * 3 4 5 , 
then all classes, being equally partakers in the blood of the 
slain, would be equally exposed to the retaliation of the 
survivors, from whom they would be therefore effectually 
and permanently alienated, while at the same time the 
Sh&li himself would avoid incurring the odium of the 
massacre. Such were the “Machiavellian means”''adopted 
for the extirpation of the supposed conspirators. 

Of the victims of that day the Nthihluft-Tairartlli 

1 Lady Shell's (tlitnpxex of Life and Manner* in /’nrm'ji, p. 276. 

a Polak’s I'erxini, vol. I. p. 352. 

3 tloliincau, p. 290. 

4 Gobincau, p. 292. 

5 Polak’s I'ursien, vol. i. p. 352. 


OF TEHERAN. 


329 


gives a complete list, which 1 here append. This list I read 
over to Subh-i-Ezel. The comments thereon made by him 
are added in square brackets. 

(1) MnllA Sheykh ‘All (“ Jmdh-i-Azhn”) was killed 
by the ‘Ulamu. 

(2) Seyyid Hasan KhurAsAnf was hacked iti pieces by 
the Princes. 

(3) MullA Zeynu’l-'Abidfn of Yezd was killed by 
the Mustaujis. [The Mustawft’ul-memalik (Secretary of 
State), unwilling to shed blood, shut his eyes and fired his 
gun in the air, while another Mustaufi named Ibrahim of 
Nur only touched the prisoner with his penknife, leaving 
the bloody work to others less scrupulous. MullA Zeynu’l- 
‘Abidin had succeeded once in escaping from his pursuers 
at Kum by throwing a handful of dust in their eyes.] 

"(4) MullA Huseyn of KhurAsAn was killed by the 
Nizamnl-Mulk, MfrzA Sa'id KhAn, ami the employes of 
the Foreign Office. [He had held no communication with 
HAjf SuleymAn KhAn or the other chief BAbfs at Teller An, 
where he had but recently rented a house. A fragment of 
BAbf writing found in his house was the sole ground where¬ 
on he was convicted.] 

(5) MirzA ‘Abdn T-WahhAb of ShirAz [‘a youth of 
good understanding’] was killed by Ja'far-Kuli Khan the 
Prime Minister’s brother, and his sons MirzA ‘Ali KhAn, 
MusA KhAn, and Zu’l-FikAr KhAn. 

(6) MullA Fathu’llAh of Kum, the son of MullA ‘Ali 
Sahhdf who had fired the shot which wounded the King, 
was killed by HAji ‘Ali KhAn the Hujibu'd-Dauia and his 
famishes. Several incisions were made in his body, and in 
these lighted candles were inserted. After he had been 
tortured in this fashion for some time, the HAjibu’d-Dawla 
shot him in the back, and he was then hacked in pieces by 
the famishes with knives. His execution took place at 
NiyAvarAn. [Subh-i-Ezel confirmed the fact that he 
suffered torture by lighted candles inserted in wounds 
inflicted on his body, but asserted that he, together with 
HAjf SuleymAn KhAn, was sawn in two.] 

(7) Sheykh ‘AbbAs of TeherAn was killed by the 
KhAns and nobles. [According to Subh-i-Ezel, however, 
he was suffered to escape privily.] 


330 


NOTE T—THE MASSACRE 


(8) Muhammad Bhkir of Najaffib&d (near Isfahan), 
who had, on his own confession, taken an active part in the 
insurrections of M&zandardn and Zanj&n, was killed by the 
pish-khidmats (pages in waiting). 

(9) Muhammad Takl of Slu'r&z was delivered over to 
the Mtr-dkkfir (Master of the Horse) and the attendants 
of the Royal Stables. These first nailed iron horse-shoes 
on his feet, and then, in the words of the Musulm&n 
historian, “broke up his head and body with clubs and 
nails.” 

(10) Muhammad of NajaffibMl was killed by the 
Eshik-dkdst-bdsM, the Jarcht-bmhr , the NascikchUbcisht, 
and their attendants. 

(11) Mlrz4 Muhammad of Nlriz, who had fought for 
the BMh cause at Hlrlz, Sheykh Tabarsi, and ZanjMn 1 , was 
killed by Mhzh Muhammad Kh4n the Sar-kisMk (captain 
of the guard) and the Yuz-bdshts (centurions). 

(12) Muhammad ‘All of NajaffibM was delivered over 
to the artillerymen. They first plucked out his eyes, and 
then blew him from the mouth of a gun. 

(13) Ak& Seyyid Huseyn of Yezd (see preceding note, 
pp. 319—322) was killed by ‘Aziz lih&n Ajudan-bashi, and 
the brigadier-generals, colonels, captains, and other officers. 

(14) Akii Mahdi of K&sh&n (see note 1 on p. 46 supra) 
was slain by the far rashes. 

(15) Mirz<4 Nabi of Danffivand [a youth about twenty- 
one years of age] was sent to the College (Dane’ l-funun) of 
Teherhn, by the professors and students of which he was 
torn in pieces. 

(16) Mi'rza Rafi‘ of Nur [a relation of Subli-i-Ezel’s, 
aged about fifty years, and noted for his skill in calli¬ 
graphy] was killed by the cavalry. 

(17) Mirz& Mahmud of Kazvin was hewn in pieces 
with daggers and knives by the men of the camel-artillery 
(zamb urakcluyd n). 

(18) Huseyn of Mfldm, called by the Bhbis “ Abu ‘Ab- 
di ’llah,” was slain by the soldiers with spears. [According 

1 As the risings at Zanj&n and Niriz were almost simultaneous, 
though the former was not suppressed for two months after the 
termination of the latter, it would appear very improbable that 
any one person could have taken an active part in both. 


OF TEHERAN. 


331 


to Subh-i-Ezel, Huseyn of Mil&n acted most discreditably, 
being at once the most turbulent and eager for mischief 
and the most pusillanimous of those who professed to 
follow the BAb. When he came to Teheran from Tabriz, he 
took up his abode in the house of H&ji Suleyman Kh&n. 
While resident there, he began to advance various claims 
to spiritual authority, first declaring himself to be a re¬ 
incarnation of the Im&m Huseyn, and then “ He whom God 
shall manifest,” whose coming the B&b had foretold. A 
considerable number of persons became his disciples, and, 
encouraged by this success, he seems to have meditated 
some act of violence, which was, however, discovered and 
frustrated by Subh-i-Ezel. He had a brother named 
■Ja'far, who gave himself out as “ King of Baghdad.” 
Huseyn of Mfldu, when arrested, would have saved himself 
by recanting and disclaiming all fellowship with the Bdbis, 
but, while he was under examination, a child came in, and 
mockingly greeted him with the words “ Es-selamu ‘aley- 
kum, yd Imam Huseyn ” (“Peace be upon you, 0 Innfm 
Huseyn!”). This sufficed to secure his conviction. It is 
worth noting that three other persons 1 besides Huseyn of 
Mi'ldn advanced vain claims to supreme authority in the 
B^bf church, to wit, Mfrzd Asadu’Mh of Tabriz surnamed 
Deyydn (see Gobineau, pp. 277—278); Seyyid Huseyn of 
Hindiy&n near Muhammara, who gathered round him 
about forty disciples, and who, though not recognized or 
accredited by the B&bl chiefs, continued to send greetings 
to them while they were in exile at Baghdad ; and Sheykh 
Ismail, believed to be still alive, who subsequently with¬ 
drew the claim which he had advanced.] 

(19) MullA ‘Abdu’l-Karfm of Kazvlu (called by the 
B&bls “ Mfrzt Ahmad-i -Kdtib” \ see note 2 on p. 41 supra) 
was killed by the artillerymen. 

(20) Lutf-‘Alf of Shfr&z was put to death by the royal 
footmen. 

(21) Xajaf of Kharnsa was delivered over to the people 
(if the city, who “ with sticks and stones crimsoned the 
earth with his blood.” 

1 But see Xote tV infra, where, on the authority of the 
Ezell controversial work called Hasht Bihisht, other pretenders 
are mentioned. 


332 NOTE T—THE MASSACRE 

(22) Hdji Mirzd Jhni of Kish&n, the merchant, was 
delivered over to Akh Mahdi the chief of the merchants 
(Maliku’t-tujjdr), and the cither merchants and shop-keepers 
of the city, “ each of whom inflicted a wound on him until 
he perished.” [According to Subh-i-Ezel, Hap MirzJ .Mm' 
took refuge in the sanctuary of SMh ‘Abdn’l-'Azim, which 
is situated about four miles south of Teheran. The 
sanctuary was, however, not respected in his case, and 
he was dragged forth. In compensation for this violation 
of the holy place the SMh plated or replated the roof of 
the shrine with gold. Of Hdji Mirzh JAid's death Subh-i- 
Ezel gave a different version, according to which he was 
strangled with the bowstring. After he was let down, 
being supposed to be dead, he half raised himself, opened 
his eyes, gazed at his executioners, and then fell back dead. 
He had three brothers, two of whom wore also BAbis. Of 
these two, one, HAji MfrzA IsmA'il, died in Teheran. The 
other, HAji MirzA Ahmad, was killed in Baghdad by 
certain BehA’is 1 , he being one of those who refused to 
transfer their allegiance from Subh-i-Ezel to Belli. The 
Tdrtkh-i-Jctdtd makes frequent mention of HAji MirzA 
Jinf, and repeatedly quotes from a history of the BAbi 
movement which he wrote.] 

(23) Hasan of Khamsa was slain by Nasru’llAh KhAn 
the superintendent of the royal kitchen and Ins myrmidons. 

(24) Muhammad BAkir of KuhpAy5 was slain by the 
KAjAr chiefs with their swords. 

(25) The body of SAdik of ZanjAn, who was slain, as 
above narrated, while attacking the ShAh, was cut into 
several pieces, which were suspended from the different 
gates of TeherAn. 

(26) HAji SuleymAn KMn, the son of YahyA IvMn of 
Tabriz, and— 

(27) KAsim of Niriz, who regarded himself as the 
successor of Seyyid YahyA of DArAb, were, by command of 
AkA Hasan the deputy-chief of the farrashes, wounded in 
many parts of their bodies, and in these wounds lighted 
candles were inserted. The two unfortunate men were 
thus paraded through the streets and bazaars of the city to 

1 See Note W infra. 


OF TEHERAN. 


333 


the sound of minstrelsy, while dust and ashes were hurled 
upon them by the spectators. After being made to traverse 
a great distance in this fashion, they were led out of the 
city, and sawn asunder into four quarters outside the Shhh 
‘Abdu’l-'Azi'm gate by the farrashes of the gaol. Their 
mangled remains were then attached to the city gates. 
[Vfimbhy (Wanderungen und Erlebnisse in Persien, Pest, 
1867, p. 299) gives a quite different account of Suleymhu 
Khan’s martyrdom, which runs as follows :■—“ Suleiman 
Chan, ein wohl-beleibter Mann, hatte zuerst vier Schnitte 
in die Brust bekommeu, in welche brennende Kerzen 
gesteckt warden und man fuhrte ihu so lange im Bazar 
herum, bis das Wachs der Kerzen von den Flainmen ver- 
zehrt war und der Docht sich spater am herausfliessenden 
Fett des Delinquenteu nahren musste. Darauf wurde ihm 
gltihende schwere Hufeisen auf die nackten Fusssohlen 
angeschlagen und aufs Keue wurde er henun geftthrt, bis 
man ihm endlich alle Zahne vom Munde herausriss und in 
der Form eines Halbmondes auf den Schadel einschlug. Da 
starb er erst.” The extraordinary heroism with which 
Suleyman Kh.in bore these frightful tortures is notorious, 
and I have repeatedly heard it related how he ceased not 
during the long agony which he endured to testify his joy 
that he should be accounted worthy to suffer martyrdom 
for his Master’s cause. He even sang and recited verses of 
poetry, amongst them the following ;— 


jL-i jl j j I jL ^>aJ j L 

“ I have returned ! I have returned! 1 have come by the 
way of Shtrdz! 

I have come with winsome airs and graces! Such is the 
lover’s madness! ” 

“ Why do you not dance,” asked the executioners 
mockingly, “since you find death so pleasant?” “Dance!” 
cried Suleyman Khkn— 


334 


NOTE T—THE MASSACRE OF TEHERAN. 


j\i J CAo db ^ a 3 L ^ l>- 5 db 

C-jjJ ‘iiLa 

“ ‘ In one hand the wine-cup, in one hand the tresses of 
the Friend— 

Such a dance in the midst of the market-place is my 
desire!’ ”] 

(28) Last but not least amongst the victims of that 
fatal day was the beautiful and accomplished Kurratu’l- 
‘Ayn, who had been imprisoned for two or three years 
previously in the house of Mahmud Kb.An the Kaluntar. 
Concerning her life and death, see Note Q, supra. 

Gobineau (pp. 301—302) and Vdmbdry (op. cit., pp. 
299—300) both assert that amongst the martyrs of that 
day were women and children, who rivalled the men in the 
fortitude wherewith they met death; but of this assertion 
(except as regards Kurratu’l-‘Ayn) I have been unable to 
obtain any corroborative evidence from Musulm&n or Bdbi 
tradition. The crimes and cruelties which that day beheld 
are black enough without going beyond even the Muham¬ 
madan chronicles, and one would be reluctant to add to 
them, unless compelled to do so by convincing evidence. 
The wife of Hdji Suleymdn Khdn would appear from 
Subh-i-Ezel’s account to have been in imminent peril, 
but by eating flies she induced so violent an attack of 
vomiting that her gaolers, believing her to be stricken with 
a mortal sickness, released her. Two women related to 
Subh-i-Ezel were arrested and imprisoned for a while in 
the house of Mahmud Khdn the Ivaldntar, but were subse¬ 
quently sent back to their homes at Nur. A large reward 
was offered for the apprehension of Subh-i-Ezel (then 
residing at Nfir), who actually conversed for some time 
with one of those sent out to arrest him without being 
recognized. 


NOTE U—WRITINGS OF THE BAB. 


335 


NOTE U. 

Writings of the Bab and Subh-i-Ezel. 

On October 11th, 1889, I received a letter from Captain 
Young (dated September 30th) enclosing a letter and sundry 
other documents from Subh-i-Ezel. Amongst these docu¬ 
ments was a list of some of the writings of the Bdb and 
Subh-i-Ezel written out by the latter. Although this list 
does not profess to be complete, comprising only such 
works as were carried by the Bdbf exiles to Baghdad, and 
although, in the absence of detailed information about the 
works enumerated therein, it is incapable of affording much 
help in the identification of Bdbf mss., I here append 
a translation of it, in the hope that it may serve iu some 
measure to throw light on the very imperfectly explored 
bibliography of the sect. Explanatory notes of my own are 
added in scpiare brackets. 

[Writings of the Bab.] 

“ What teas collected of the boohs of the Beydn of the 
remnant left from Persia, which was taken away in 
Baghdad, carried off by the relations of this humble one 
[i.e. Subh-i-Ezel]. 

[1] Commentary on the Kur’dn in the style of the 
Kur’dn, complete, 1 vol. 

[2] Answers and Commentaries ( .^li' 9 dja.^0’ 

1 vol. - 

[3] Commentary on the Kur’dn in the fashion of the 
verses of the Kur’dn, complete, 1 vol. 

[4] The Five Grades Afff), 1 vol. [A ms. of 

this work was forwarded to me by Subh-i-Ezel with the 
letter above referred to. It comprises 395 pages of 14 lines 
each, and contains selections of pieces in each of the “ five 


336 


NOTE U—WRITINGS OF THE BAB. 


grades” or “styles” employed by the Biib, the nature of 
which will be briefly discussed at the end of this note.] 

[5] Verses (oil), 2 vols. 

[6] The Book of Recompense (' j>- 2 vols. [A 

small fragment of this work, transcribed by Subh-i-Ezel, is 
in my possession. One peculiarity thereof is the occurrence 
of groups of verses differing from one another only in one or 
two words. By combining the first letters of the divergent 
words or clauses proper names are formed, so that the 
book would appear to be in part a cabbalistic register of the 
names of believers. In the following specimen, which will 
render the nature of this procedure more clear, the catch¬ 
words are indicated by a line drawn over them:— 


^ 3 3 u I i_ f wtaL-l 4jLi & 

^ \ ^je oL ^ djl a j&\ *Lij L <jjl 

4jui ois""" ^ Lo j <3 Oj*U) 

3 *_ ' ' j* ^ i ^ 3 <3^" '*- J 3jV~ ^ 

l**-l4i)l oi5*"” aLAai *L Lj oLT j Lo j 

3 j Cj Lo ^3 A^Jaul \ J # Lie 

4J0 ^ ^ L> J^e Lie <Uil ^ L^J Ls 


4jj # L >j oi5^" ^ L^i*j L ^ ji\ j 

3 ^rr 5 . ^ 3 3 i_ > c^\a i/Ji flo 


THE BOOK OF RECOMPENSE. 


337 


<xjl ^ <ul Js ^ UjJ9 UjIj <juI oL 5" 
^ ^»<o! I_i olS^ ^3 

4 J 3 I ol5^ U^Zj L ^ ^j£>ji)l\ j} q! ^jh\L\ 4ji ^ 
U ^ ji\ ^ uJJL <u _© # U.xJ Q.C ^_qL> 1 Ii 

*uj ^ ^ 1 (iiu ii 4jji oir ^ u.,gij 

<uj ^ # U*Ja] I4jjl olS^ ^ Ug*j U j J»Si\ 3 

li <iil jl_S" 3 L^-'.i L _j ^ cLjl oaLkl 

1 ^^ .'.* La ^ _^VI pij}&...ll l^J 41) 3 % L a ^iaC v &ial 

# \aJo£ l^j Ij 41)1 olS"” 3 

By combining the first letters of the catch-words in the 
above extract (after discarding the definite article, in cases 

where this is prefixed) we get the name _J_kd I Sc 
Hfijf ‘Abdu’l-Muttalib. Similarly the verses immediately 

succeeding these give the name i_5Jy-<> JU^ t _^>-l=— Hfijf 
Muhammad Mahdf.] 

[7] Supplications and Visitations (dJjL j 3 diU-Lo), 

1 vol. [In my second article on the Bfibts in the J.R.A.S. 
for 1889, I described one of these “ Visitations ” under 
the name Ziy&rat-ndme (pp. 894—902, 1000), and at¬ 
tempted to prove its identity with Gobineau’s “Journal du 
Pelerinage ” and with a Bfbl ms. described by Mirza 
Kazem-Beg (ii, pp. 498—502). At that time I was not 
aware that the Bdb had composed more than one work 

B. 22 


338 


NOTE U—WRITINGS OF THE BAB. 


of this character. I subsequently enquired of Subh-i-Ezel 
as to the authenticity of this work. In reply he wrote as 
follows:—“ The ‘ Book of Visitation ’ (Kitab-i-ziydrat) 
which you alluded to is from His Highness the Point 
(i.e. the B4b), and was after the ‘ Manifestation,’ as its 
contents testify. He wrote many ‘ Visitations ’: it is not 
limited to one. But there is also a ‘Book of Visitations’ 
by myself. That is in another style, but there is in this 
land but a small portion thereof.” Some of these ‘ Visita¬ 
tions’ are included in the ms. of the ‘Five Grades’ mentioned 
above, amongst them being one designed for the use of 
pilgrims visiting the graves of the martyrs who fell at 
Sheykh Tabarsl. This, according to Subh-i-Ezel, was also 
composed by the B4b.] 

[8] Prayers 1 vol. 

[9] Various Grades Ojii), unbound, 1 [vol.]. 

[10] Writings of the Scribe [probably Ak4 Seyyid 
Huseyn of Yezd or Mulld ‘Abdu’l-Karim of Iyazvin] com¬ 
prising ivhat was revealed at Shiraz and Isfahan and 
during the journey of the Pilgrimage [to Mecca], 3 vols. 

[11] The Best of Stories ( ( j^ai!l 1 vol. [This 

work, better known as the ‘ Commentary on the Sura of 
Joseph,’ is so called in allusion to Kur’&n xii, 3, where the 
history of Joseph is thus characterized. Specimens of it have 
been published by Baron Eosen in vol. i of the Collections 
Scientifiques de Vlnstitut des Langues Orientates (St Peters¬ 
burg, 1877), pp. 179—191. Some description of it, based 
on the extracts published by Baron Eosen, is given at 
pp. 904—909 of my second article on the Babls. See also 
p. 3 supra, and note 3 thereon.] 

[12] The Book of Names (L.J ,_>LS^), comprising 361 

Names, amongst which is the Name ‘ Musa 11: in ’ (‘the 
Calmer’), incomplete, 2 vols. [The extracts from a B4bl 
ms. in the St Petersburg collection published by Dorn in the 
Bulletin de VAcademie Imperiale de St Petersbourg of 
Dec. 22nd, 1864, were pronounced by Subh-i-Ezel, to whose 
inspection I submitted them, to belong to this work.] 


NOTE U-WRITINGS OF THE BAB. 


339 


[13] Writings of the deceased Aka Seyyid Jfuseyn 
[of Yezd], original copy, 2 vols. 

[14] Various Grades (diJaS OfA>), 1 vol. 

[15] The Book of Figures (J^Lfc v_)bS^), 1 vol. 

[See note 1 on p. 42 supra , Mirza Kazem-Beg, ii, p. 498, 
and Gobineau, p. 498, note 1.] 


[16] Sundry (as yi^), 1 vol. 

[17] Things appertaining to Jendh-i-Sheykh-i- Aziin 
[Mulld Sheykh ‘All, see Note T, p. 329 supra], 3 vols., 
together with his effects. 


[18] Copies and originals of writings 
IfALjj), tied up together in four bundles. 


[19] Beyan, 1 vol. [Concerning the application of this 
name see below.] 

[20] Prayers (dblj^j), 1 vol. 

[21] Prayers and Visitations (oljLj 3 oUo), 
1 vol. 


[22] The Best of Stories [see No. 11 supra], and another 

Beydn ivhich is missing ajii V ^ oLj)> 

2 [vols.]. 

[23] The Five Grades [see No. 4 supra], 1 vol. 


[24] Sundry (ksyCa)' 

[25] Another Book, 1 vol. 

“Besides what was destroyed in Persia, some of which 
never reached [my] hand, and what went to foreign lands 
and was therefore ignored in [making out the catalogue of] 
the trust. What was promulgated [by the Bd,b] at first 
in Shlr&z and other places [included] the Book of seven 

hundred Suras jUala* ._>L_S^); the Book of the 

Proof sic); the Book of the two Sanctu- 

22—2 


340 


NOTE U—WRITINGS OF SUBH-I-EZEL. 


dries *da^s>); the [Book of] Justice (dJjc); the 

Prayer of the two alifs (or, of the two thousand .', 

Epistles of the earlier period of the dispensation (J_jl ^ lj.ll 
^>l), each of which was sent to a different destination; 
the Commentary on the ‘ Bismi’lldh’ (aLw) and 

the Commentary on [Sura ciii of the Kur’fin beginning] 
‘Wa’l-'asr’ (see supra, p. 11). 

“As to what appertained to [i.e. was composed by] the 


‘Name of the Last’ ( .4-1 *»j) [by which title, as Subh-i- 


Bzel explained elsewhere, Mullfi Muhammad ‘All of Bhr- 
furhsh, called by the BfiWs Jenctb-i-Kuddus, is intended], 
but little remained in [my] hands. All the rest passed 
into the hands of strangers. Amongst other things the 
Commentary on [the opening chapter of the Kur’4n entitled 
‘Al-]Hamd,’ [the eloquence of] which was beyond the power 
of man, was entirely destroyed, and no copy remained in 
[my] possession.” 


[Writings of Subh-i-Ezel.] 

“ What appertained, to this humble one [i.e. Subh-i- 
Ezel], apart from that whereof the existence in Persia is 
unknown [i.e. besides what may exist in Persia unknown to 
me]. 

[1] The Book of Light (jy yifD, 1 vol. [See 

Gobineau, pp. 312—313; B. ii, pp. 939—942; and M. C. 
Huart’s Note sur trois ouvrages Bdbis in the Journal 
Asiatique for 1887 (s^rie viii, tome x, pp. 133—144). 
M. Huart identified the first of the three works which 
he described with the Book of Light mentioned by Gobineau, 
but did not fail to observe the discrepancy in size between 
the “ assez gros in-folio ” of the latter writer and the small 
volume which was the subject of his own description. The 
solution of the difficulty appears to be that there are two 
separate works bearing the same name, both composed by 


THE BOOK OF LIGHT.” 


341 


Subh-i-Ezel. I forwarded an abstract of M. Huart’s de¬ 
scription of the supposed Book of Light to Subh-i-Ezel, who 
replied as follows :—“ The Book of Light is by this humble 
one [i.e. by myself], but there are two Lights, a first and a 
second. If it be the second, it will be worthy of attentive 
perusal, and ^ill be a voluminous work. Some of the 
names of the suras which you wrote are from the Book of 
Light, provided that there be not therein interpolations 
of enemies, such as my relatives have effected in some 
cases, inserting their own calumnies in certain epistles; 
though to him who hath knowledge of God this will be 
apparent.” The Book of Light mentioned in this list is, as 
I ascertained during my sojourn at Famagusta, the larger 
of the two works bearing this name.] 


[2] The Highest Heaven 1 vol. [Of this work 

Subh-i-Ezel mentioned two copies, one in Persia, and one 
(the same here mentioned) in the hands of the Behd’fs at 
Acre.] 

[3] Miscellaneous (aal'.^), 1 vol. 

[4] The Wakeful, &c. (iAA„^), 1 vol. [A copy extant 
in Persia.] 

[5] Writings of the Scribe (._.1 IS Js 2 vols. 


‘the Scribe,” as subsequently explained by Subh-i- 
3zel, MuM ‘Abdu’l-Karfm of Kazvfu is intended. See 
note 2 on p. 41 suprai] 

[6] Tracts, &c., of [the nature of] Visitations 
Oljl; j j), 1 large vol. 

7 Another book, miscellaneous, 1 vol. 

8] Commentary on the Kasida, and other miscellaneous 

writings Ula£ a i.. ), unbound, 1 vol. 

[9] [Book of] Light, unbound, 1 vol. [The same as 
No. 1 supra.\ 


[10] Verses (oLJ), 1 vol. 

“Besides what may exist unknown [to me] in other 


342 NOTE U—FATE OF THE BAB’S WRITINGS. 


lands, and entirely apart from [what exists in] the prison of 
this land. All these books and epistles have disappeared, 
save what have remained in other countries and the few 
which remain in this land.” 

In the letter accompanying this list Subh-i-Ezel wrote 
as follows concerning the fate of the Bhb’s works generally 
and of those above enumerated in particular:— 

“ As to what you asked concerning the existence of 
certain epistles, it is even as you have heard, leaving out of 
account that which from first to last passed into the hands 
of strangers, whereof no copy was preserved. At the time 
of the martyrdom [of the B4b] at Tabriz, as they wrote 
from thence, many of the original writings passed into the 
hands of persons belonging to the country of your Excellency 
or to Russia, amongst these being even autograph writings 
of His Highness the Point [i.e. the B&bl. Search is neces¬ 
sary, for to read the originals is difficult. If this humble 
one be applied to, copies thereof will be sent. What I 
myself arranged and copied out while at Baghdad, and 
what was commanded to be collected of previous and subse¬ 
quent [writings] until the Day of Martyrdom [of the Bhb], 
was nigh upon thirty volumes of bound books. I myself 
wrote them with my own hand, and up to the present time 
I have written many. The originals and copies of these, 
together with what was in the writing of others, sundry 
other [books] written in proof of this religion by certain 
learned friends 1 , and what I myself wrote and compiled, 
amounted to numerous volumes, as [recorded in] the list 
thereof [which] I have sent. For some years all of these 
were in a certain place in the hands of a friend as a 
trust. Afterwards they were deposited in another place 2 . 

1 In answer to a question as to the nature and authorship of 
the works here alluded to, Subh-i-Ezel informed me that the Bdb 
declared it to be a meritorious action for each of his followers 
who was competent thereunto to compose a treatise in defence of 
the Faith. Many such treatises were accordingly composed by 
the more learned B&bls, amongst them being one by Jendb-i- 
‘Azim (Mulla Sheykh ‘All), and one called ofU*™, (‘The seven 
hundred’) by Jend.b-i-Tdh.ira (Kurratu’l-‘Ayn). 

2 One of these depositaries, as I subsequently learned from 


THE FIVE GRADES. 


343 


Eventually I entrusted them to my own relatives 1 , [in 
whose keeping] they were preserved for a while; for, inas¬ 
much as the friends of this recluse [i.e. myself] had attained 
unto martyrdom through the equity and justice of the 
oppressors of the age, who consider themselves as seekers 
after truth and just men, there was no resource but that 
this humble one [i.e. myself] should make his relatives his 
trustees. So did this humble one; and whatever [was 
mine] of books and epistles was [deposited] in their house. 
The vicissitudes of the world so fell out that these also 
unsheathed the sword of hatred and wrought what they 
would. They cruelly put to the sword the remnant of [my] 
friends who stood firm' 2 , and, making strenuous efforts, got 
into their hands such of the books of His Highness the 
Point as were obtainable, with the idea of destroying them, 
and [thereby] rendering their own works more attractive. 
They also carried off my trust [i.e. the books above referred 
to committed to their care], and fell not short in anything 
which can be effected by foes.” 

As to the meaning of the word Beydn, Subh-i-Ezel 
writes in another passage of the same letter as follows:— 

“But in the Beycin different grades O are 

observed. The first grade is like [i.e. in the style of] 
previous [sacred] books; the second [is] of the nature of 

supplications and prayers {Cj'yzy * oU-!h>); the third [is] 

the grade of homilies wherein he had regard to 

clearness and eloquence; the fourth [comprises] scientific 

treatises (d-Je Oyf), commentaries, and answers to en- 


Subh-i-Ezel, was Aka Seyyid .Jawad, who died lately at Kirman. 
The other was a certain merchant of great -wealth whom I cannot 
more particularly designate. 

1 By his ‘relatives’ Subh-i-Ezel means his half-brother 
Beha’u’llah and those of his kindred -who followed him. I never 
heard Subh-i-Ezel allude to Beha’u’llah and his followers by name. 
When he spoke of them at all (which he did but rarely) it was as 
his ‘ relatives,’ the ‘ people at Acre,’ or the ‘ Mlrzd’ls.’ 

2 See Note W infra. 


344 


NOTE U—THE Bab’s WRITINGS. 


(|uirers; the fifth [comprises what is written] in the Persian 
language, which is [in substance] identical with the afore¬ 
mentioned grades, ‘for that all this is watered with one 
water’.” 

This statement of what is meant by the term Beydn is 
(with the exception of some slight differences in the 
arrangement of the ‘grades’) fully corroborated by the 
Persian Beydn, which, at the beginning of Vahid iii, ch. 17, 
has the following passage:— 


jL il i diaflj jlil JS'”" ^1 

Jbt) ^ iA(LL 4 . 1^1 ^j! 

^liLo ^ Juu ^ J dj^jl 

Iai 


djul j di-<Jc j Juu ^ djlli dSLS^ 

di-^a l>- dSLSi^ dcw« J I9 OLktS*"" ^iio Juti & 

* OlflSeLuutj j\ LI u a& JjI J j 


“ The substance of this chapter is this, that all the 
writings of the Point [i.e. the Bdb] are named Beydn. 
But this name is, in its primary nature, peculiar to verses 
[i.e. verses written in Arabic in the style of the Kur’dn]; 
then it is uttered in its secondary nature in regard to 
supplications; then in its tertiary nature in regard to 
commentaries; then in its quaternary nature in regard to 
scientific treatises; then in its quinary nature it is used in 
regard to Persian words [i.e. writings and discourses]. But 
properly speaking this name [of Beydn] is peculiar to verses, 
and [is applicable] to nought else.” 

Again in Vdhid vi, ch. 1, the following passage occurs:— 


I yfj ^ aJo-j cJjLI y u5[)lLI dJ j\ oL> 


MEANING OF THE TERM “ BEYAN.’ 


345 


V 1 jAw * 1 uJ V } 6^ 4£ 

O^Uol Ajj^jLi Ag-«.<?-.>- ^3 ^ <Olil ^Jc 

3^ 3 oLiJo” ^1 j Of clL) 3 

^i cLI 4ujm j\$ oUSCI” 

|J_jl JA iS^ ^h»-La9 l_fi <t>-^S^"I 

jil^j OjJ*- O-J JfiA'.a y>~\ J4 C*-<i 

'^' ^ Awj y_i ij ^ a 


“ The name Began is, in its primary nature, applied to 
verses alone, for they are the chiefest proof and greatest 
argument, which point not save unto God alone. But in 
its secondary nature it is applied to supplications; in its 
tertiary [nature] to commentaries; in its quaternary [nature] 
to scientific treatises; and in its quinary [nature] to Persian 
words. But all [these] are mentioned in the shadow of 
[i.e. as subsidiary or subordinate to] verses, for, although 
that mysterious eloquence which is apparent in the first 
[grade] is also observable [or, if we adopt B’s reading, 
latent ] in the last, yet, since all cannot understand, they 
[i.e. the lower grades] are not mentioned [as a proof].” 

From all this it follows that, although the book generally 
known as the Persian Beydn is a definite work of limited 
extent, we can no longer employ the term Arabic Beydn in 
an equally definite sense. As Subh-i-Ezel states in another 
letter, as a rule only those books which were composed by the 
Bhb during the earlier part of his mission received special 
names, while at a later date all that he ‘uttered’ or 
‘revealed’ was named collectively Beydn (‘Utterance’ or 
‘ Revelation ’). Some of these ‘ utterances ’ (such as the 

1 B reads jy~°. 


346 


NOTE U—THE BAB’S WRITINGS. 


‘ verses ’ recited by the Bab before his judges at Tabriz, 
concerning which see Gobineau, pp. 261—262) can hardly 
have been preserved at all, much less were all ever collected 
into a single work, though, according to Subh-i-Ezel, a 
selection in nineteen volumes was compiled, or ordered to 
be compiled, during the Bab’s lifetime. Gobineau, with 
his usual acumen, appears to have clearly apprehended this 
peculiar and elastic use of the term Beyan, for he says 
(p. 311):—“Le mot Biyyan, une fois employ^ par le Bab, 
lui parnt convenir tr&s-bien pour designer la sphhre d’iddes 
dans laquelle sa pensile se mouvait, et il le donna dbs lors 
pour titre h tout ce qu’il composa.” When, therefore, he 
speaks of “ a Beyan written in Persian, which is not the 
commentary on the first Beydn written in Arabic,” and of 
“ a third Beydn, likewise composed by the first Bab,” 
he apparently intends merely to signalize certain specially 
noteworthy parts of that almost limitless mass of religious 
literature emanating from the Bab which is known col¬ 
lectively as the Beyan. 

From what has been said it is evident that the short 
list of the Bab’s works which I gave at the end of my 
second article on the Babfs in the J. R. A. A. for 1889 
(pp. 1000—1002) requires much alteration both in the way 
of correction and extension. The sum total of the Bab’s 
writings would appear, both from the Persian Beyan and 
from the T&rikh-i-Jadid, to have been enormous; and, 
though much of this mass of literature perished, much is 
still preserved in Persia and elsewhere in the East. Quite 
recently I received from Subh-i-Ezel mss. of the Commentary 
on the 8uratu’l-‘asr (see supra, j>. 11, and B. ii, p. 912) 
and the Commentary on the Suratu’l-Bakara (see B. ii, 
pp. 902 -903, 912), which had been brought from Persia 
to Cyprus during the present year (1890). Of the genuine¬ 
ness of these mss. I entertain no doubt. Four other mss. of 
different works composed by the Bab (amongst which are 
included the Commentaries on the Suras called Kawthar 
and Yusuf) were brought to Cyprus at the same time, but 
of these I have not yet obtained copies 1 . Of the Sura-i- 

1 Since writing the above I have received two of those four 
mss. One of them is the commentary on the Stiratu l-Kawthar 


NOTE V—"HE WHOM GOD SHALL MANIFEST.” 347 


Yusuf at least two copies are preserved in Europe, one 
(numbered Or. 3539) in the British Museum, and one (fully 
described by Baron Rosen at pp. 179—191 of vol. i of the 
Collections Scientifiques &c .) at St. Petersburg. 


NOTE V. 


Texts prom the Persian Beyan illustrating the Bab’s 
VIEW OF HIS RELATION TO ‘ HlM WHOM GOD SHALL 
MANIFEST.’ 

(i) The whole Beyin revolves round the saying of 
‘ Him whom God shall manifest.’ 

[ Vahid iii, ch. 3.] 


A3 J jUl ol . '1 Ml Jt>-1 yj 111 1 t_»L1I 

oK" L & iJ * 3 > mLl= 

La y 4hl (J y+vJ (J yS (J y>- (3- OuLLa A3 ^ja y 


a! y3 J y>- ^3 mils A3 y aV_jl dill 

jL .Aa Aiol ^L) jJjI La A ^p-l _J y{ Ja 

y\ y y\ jic AjT Alii a yf-^ fjf Kl 


above mentioned. It contains 227 pages, and is dated Zi’l-Hijjd 
4th, a.h. 1296 (Nov. 19, a.d. 1879). The other, a much larger 
work, is named by Subh-i-Ezel “ Commentary on the Names ” 

(,UVl )• 

1 B omits. 2 B omits. 

3 Omitted in my own MS. and B, but supplied from the por¬ 
tion of the text published by Baron Rosen (MSIS. Persons, p. 14). 

4 B reads «VjI. 5 B reads 


348 


NOTE V—RELATION OF THE BAB 


. , SI »* I -.1 A . r _ . ,: -VI"'. ,M 


“ The third chapter of the third Vahid. Concerning 
this, that the Began and whosoever is therein revolve round 
the saying of Him whom God shall manifest , even as the 
Alif\_ i.e. the Gospel, Injtl ] and whosoever ivas therein re¬ 
volved round the saying of Muhammad the, Apostle of God , 
and as that which God revealed unto him at first and who¬ 
soever was therein revolved round that which he said at the 
period of his later manifestation. The quintessence of this 
chapter is this, that the gaze of the Bey&n is not extended 
save towards Him whom God shall manifest, for none but 
He hath raised or doth raise it up, even as none but He 
hath sent or doth send it down. And the Beyhn and such 
as are believers therein yearn more after Him than the 
yearning of any lover after his beloved.” 


(ii) A thousand perusals of the Bey&n are not equal 
to the perusal of one verse of what shall 
be revealed by ‘ Him whom God 
shall manifest.’ 

[ Vahid v, ch. 8.] 


if' J>- j Je OU 

Cjffi f' I vib 1 djjl a hi 

Cij'fj lj6L.J A-Svjl jl 0—1 Jfj' Af 


1 B reads j^.. 2 B omits. 

3 B reads > ^ J=-. 


4 B reads ■*!. 


TO “HIM WHOM GOD SHALL MANIFEST.” 349 


“ I swear by the Most Holy Essence of God (Glorious 
and Splendid is He !) that in the day of the manifestation 
of Him whom God shall manifest if one should hear a 
single verse from Him and recite it, it is better than that 
he should recite the BeyAn a thousand times.” 

[The same assertion is repeated in slightly different 
words in Vahid vi, ch. 6.] 


(iii) The BeyAn is to day in the stage of seed, but in the 
day of ‘Him whom God shall manifest’ it will 
arrive at the degree of fruition. 

[Vahid ii, ch. 7. The passage referred to will be 
found in Note C at pp. 224—225]. 


(iv) All the splendour of the BeyAn is ‘ He whom 
God shall manifest.’ 

[ Vahid iii, ch. 14.] 


j\ J J S' O-ul Oil! oL> I^J 


® j jjii _${; oLI 

“All the splendour \Beha\ of the BeyAn is He whom 
God shall manifest. All mercy be on him who believeth, 
and all chastisement on him who believeth not in Him.” 


NOTE W. 

MirzA YahyA “Subh-i-Ezel.” 

After the BAb himself, BehA’u’llAh and Subh-i-Ezel are 
without doubt the most important figures in the history of 
BAbfism. To the words and deeds of the former a large 

1 B inserts y,, 


350 NOTE W—M1RZA YAHYA “ SUBH-I-EZEL.” 

portion of the present work is devoted, while the latter, 
when mentioned, is spoken of slightingly as a mere “man 
of straw.” One whose knowledge of B&bi history should be 
limited to the account given in this Traveller s Narrative 
would, therefore, by no means properly apprehend the 
importance of the part actually played by Subh-i-Ezel. In 
my opinion it is proved beyond all doubt that the B&b ere 
his death chose him as his successor, duly appointing him 
as such by the form of words which I published at pp. 
996—997 of my second paper on the Bfibis in the J.R.A.S. 
for 1889, and that during the period which elapsed from 
the B4b’s death till the advancement of BeM’u’lHh’s 
claim to be “He whom God shall manifest” (i.e. from 
1850 to 1864 at any rate) he was recognized by all the 
Bfibis as their spiritual chief. Even now the number of his 
followers, though small in comparison to that of the Behfi’is, 
is considerable ; and since, in addition to all this, the old 
Bfibf doctrines and traditions, which have undergone con¬ 
siderable modification at the hands of Beh&’u’llith, are 
preserved intact by Subh-i-Ezel, I have considered it in¬ 
cumbent on me to embody in a separate note all the more 
important facts relating to him which I have been able to 
ascertain, together with a complete account of the B4bis 
exiled to Cyprus based on the most authentic documents. 

The sources from which my information is derived are, 
broadly speaking, four in number, as follows :— 

(1) Letters received from Subh-i-Ezel himself between 
August 1889 and the present time, the correspondence still 
continuing. In only one or two of these letters, however, 
does he speak of his own adventures and circumstances 
with any approach to freedom. 

(2) Conversations between Captain Young or myself 
on the one hand and Subh-i-Ezel or his sons on the other. 
In the numerous and protracted interviews which I had 
with Subh-i-Ezel between March 22nd and April 4th, 1890, 
I was able to recur for my own satisfaction to almost every 
point which the preliminary enquiries kindly undertaken 
by Captain Young had first elicited. 

(3) Official documents relative to the exiles preserved 
in the archives of the Cyprus government. Sir Henry 
Bulwer, with a kindness and courtesy for which I cannot 


MATERIALS FOR HIS BIOGRAPHY. 


351 


sufficiently express my gratitude, permitted me freely to 
inspect and copy all the more important of these documents, 
and, with one exception, to make use of the information 
therein contained, as has been set forth in detail in the 
Introduction. 

(4) A bulky MS. of a hitherto unknown Ezell contro¬ 
versial work entitled Hasht Bihisht (“ The Eight Paradises ”), 
which I was fortunate enough to obtain a few days ago 
(February 2nd, 1891) from a learned Ezell resident in 
Constantinople. The whole of this work is not at present 
in my possession, 10 fasciculi (160 pp.) out of the middle 
having unfortunately fallen into the hands of the Philistines 
after they had been written out by the scribe. The original 
MS. is, however, in safe keeping, and in the course of a 
month or two I hope to receive a fresh transcript of the 
missing portion, which extends from p. 128 to p. 329 
inclusive 1 . The whole work contains nearly 450 pp., and 
deals chiefly with the philosophical basis of Babiism, its 
superiority to other religions, and the proofs of its divine 
origin; but a great deal of information is also given about 
the history, especially the later history, of the movement. 
The account given of the schism which separated the 
Behd’ls from the Ezells is, especially when taken in con¬ 
junction with the version given in this present work, 
extremely instructive; and the polemical portion, wherein 
the claims of Beh4 are attacked, and those of Subh-i-Ezel 
defended, is full of interest. At some future date I hope 
to give a fuller notice of this valuable work, but for the 
present I must needs content myself with extracting from 
it the chief facts recorded concerning the life of Subh- 
i-Ezel. 

How best to deal with the information scattered through 
these numerous documents, notes, and letters in a manner 
which shall combine reasonable brevity with sufficient full¬ 
ness is a matter which has cost me considerable thought. 
The plan which I have finally decided to follow is to give 
firstly, a full and literal translation of a short section of tlm 
Hasht Bihisht entitled Skarh-i-kdl-i-Hazrat-i-Thamara-i- 

1 The fresh transcript of the missing portion reached me on 
March 23rd, 1891. 


.352 NOTE W—MIRZA YAHYA “ SUBH-I-EZEL. 


Beydn (“Elucidation of the circumstances of His Highness 
the Fruit of the Beyfin ”); secondly, a brief abstract of the 
account given in the same work of the origin and progress 
of the schism; thirdly, an epitome of the information 
derived directly from Subh-i-Ezel, either by letter or in 
conversation; and lastly, a resume of the official documents 
preserved in the archives of the Cyprus government. 

I. Translation from Hasht-Bihisht. 

“ Now during the two last years [of the Bdb’s mission], 
when the five years’ cycle 1 of the 1 Minor Resurrection’ had 
come to an end, the manifestation of His Highness the 
Eternal ( Hazrat-i-Ezel) took place. And he, being then 
nineteen years of age, appeared in the hamlet of Takiir 
in [the district of] Nur of M&zandardn, and began with 
untaught tongue (lisdn-i-umini) to utter the Innate Word 
( kalima-i-sdti) and spontaneous verses (dydt-i-fitri). 
When the first letter from him was conveyed by means of 
Mfrz4 ‘Alf Sayyiih to His Highness the Point [i.e. the 
B&b], the latter instantly prostrated himself to the earth in 
thankfulness, saying, ‘ Blessed be God for this mighty 
Luminary which hath dawned and this noble Spathe which 
hath arisen in the night 2 ,’ testifying of him that he spoke 
spontaneously and by the Self-Shining Light, which is the 
Innate Word, the Natural Reason (‘akl-i-fitr/), the Holy 
Spirit, the Immediate Knowledge (‘ilm-i-laduni), the Suffi- 

1 A passage in the Dald’il-i-sab‘a (“ Seven Proofs”), to which 
I referred at p. 913 of my second paper on the Biibi's in the 
./. It. A. S. for 1889, affords confirmatory evidence of what is here 
alleged concerning the date of Subh-i-Ezel’s first appearance. 
This passage runs as follows : _,L-ia i ASCII ^ ji, 

—<.—ijij *5" AU 

ifcjb wJIj ji ajlfil j£- ^ 

L9 j Qf> ji J Cfrrt op}\ £il j JJ I a1*J j^J\ 

# \£i^> o j \S ujlk f I X) ^ 1 j JjVl 5 ^ 

J (3jllloJl O jU\ ii'j ^ «aSi UjLT. 


HIS TITLES. 


353 


cing Light ( nur-i-mustdkfi ), or, after another manner of 
speech, by Inspiration (icahy), Revelation (fanztl), and 
Illumination (farddb u fartab). 

“ At this time His Highness the Point was imprisoned 
on the mountain of M&ku, and he therefore sent the 
writings of His Highness the Eternal for each of the 
Letters of the Living and the chief believers, testifying to 
his [i.e. Hazrat or Subh-i-Ezel’s ] innate capacity ( Jitrat), 
and calling him by the names of ‘ Fruit of the Beydn ’ 
( Thamara-i-Beydn), ‘Morning of Eternity’ ( Subh-i-Ezel ), 
‘ Countenance ’ ( Wajh), ‘ Splendour of God ’ (BeM’ulluh), 
‘Mirror’ (Mir at), ‘Crystal’ (Bellur), ‘Essence of Sweet 
Perfume’ (Jaivhar-i-Kdfur) 1 , ‘Sun of Eternity’ ( Shams-i - 
Ezel ), ‘Second Point’ (Nuhta-i-thdm), ‘One’ (Wahid) 2 , 
‘the Living, the Speaking’ ( Ilayy 3 - - Natih ), and sundry 
other titles. Having designated Hazrat-i-Ezel as his 
successor, he made over to him generally and particularly 
all the affairs of the Beydn , even transferring to him the 
[right of] disclosing the eight ‘ paths ’ ( manhaj) of the 
Beydnic ordinances 4 which had [hitherto] remained con- 

1 Cf. Lane’s Arabic-English Lexicon, Book i, part Hi, p. 2622, 
col. 3, s. v. j and Kur’du, lxxvi, 5. For an instance of the 
employment of this expression (which occurs repeatedly in the 
Bdb’s writings), see Mirza Kazem-Beg’s last article on the Bdbfs 
in the Journal Asiatique for 1866 (sixifeme serie, vol. viii) p. 501, 
last line. 

2 The numerical equivalent of Wahid (28) is the same as that 
of Yahyd. [See my second paper on the Bdbfs in the J. R. A. S. 
for 1889, pp. 996—997.] 

3 Concerning the sacred nature of the word j >., see Gobineau, 
p. 320. Subh-i-Ezel’s name Yahyd not only contains the root 
hayy (indeed by merely altering the vowel-points it becomes 
Yuhyi, “he quickens,” or “gives life”), but is also, as has just 
been pointed out, numerically equivalent to Wahid “ One,” ano¬ 
ther word of singular virtue. 

4 By these ‘eight paths’ of the Beydn are evidently intended 
the unrevealed Vahids. Gobineau, whose penetration suffered 
nothing to escape him, has not failed to notice that the Beydn — 
or rather Beyd.ns , for, as has been pointed out, there are several— 
are purposely left incomplete. I cannot do better than quote his 
own words (p. 332):—“ Le Biyyan ^tant le livre divin par excel¬ 
lence, doit n^cessairement 6tre constitiH sur le nombre divin, 

23 


B. 


354 NOTE W—MfRZA YAHYA “ SUEH-I-EZEL 


cealed within the Divine Volition (whereon their disclosure 
depended), in case the time should demand this. 

“ In short, during the two last years [of the Bdb’s life 
and mission] all that emanated from the Supreme Pen bore 
reference to His Highness the Fruit [of the Beydn], whom 
he [i.e. the Bhb] recommended to all the people of the 
Bey&n, saying that should they bring sorrow, even to the 
extent of the mention of aught, on his holy heart, all their 
good works and devotions would become as scattered dust. 
Of the words of His Highness the Point [i.e. the Bib] still 
extant at the present day, what bears reference to the 
Fruit [of the Beyin, i.e. Subh-i-Ezel] exceeds 20,000 verses, 
not counting what has disappeared. And for ten years 
after [the death of] His Highness the Point all the people 
of the Beyin were unanimous and agreed as to the bestowal 
of the successorship on His Highness the Eternal [i.e. 
Subh-i-Ezel]. And he abode for more than two years in 
Teherin and Shimlrin, whence he departed into Mizan- 
darin, whence again (because men had been stirred up on 
behalf of the government to seek him out) he set out 
disguised in the garb of a dervish for Hamaddn and 
Kirminshihin 1 . Thence he proceeded to the Abode of 
Peace of Baghdad 2 , and in reference to this the 1 Tongue of 
the Unseen ’ [i.e. the poet Hifiz] says :— 

c’est-El-dire sur le nombre 19. II est done compose, en prineipe, 
de 19 unites ou divisions principales, qui, k lour tour, se subdivi- 
sent chacune en 19 paragraphes. Mais le B;tb n’a dcrit que onze 
de ces unites, et il a laissd les huit autres au veritable et grand 
Rdvelateur, h celui qui compldtera la doctrine, et k l’dgard duquel 
le Bab n’est autre chose que ce qu’dtait saint Jean-Baptiste 
devant Notre-Seigneur.” 

1 Cf. pp. 51—52 supra. 

2 Daru’s-salam (“the Abode of Peace”) is the official title of 
Baghdad, just as Tcherdn is called Ddru'l-khildfat (“the Abode 
of the Caliphate”), Isfahan Daru ’s-saltanat (“ the Abode of the 
Sovereignty”), Shlrdz Dd.ru 'l-Hlm (“the Abode of Knowledge”), 
Yezd Daru ’ l-Hbadat (“the Abode of Worship”), Kirman Ddru ’l- 
aman (“ the Abode of Security”), and the like. The Bdhis, so 
prone to regard such coincidences, attach great importance to 
this title of Baghdad (which for eleven or twelve years was their 
head-quarters and rallying-point and the home of their chiefs), 

and quote as prophetic Kur'dn vi, 127 :—^ s m f.%11 j\i ) 


AT BAGHDAD. 


355 


(Couplet) 

‘ Baghdad shall be filled with tumult; one with lips like 
sugar shall appear; 

I fear lest the disturbance of his lips may cast Shiraz into 
confusion 1 .’ 

“At this juncture Mfrzfi Huseyn ‘All [i.e. BeM’u’ll&h], 
the elder brother of His Highness [Subh-i-Ezel], came to 
Baghdad with two other brothers and several of the 
believers, and these gathered round that Most Mighty 
Light, who, in accordance with instructions which His 
Highness the Point of Revelation [i.e. the B4b] had given 
him, passed his nights and days behind the curtains of 
seclusion apart from believers and others— 

(Couplet) 

‘ Behind a veil sits that moon-browed beauty; 

He has rent asunder the veils of the w T orld, yet sits behind 
a veil ’— 

and none approached him save his brothers and certain 
favoured followers. But from behind that veil issued forth 
letters, epistles (alwdh), and books [written] in reply to 
men’s questions and petitions.” 

Here ends that section of the Hasht Bihisht which I 
deemed it desirable to translate in full. It is followed by a 
section entitled Slut rh- i-hdl-i-'ijl u Samiri (“ Elucidation 
of the circumstances of the Calf and SMnirl”) 2 , which in 


Of* l_yl f W (“Theirs is an Abode of Peace beside their 
Lord, and He is their Protector by reason of that which they 
have done”). 

1 This verse I have generally heard somewhat differently 
quoted ; see B. ii, pp. 993—994 and note 2 at foot of former page. 
My MS. of the Hasht Bihisht puts “ Ahwdz” in the margin as an 
alternative reading for “ Shiraz" The couplet is not to be found 
in the Divan of Hdfiz—at least in any of the copies which I have 
seen. 

2 Allusion is made to the Golden Calf which the Children of 
Israel were misled by S&mirl into worshipping. (See KurAn, vii, 
146; xx, 87, et seq.; and numerous other passages.) By ‘the 
Calf the Ezell controversialist, of course, means Behd’u’lllh (or, 

23—2 


356 NOTE W —Ml'aZA YAHYA “ SUBH-I-EZEL.” 


turn is succeeded by another entitled Sharh-i-hiil-i-fitne-i- 
saylam (“Elucidation of the Direful Mischief”), by which 
is meant the secession (according to the Ezell view) of Beh& 
and his followers. These sections occupy many pages, 
are of a violently polemical character, and contain grave 
charges against the BeliAls and vehement attacks on their 
position and doctrines. The gist of their contents is given 
in the following abstract. 

II. Abstract from Hasht Bihisht. 

Subh-i-Ezel having retired into a seclusion inviolable 
save to a chosen few, his elder brother Mlrzd Huseyn ‘All 
[BehAu’Mh] found the practical direction of affairs in his 
own hands. Now he was a man who from his youth 
upwards had associated and mixed with men of every class, 
whereby he had acquired a certain “breadth of disposition” 
(ivus‘at-!-mashrab) and “ religious pliability ” ( rakhawat-i- 
maz-hab) which attracted round him men of like mind, to 
whom some slackening of the severer code of the Beydn 
was not unwelcome. Certain of the old school of Bftbls, 
such as MuM Muhammad Ja‘far of NirAk, MnllA Rajab 
‘All “ Kahtrf Hdjl Seyyid Muhammad of Isfahan 1 , HAjl 
Seyyid Jaw&d of Kerbeld, Hdjl Mlrzh A\im&d-i-Katib 2 , the 
MatawalU-basM (Chief Custodian of the Shrine) of Kum, 
Hajl Mlrzd Muhammad RizA and others, perceiving this 
tendency to innovation and relaxation, remonstrated so 
vigorously "with Mlrzd Huseyn ‘All that he left Baghdad in 

as he calls him throughout, Mfrza Huseyn ‘All), and by ‘ Sdmiri,’ 
Aka Mlrzd Akd Jdn (abusively designated as the “ scald-headed 
soap-seller of Kdshdn”), to whom he attributes a role similar 
to that wherewith Seyyid Muhammad of Isfahdn is credited by 
the BehfWs at pp. 93—98 of the present work. Concerning Aka 
Mlrzd Akd Jdn (called by the Behd’ls Jen&b-i-Khadimu Hah, 
“His Excellency the Servant of God”) see Introduction, and also 
B. i, p. 519. 

1 See pp. 93—98 supra. 

2 Mulld ‘Abdu’l-Karfm of Kazvln is generally designated by 
this title (see supra , pp. 41—42, and footnote to former), but, as 
lie was killed at Teherdn in 1852, either this must be a mistake, 
or some other person bearing the same name must be intended. 


BEGINNINGS OF DISCORD. 


357 


wrath and went towards Suleym&niyy^, in the neighbour¬ 
hood of which he abode amongst the Kurds for nearly two 
years 1 . During all this period his whereabouts was un¬ 
known to the Babls at Baghdad. When at length it 
became known, Subh-i-Ezel wrote a letter to him inviting 
him to return. 

About this time Mlrzd Asadu’ll&h entitled “Dei/ycm 2 3 ” 
(one of the second group of “Letters of the Living” or 
“ Second Unity ”), called by the author of the Haslit 
Bihisht “the Judas Iscariot of this people,” who had been 
appointed by the Bilb amanuensis to Subh-i-Ezel, and who 
was learned in the Hebrew and Syriac languages, declared 
himself to be “He whom God shall manifest”; and one 
Mfrzh Ibrilhlm forthwith believed in him. Mlrzd Huseyn 
‘All [BeM’u’ll&h], after a protracted discussion with him, 
instructed his servant Mirzd Muhammad of M&zandardn to 
slay him, which was accordingly done. Shortly after this, 
Mfrzh ‘Abdu’lldh called Ghaicghd [“Conflict”] advanced 
the very same claim; and he in turn was followed by 
Huseyn of MfHn, commonly known as “ Huseyn Jin,” 
who made the same pretension in Teherin :i . The matter 
did not end even here, for these pretenders were followed 
by Seyyid Huseyn of Isfahan 4 , and Mfrzi Muhammad 
“ Nabil” of Zarand, called “the tongue-tied” ( akhms ) 5 ; 

1 Of. pp. 64—65 supra, and verse 6 of Nabll’s chronological 
poem at pp. 983 and 987 of my second paper on the Bdbi's in the 
J. R. A. S. for 1889. Subh-i-Ezel also mentioned that Behd’u’lldh 
withdrew for some while from Baghdad because he “ got angry” 
(kahr kard). 

2 See Gobineau, pp. 277—278. The passage is quoted in full 
on p. 365 infra. 

3 See supra, pp. 330—331. If Huseyn of Milan was killed at 
Teherdn in 1852, it is evident that whatever claim he advanced was 
long anterior to this period, for, according to Nahfl’s chronologi¬ 
cal poem (B. ii, pp. 983—984 and 987, verses 6 and 7), Beha’u’llah 
was 40 years old when he returned from Kurdistdn to Baghdad, 
which, as he was born in a.h. 1233, must have heen in a.h. 1273 
(= a.d. 1856—7). 

4 Or of Hindiyan. See p. 331 supra, and cf. Gobineau, p. 278. 

6 The same Nabil who is now at Acre, and who wrote the 

chronological poem referred to in the last footnote but one. Some 
poems attributed to him and written apparently during the 


358 


NOTE W—MI'RZA YAHYA “ SUBH-I-EZEL. 


until, to quote verbatim from the Hasht Bihisht, “the 
matter came to such a pass that everyone on awakening 
from his first sleep in the morning adorned his body with 
this pretension.” 

Now when Mfrzd, Huseyn ‘AH beheld matters in this 
disordered state, he bethought himself of advancing the 
same claim himself (considering that from the prominent 
position which he had long held as practical director of 
affairs, he stood a better chance of success than any 
previous claimant), and in this idea he was greatly en¬ 
couraged by Akd Mfrz & Ak4 J4n of KAsh^n. Little by 
little his resolution took more definite shape, and lie fell to 
thinking how he might compass the destruction of such of 
the Bdbfs as were likely to oppose his contemplated action. 

About this time the Muhammadan clergy of Baghdad, 
KerbelA, and Nejef began to complain loudly because of 
the large number of Babfs who continued to flock thither 
from Persia, and the Persian Government accordingly in¬ 
structed Mirzii Huseyn Klntn Mushtru'd-dawla, its repre¬ 
sentative at the court of the Ottoman Sultan, to petition 
the Turkish authorities for the removal of the Babfs to 
some part of their dominions remote from the Persian 
frontier 1 . To this request the Turkish authorities, anxious 
to put a stop to the quarrels which were continually arising 
between the Babfs and Muhammadans, acceded. The B4bfs 
were summoned to Constantinople; whence, four months 
after their arrival, they were sent to Adrianople. On their 
arrival in that city, Mfrzd Huseyn ‘All, still instigated and 


period of his claim are in my possession. In one of them the 
following verse occurs 


y pi* 


ola- 


jt* 


N > ->JJ oui ^ } p, ol yyji ui. 

“ I am the uplifted Tree of Life ; I am the hidden and apparent 
Fruit ; 

I am the King of Kings of the BeyAn, and by me is the Beydn 
exalted.” 


1 Cf. pp. 82—89 supra. 


“ THE DIREFUL MISCHIEF. 


359 


encouraged by AkA Mfrzd AkA Jdn, gradually made public 
his claim to be, not only “ He whom God shall manifest,” 
but an Incarnation of the Deity Himself, and began to send 
letters and epistles in all directions. And now, according 
to the Ezeli historian, began a series of assassinations on 
the part of the Behft’is. All prominent supporters of Subh- 
i-Ezel who withstood Mfrzd Huseyn ‘All’s claim were marked 
out for death, and in Baghdad MulH Rajab ‘All “ KaMr” 
and his brother, Hiljl Mfrzd Ahmad, H&jl Mirzh Muhammad 
Rizh, and several others fell one by one by the knife or 
bullet of the assassin 1 . But the author of the Haslit 
Bihisht brings a yet graver charge against Mfrzd Huseyn 
‘All, and asserts that he caused poison to be placed in one 
side of a dish of food which was to be set before himself 
and Subh-i-Ezel, giving instructions that the poisoned side 
was to he turned towards his brother. As it happened, 
however, the food had been flavoured with onions, and 
Subh-i-Ezel, disliking this flavour, refused to partake of 
the dish. Mlrzi Huseyn ‘All, fancying that his brother 
suspected his design, ate some of the food from his side of 
the plate; but, the poison having diffused itself to some 
extent through the whole mass, he was presently attacked 
with vomiting and other symptoms of poisoning. There¬ 
upon he assembled his own followers and intimates, and 
declared that Subh-i-Ezel had attempted to poison him 2 . 

Shortly after this, according to the Ezell writer, another 
plot was laid against Subh-i-Ezel’s life, and it was arranged 
that Muhammad ‘All the barber should cut his throat 
while shaving him in the bath. On the approach of the 
barber, however, Subh-i-Ezel divined his design, refused to 
allow him to come near, and, on leaving the bath, instantly 

1 Cf. B. i, p. 517, and B. ii, pp. 995—6. 

2 The Behdi's reverse this story as well as the following 
in every particular, declaring that Mlrza Yahyd Subh-i-Ezel at¬ 
tempted to poison Mlrza Huseyn ‘Ali Bdiahillah, and after his 
failure spread abroad the report that the attempt had been made 
on himself. Behd’u’lliih’s version will be found in the SUra-i- 
HeyTcal at pp. 154—155 of Baron V. Rosen’s forthcoming work. 
The text and translation of this passage, which Baron Rosen has 
most kindly permitted me to copy from the proof-sheets of his 
still tmpmblished work, will be found a few pages further on. 


360 NOTE W-MfKZA YAHYA “ 8UBH-I-EZEL. 


took another lodging in Adrianople and separated himself 
entirely from Mi'rzA Huseyn ‘All and his followers. 

Some w'hile after this, says the author of the Hasht 
Bihisht, Mfrz& Huseyn ‘All devised a new stratagem. A 
number of letters were written in different handwritings 
by AM Mirzii Akii J&n, Mushkfn Kalam, ‘AbMs Efendf, 
and other partisans of Mfrzd Huseyn ‘Ah' to sundry Turkish 
statesmen and officials to the following effect:—•“ About 
thirty thousand of us Bitbfs are concealed in disguise in 
and around Constantinople, and in a short while we shall 
rise. We shall first capture Constantinople, and, if Sult&n 
‘Abdu’l-'Azfz and his ministers do not believe [in our 
religion], we shall depose and dismiss them from their rule 
and administration. And our King is Mfrzd, Yahy& Subh- 
i-Ezel.” These letters were left by night at the Sultan’s 
palace and the houses of the different ministers by Mushkfn 
Kalam and other partisans of Mfrz£ Huseyn ‘All resident 
in Constantinople. When next day these letters were 
discovered, the Turkish Government, which had treated 
the B4bfs with kindness, and afforded them shelter and 
hospitality, was naturally greatly incensed. The letters 
were forthwith laid before the Persian Ambassador, and, at 
a joint assembly of Turkish and Persian officials, it was 
decided to exile the B4bf chiefs to some remote island or 
fortress on the coast 1 . 

Meanwhile IlAjf Seyyid Muhammad of Isfahan, a philo¬ 
sopher of note, and AM JAn Bey, nicknamed Kaj-kuluh 
(“Skew-cap”) 2 , who held the rank of lieutenant-colonel 
(kd’im-ma-kdm) in the Turkish army, discovered how 
matters stood, and made known to the Ottoman authorities 
the hostility which existed between the two brothers at 
Adrianople. The only good result which followed from 
their intervention was that it was decided by the Turkish 
government to exile Mfrzd, Yahy& Subh-i-Ezel and Mfrzd 
Huseyn ‘Alf Behauttdh not to the same but to two 
different places ; the former was ordered to be sent with his 

1 Cf. the Beh&’f account of the events which led to the removal 
of the B&bf chiefs from Adrianople at pp. 98—99 supra, and 
Suhh-i-Ezel’s account in note 1 at the foot of the latter page. 

2 See B. i, p. 517, and note 1 at foot of p. 99 supra. 


ASSASSINATION OF EZELIS. 


361 


family and four of Behd’u’ll&h’s followers, to wit Mushkfn- 
Kalam 1 2 , Mfrzd ‘All Sayydh, [Muhammad] B&kir, and 
‘AbduT-Ghaff'&r, to Famagusta [Mdghusd] in Cyprus; the 
latter, with his family, about 80 of his adherents, and four 
of Subh-i-Ezel’s followers, to wit Hbjf Seyyid Muhammad 
of Isfahan, Aka Jin Bey, Mirzi Itizi-Kuli of Tafrish, and 
his brother Aki Mi'rza Nasru’llih, to Acre [‘Akka\ in 
Syria. Before the transfer was actually effected, however, 
Mlrzi Nasru’llih was poisoned by Mirzi Huseyn 'All at 
Adrianople. The other three Ezell's were assassinated 
shortly after their arrival at Acre in a house which they 
occupied near the barracks, the assassins being ‘Abdu’l- 
Karim, Muhammad ‘Ah' the barber, Huseyn the water- 
carrier, and Muhammad Jawid of Kazvfn. 

After remarking that Adrianople is called “ the Land of 

the Mystery” ( because therein took place the 

separation between the Light and the Fire, the People of 
the Right Hand and the People of the Left Hand, the Good 
and the Evil, the True and the False, the Ezell historian 
proceeds to describe, with much censure and animadversion, 
the propaganda by letters and missionaries set on foot 
throughout Persia by Mlrz& Huseyn ‘All, the extravagant 
claims advanced by him, and the high-sounding titles 
conferred on his wives, sons, and chief followers. Amongst 
the titles so conferred are enumerated the following:— 
(on his wives) Mahd-i- Ulya, (“the Supreme Cradle”—a 
title reserved for the Queen-mother in Persia); Waraka-i 
‘Ulya (“the Supreme Leaf”); (on his sons) Ghusn-i- 
A'zam (“the Most Mighty Branch”); Ghusn-i-Akbar 3 
(“the Most Great Branch”); Ghum-i-At-liar (“the Most 
Pure Branch ”); (on Akh Mirza Aka J&n of KJshan) 
Avvalu man cimana (“the First to believe”) and Jenab- 

1 See B. i, p. 516, and B. ii, p. 994. Fuller particulars con¬ 
cerning all of these will be found at the end of this Note. 

2 Moreover the sum of the letters in the word ^ (Mystery) is 
the same as in the word ajjjI (Adrianople), vis. 260. 

3 See B. i, p. 518. 


362 NOTE W —MIRZA YAHYA “ KUBH-I-EZEL.” 

i-Khddimu’lldh (“ His Excellency the Servant of God ”) 1 ; 
(on others of his followers) Mushkm-i-UdM (“ Divinely 
Fragrant”); Zeyniil-Mukarrabm 2 (“ the Ornament of the 
Favoured ”); Glmldmiil-Khuld (“the Servant of Para¬ 
dise”); Jabrail-i-Amm (“Gabrielthe Trusty”); Kannddu's- 
Samaddniyyat (“the Confectioner of the Divine Eternity”); 
Khabbdzul- Wdhidiyyat (“the Baker of the Divine Unity”); 
Dallukul-HaMkat (“ the Barber of the Truth”); Malldhul- 
Kuds (“ the Saiior of Sanctity ”); and the like. 

The author of the Hcisht Bihisht, after indulging in a 
good deal of strong invective, garnished with many allusions 
to Pharaoh, the Golden Calf, and SAmiri, brings forward 
further charges against the BehA’is. Certain persons, he 
says, who had at first been inclined to follow MirzA Huseyn 
‘All, subsequently withdrew and separated themselves from 

him. Some of these, such as AkA ‘Abdu’l-Ahad, AkA 
Muhammad ‘Ali of IsfahAn, HAji AkA of Tabriz, and the 
son of HAji FattAh, fled from Acre; but the Khayydt-bdshi 
(chief tailor) and HAji Ibrahim were assassinated in the 
Caravansaray of the corn-sellers ( Khdn-i-gandurn-firtishdn) 
and buried in quick-lime under the platform, which was 
duly mortared up over their bodies. After a while, how¬ 
ever, the smell of the decomposing corpses became so 
offensive that the other inhabitants of the caravansaray 
complained to the local authorities, who instituted a search 
and discovered the bodies. Without mentioning what 
further action was taken by the Turkish government in the 
matter (a point certainly demanding elucidation, for we 
cannot suppose that, if what the Ezeli historian relates be 
true, they took no action at all to punish the murderers) 
the author proceeds with his indictment. HAji Ja'far, says 
he, had a claim of 1200 pounds against MirzA Huseyn ‘Ali, 
and demanded the payment of this debt with some violence 
and importunity. MirzA AkA JAn of KA.shAn thereupon 
instructed one ‘All of Kazvin to slay the old man and 
throw his body out of the window of the upper room which 

1 See Introduction, and B. i, p. 519. 

2 The writer of the MS. from which the fac-simile forming 
vol. i of the present work is taken. See Note Z, infra. 


ASSASSINATION OF EZELlS. 


363 


he occupied into the courtyard of the caravansaray. It was 
then put about that he had “cast himself out and died, 
yielding up his life to the Beloved.” Another disappointed 
creditor, a native of Khur^sdn, is said to have gone mad in 
Acre from chagrin and deferred hope. Other assassinations 
in other places are alleged, the following being specially 
notified :—Aki Seyyid ‘All the Arab, one of the original 
“ Letters of the Living,” was killed in Tabriz by Mlrz& 
Mustafa of Nirdk and Sheykh [name omitted] of Ivhurhs&n; 
Muila Rajab ‘All KaMr, also one of the “Letters,” was 
killed at Kerbelb by Nhsir the Arab; his brother Akh ‘All 
Muhammad was killed in Baghdad by ‘Abdu’l-Karnn; and, 
in short, if we are to believe the Ezell writer, most of the 
more prominent Bbbls who withstood Mlrzsi, Huseyn ‘All’s 
pretensions were sought out and slain wherever they 

chanced to be, amongst these being H&jl Akil of Tabriz. 

The indictment does not stop here. Amongst those 
who had at first inclined to follow Mlrzd Huseyn ‘Ah' was, 
according to the Hasht Bihisht, a merchant named Ak4 
Muhammad ‘All of Isfahdu, who at this time resided in 
Constantinople. Owing to certain discoveries which he had 
made, however, his faith had undergone considerable abate¬ 
ment, and signs of coolness had been observed in him. 
Mlrzd Abu’l-K&sim the Bakhtiyhrl robber was consequently 
despatched from Acre with instructions to “ bleed that 
block of heedlessness whose blood is in excess.” On his 
arrival in Constantinople he took up his lodging with the 
unsuspecting merchant in the Khdn-i-Shark!, Here he 
remained till one day he found opportunity to break open 
his host’s private safe and abstract therefrom .£350. A 
part of this sum he retained for himself; with the remainder 
he bought clothes, stuffs, and other goods which he sent to 
Acre. In return for this service he received the following 
epistle:—“ 0 phlebotomist of the Divine Unity! Throb like 
the artery in the, body of the Contingent World, and drink 
of the blood of the ‘ Block of Heedlessness ’ for that he turned 
aside from the aspect of thy Lord the Merciful'! ” Here 

1 The original text of this epistle stands as follows in the 
Hasht Bihisht :— 


364 NOTE W —MfEZA YAHYA “ SUBH-I-EZEL.' 


ends the list of charges alleged against the Behd’is by the 
Ezells, and what follows is of a purely controversial nature, 
consisting of refutations of the claims advanced by Mlrzd 
Huseyn ‘All Behau’llah, and arguments to prove the rights 
of Mlrzd Yahy,4 Subh-i-Ezel. This controversial portion, 
interesting as it is, I am forced to omit here for lack of 
space. 

It is with great reluctance that I have set down the 
grave accusations brought by the author of the Haskt 
Bihisht against the Behd’ls. It seemed to me a kind of 
ingratitude even to repeat such charges against those from 
whom I myself have experienced nothing but kindness, and 
in most of whom the outward signs of virtue and dis¬ 
interested benevolence were apparent in a high degree. 
Yet no feeling of personal gratitude or friendship can 
justify the historian (whose sole desire should be to sift 
and assort all statements with a view to eliciting the truth) 
in the suppression of any important document which may 
throw light on the object of his study. Such an action 
would be worse than ingratitude; it would be treason to 
Truth. These charges are either true or false. If they be 
true (which I ardently hope is not the case) our whole view 
of the tendencies and probable influences of Behi/s teaching 
must necessarily be greatly modified, for of what use are 
the noblest and most humane utterances if they be associ¬ 
ated with deeds such as are here alleged ? If, on the other 
hand, they be false, further investigation will without doubt 
conclusively prove their falsity, and make it impossible that 
their shadow should hereafter darken the page of B4bi 
history. In either case it is of the utmost importance that 
they should be confronted, and, to this end, that they 
should be fully stated. Inasmuch as the Hasht Bihisht 
only fell into my hands as I was beginning to write this 
note, and as several of the charges alleged in it against the 
Behfi’ls are new to me, I regret that I cannot at present 
offer any important evidence either for their support or 


p y J >■ fjb UJ jZ\ 2 ul£*Yl ujj d JlT* lALi daJ»Yl jLaa l ul 


CREDIBILITY OF HASHT BIHISHT. 365 

their refutation. Certain points, however, which are con¬ 
nected with the narrative of the Ezell controversialist and 
can be checked by other testimony are as follows :— 

(1) , For the claim advanced by Mlrzd Asadu’lldh 
“ Deyydn” of Tabriz, and the fate which it brought down 
upon him, we have Gobineau’s testimony, given (at pp. 
277—278 of his work) in the following words:—“L’dlection 
[c-h-d. de Hezret-i-Ezel\ avait 6t6 toute spontande et elle 
fut reconnue imruMiatement par les babys. Cependant, un 
ties membres de l’Unitd, qui n’dtait pas d Tdhdran au 
moment oil elle eut lieu, et qui se nommait Mirza-Asad- 
Oullah, de Tebriz, surnommd Deyydn, ou ‘ le Juge supreme,’ 
personnage trhs-important et membre de l’Unitd prophd- 
tique, entreprit de se faire reconnaitre lui-meme pour le 
nouveau Bab. II courut dans l’Arabistan et chercha d y 
reunir un parti. Mais les religionnaires se mettant sur ses 
traces, l’atteignirent pres de la frontiere turke, et lui 
attachant des pierres au cou, le noy^rent dans le Shat-el- 
Arab. Cette tentative malheureuse n’encouragea pas les 
dissidents.” From Gobineau’s account we are led to infer 
that this episode occurred very soon after the death of the 
Bdb and the election of Mlrzd Yahyd Subh-i-Ezel , that is 
to say some time before the Baghdad period. 

(2) For the claim advanced by Huseyn of Mlldn we 
have Subh-i-Ezel’s evidence (see Note T, p. 331 supra), but 
since, as has been already pointed out, this Huseyn was 
amongst the Bdbfs killed at Teherdn in 1852, this event 
has no more connection than the last with the Baghdad 
period. 

(3) That Nabll advanced a similar claim which he 
subsequently withdrew is a statement which I have heard 
made once if not oftener by Bdbls (of the Behd’l sect) in 
Persia. Some of the poems attributed to him, if really his, 
afford confirmatory evidence, as has been already observed 
(p. 357, note 5, supra). 

(4) The assertion that Behd’u’lldh alleges against 
Subh-i-Ezel an attempted fratricide, of which, according to 
the Ezell writer, he was in reality himself the author, is 
fully borne out by the following passage in the earlier part 
of the Sura-i-Heykal, which Baron Bosen has most kindly 
permitted me to quote from his still unpublished work:— 


366 NOTE W—MfRZA YAHYA “ KUBH-I-EZEL. 


b>ei J ^ lj>-l bly-l y* till •il 

^ ■ *'l , ■*■ Q & !_.<aA Lae..* J ^-i*S I ^i A 1 £ aLc 

*b* ^ jjdl ^laJ ,JI al^9j _5 jJjjo 

y**xs O Li £^c ju3 i_5i JS^ ^=> (JjC a _j A^flj 

_2 ^"il_o L.. ll (_}aI iiilao y b5^ _j * 0_5 A la] 1 Ac 

^ ^ j Jf 1^-0 b jL»]i j-5^ vi (jijVi 
Ol Jl (S^-o I £^Jc U.sli _j iib _j dill jf jj liLI) 

C^-V _$ A>jJB cic j ajll >i^§Iil _3 iflL- ^ dill aJ$^" 

t_£l__^ LJ ^>-1 ol * O^j-oJ>L c viiljj _5 A'^Jal^ 

v_fll>- Ijl IJlj)^C _j IaJjj J>-_o ^jl ^jsYI 

j s—ijS' _j oLL (J-il>- _J >—> 1 ji»- _J jL*VI 

dl jl ol ^ O 

lj^>-kb ^ ->Lc j^w.3 ^ s— * J 

dili ■j JJ^ J * Ojjjfl* -iLc |^jlj _3 yc j <1)1 ^ 

dill lil vfAJi ^C al^cl j ^yolA>- Js*\ 

d*A L jc J^jI _J ^ -lafljv- _5 fljL^OjI _J a_^*]I 


beha’s version of the matter. 


367 


VI oil \jjoS^ ^jdl JJaj j jljl 

d) ^ L ir> l ^ dw£U dl La ^^ ^ ^<1 

^lio ^1 ^ V^A ^a §*^c*-aJI £fljjl lj^y>-l& I*^jJJI 
d^J$***** ^ 0 .L Ld I ^ L u o 1 d I d»j a^J 1 ^a I 3 1/ 

VI dll V l£aJI d«Lj!^3 (A^^-auj ^LjjJI ^Jya ^yjZl ^..^>'1 

^ ^Lia^VI ^ L *U\ Lyal ^ i^iJi ^ ^ 

w - s. 

A L I C- **■! L^L» ^ V^A ^ y xJ ^ y a 

La ^ O^A^go r . & :.Jl ^Jya ^ a jA-£> ^ "L*o t.ll 

aA>-^ lIAaJI v 3 L*J»- ^ A*J aLjlj L ^ dj Llia^juj 

^oVI oL ^iJ»i LJ djl ^j^JLII dul Jja9 Lqj^o 

^ 3L*JI Jl ^ ^aX 3I pia A>-l ^glll 

ul^dl ^ <3 l*J2j 1,3 dl!3 LljJ ^.UiJI Aj^ flJI Jo3 L 

l£aJI jB 3_o3^1l ^jjoll 4A1L I^Jol ^IjaII JjA-^j ^ Lajull 

^*y a I d<ja ^y a Lj^^t) a AJ 

w^jl O) Jl d**J2j i^ L v£il-> £o JI j I 

djul da j>» ^ ^ ^ I l£V L 

d^*j ^Jjl ^y l!^ L A^ 3^-u^oJ I ^J^dl AAAdl 


308 NOTE W —MfRZA YAHYA “ SUBH-I-EZEL. 


J j 1 jsljo <uil 

\j\ ^~aj <Jc .>jj U i _ 5 aJj dins' LO&I dill LgJflj 

# o^Au 

“Then tell them that we chose out one from amongst 
our brethren, and sprinkled upon him drops from the depths 
of the Ocean of Knowledge; then we arrayed him in the 
raiment of one of the [Divine] Names 1 , and upraised him 
unto [such] a station that all arose to praise him ; and we 
preserved him from the hurt of every hurtful thing in such 
wise as [even] the powerful cannot do. We were alone 
against the dwellers in the heavens and the earth in the 
days when all men arose to slay me, and we were in their 
midst, speaking in commemoration of God and His praise, 
and steadfast in His affair, until the Word of God was 
realized amongst His creatures, and its tokens became 
public, and its power waxed high, and its dominion shone 
forth; whereuuto testify favoured servants. Verily my 
brother, when he saw that the matter had waxed high, 
discovered in himself pride and error; then he came forth 
[from] behind the veils, and warred with me, and contended 
with my signs, and denied my proof, and repudiated my 
tokens; neither was the belly of the glutton sated till that 
he desired to eat my flesh and drink my blood, whereunto 
bear witness those servants who fled into exile with God, 
and beyond them those brought nigh. And herein he took 
counsel with one of my attendants, tempting him unto 
this. Then God helped me with the hosts of the Invisible 
and the Visible, and preserved me by the truth, and 
revealed unto me that which withheld him from what he 
purposed, and brought to naught the device of those who 
denied the signs of the Merciful [God]: are they not a 
people unbelieving? Aud when that whereunto his passion 
[had] seduced him was divulged, and those who [had] fled 
into exile became aware thereof, outcry arose from these, 

1 Cf. pp. 95—96 supra , and footnotes thereon. 


beha’s version of the matter. 369 

and attained such a pitch that it was within a little of 
being published throughout the city. Then we restrained 
them, and revealed unto them the word of patience, that 
they might be of those who are patient; and by God, than 
whom there is none other god, we were assuredly patient in 
this, and enjoined patience and self-restraint on [God’s] 
servants, and went out from amongst these, and dwelt in 
another house, that the fire of hatred might he quenched in 
his bosom and he might become of those rightly directed. 
Neither did we interfere with him nor see him afterwards; 
we sat alone in the house watching for the Grace of God, 
the Protector, the Self-subsistent. But he, when he became 
aware that the matter had become publicly known, took 
the pen of falsehood, and wrote unto the people, and 
attributed all that he had done to my peerless and wronged 
Beauty, seeking mischief in himself, and the introduction 
of hatred into the breasts of those who [had] believed in God 
the Mighty, the Loving. By Him in whose hand is my soul, 
we are amazed at his device, nay rather all being, invisible 
and visible, is amazed ! Yet withal he rested not in himself 
till he committed that which the pen cannot set down, that 
whereby he dishonoured me, and God, the Potent, the 
Mighty, the Praised. Should I describe that which he did 
unto me, the seas of the earth would not complete it were 
God to make them ink, neither would all things exhaust it 
were God to turn them into pens. Thus do we reveal that 
which hath befallen us, if ye [will] know it.” 

I never heard Subh-i-Ezel himself allude to the events 
in question, for he is little addicted to complaints, and 
reticent as to all that concerns his brother Beh&’u’lMh, but 
his son ‘AbduVAli gave me the same account as is set 
forth in the Hasht Bihisht. 

(5) The account of the forged letters circulated by the 
BeM’fs is improbable in itself (for the catastrophe which 
they were intended to produce was bound to involve all.the 
B&bls at Adrianople), and is at variance with the versions 
given by BeM’u’lHh (supra, pp. 98—99) and Subh-i-Ezel 
(supra, p. 99, note 1). 

(6) The names of the Behd’fs exiled with Subh-i-Ezel 
to Famagusta are stated correctly, as proved by the docu¬ 
ments of the Cyprus Government shortly to be cited. 

r. 24 


370 NOTE W—MfRZA YAH YA “ SUBH-I-EZEL.” 

(7) As to the assassination of the three Ezelis, Ak& 
■J4n Bey, llhjf Seyyid Muhammad of Isfahan, and Mfrz& 
Riza-Kulf of Tafrfsh, by some of Behd’s followers at Acre, 
there can, I fear, be but little doubt; for the account of 
this event which I published at p. 517 of my first paper on 
the BAbfs in the J. It. A. S. for 1889 was given to me by a 
Behd’f who had during his visit to Acre seen, and, I think, 
conversed with some of the perpetrators of this deed. It is 
curious that he, so far from attempting to minimize the 
matter, raised the number of the victims and assassins from 
three and four to seven and twelve respectively. Subh-i- 
Ezel’s account (B. ii, pp. 995—6) agrees with that contained 
in the Hasht Bihiskt. There is, however, no evidence to 
prove that the assassins acted under orders, though the 
passage in the Kitdb-i-Akdas alluding (apparently) to 
Hap Seyyid Muhammad’s death, which is quoted at the 
foot of p. 93 supra, proves that Beh&’u’lldli regarded this 
event with some complaisance. His son ‘Abbds Efendf 
would also seem to have interceded for the murderers 
(B. i, p. 517). Mr Oliphant in his work entitled Haifa 
(see supra, pp. 209—210), after speaking of the mystery 
which surrounds Beh&’u’lHh and the difficulty of seeing 
him, says, in a passage which appears to bear reference to 
these assassinations (op. cit., p. 107):— 

“ Not long ago, however, public curiosity was gratified, 
for one of his [i.e. BeM’u’lHh’s] Persian followers stabbed 
another for having been unworthy of some religious trust, 
and the great man himself was summoned as a witness. 

“‘Will you tell the court who and what you are?’ 
was the first question put. 

“ ‘ I will begin,’ he replied, ‘ by telling you who I am 
not. I am not a camel-driver’—this was an allusion 
to the Prophet Mohammed—-'nor am I the son of a 
carpenter’—this in allusion to Christ. ‘This is as much 
as I can tell you to-day. If you -will now let me retire, I 
will tell you tomorrow who I am.’ 

“ Upon this promise he was let go; but the morrow 
never came. With an enormous bribe he had in the 
interval purchased an exemption from all further attendance 
at court.” 

Since these assassinations took place within the last 


ETHICS OF ASSASSINATION. 


371 


23 years, it is not too much to hope that further investi¬ 
gation may serve to throw fuller light on the matter. The 
examination of Turkish official records (should this be 
possible) would probably do more than anything else to 
elicit the truth. 

Of the other assassinations alleged by the author of the 
Hasht Bikisht, those of the following persons were inde¬ 
pendently mentioned by §ubh-i-Ezel:—Mullit Rajab ‘Alf 

KaMr; AkA ‘All Muhammad of Isfahan, brother of the 
above; Mfrzd Nasru’llih; Hdjf Mfrzd Ahmad, brother of 
Mfrzd JAnf (see Note T, p. 332 supra); and H&jf Ibrahim. 
The last was stated to have been at first a fanatical Belief, 
and to have cruelly beaten H4jl Seyyid Muhammad of 
Isfahan the Ezell on board the ship which bore the exiles to 
Acre, of which action he subsequently repented sincerely. 
The following three persons, not mentioned in the Hasht 
Bihisht, were also stated by Subh-i-Ezcl to have been 
assassinated:—Hnseyn ‘All and Ak& ‘Abdu’l-KAsim of 
KAshdn; Mfrz4 Buzurg of Kirm4nsh4h. This raises the 
total number of alleged assassinations of Ezells to sixteen 
(unless, as appears probable, one of the last three be 
identical with the “ Khayydt-bdshi ’’ mentioned in the 
Hasht Bihisht), which agrees pretty well with Subh-i-Ezel’s 
statement to Captain Young (B. ii, p. 996) that about 
twenty of his followers were killed by the Beha’fs 1 . 

It should be borne in mind, however, that the removal 
of persons inimical to a religious movement by violent 
means, or in other words religious assassination, is a thing 
far less repugnant to the Eastern than to the Western 
mind. Since the first beginning of Isl&m (not to go further 
back) it has been freely practised; and the Prophet 
Muhammad gave to it the sanction of his example on 
numerous occasions. Nothing can illustrate in a more 
striking manner the difference between the Oriental and 
the Occidental attitude of mind than a narrative given by 

1 The words “at Acre” added to this statement are clearly 
due to a misapprehension of the interpreter, and should read “ of 
Acre,” for Subh-i-Ezel distinctly and repeatedly alluded to the 
majority of these assassinations as having taken place at Baghdad 
and elsewhere. 


24—2 


372 NOTE W—MiEZA yahya “subh-i-ezel.” 


Ibn Hishdm in his Life of Muhammad (ed. Wiistenfeld, 
pp. 553—555) to which my attention was first called by 
my friend Mr A. A. Bevan, This narrative is briefly as 
follows. There were in the time of Mohammad two 
brothers, of whom the younger, named Muhayyisa, had 
embraced Isl&m, while Huwayyisa, the elder, still remained 
a pagan. Muhayyisa, at the command of the Prophet, 
assassinated a Jewish merchant named Suneyna (or 
Subeyna) with whom Huwayyisa was on terms of friend¬ 
ship. Huwayyisa, on hearing of this, fell upon his younger 
brother with blows and reproaches, saying, “ 0 enemy of 
God, hast thou slain him ? By God, many a fat morsel 
of his wealth has gone into thy maw! ” To this the 
other replied, “ By God, I was ordered to kill him by one 
at whose command I would smite off thy head were he so 
to direct me!” “ Would’st thou indeed slay me if Muham¬ 
mad should order it?” asked Huwayyisa. “ Yes,” answered 
the other, “ by AlHh, were he to command me to cut off 
thy head I would assuredly do so.” “By Allfih,” said the 
elder brother, “ a religion which hath brought thee to this 
is assuredly a marvellous thing ! ” and he thereupon adopted 
the Muhammadan faith. The legend of Khizr and Moses 
in the Kur’hn (sura xviii, v. 64—81), and the first story in 
the Masnavt of JaMlu’d-Di'n Riimi (well styled by Jhml 
“the Kur’hn in the Persian language”), which describes 
with the utmost nonchalance how a poor goldsmith is slowly 
poisoned by a saintly personage to gratify the ignoble 
passions of a king, afford further illustration of this attitude 
of mind, which also revealed itself to me very clearly in a 
conversation which I had with a B4bf Seyyid of Shirhz 
with whom I was disputing about the divine origin of 
Isl&m. In the course of the discussion I animadverted on 
the bloodshed and violence resorted to by Muhammad and 
his followers for the propagation of their religion. “ Surely,” 
replied the Seyyid, with a look of extreme surprise, “ you 
cannot pretend to deny that a prophet, who is an in¬ 
carnation of the Universal Intelligence, has as much right 
to remove anyone whom he perceives to be an enemy to 
religion and a danger to the welfare of mankind as a 
surgeon lias to amputate a gangrened limb ? ” 

I have insisted thus strongly on this point because we 


HIS EARLY LIFE. 


373 


cannot properly estimate the probability or improbability 
of an action alleged but not proved to have been committed 
by a given body of men unless we are in a position to 
form a just judgment on their opinions as well as their 
character. The idea of secret assassination is so repug¬ 
nant to us, and so incompatible with our notions of virtue 
and moral rectitude, that we naturally shrink from im¬ 
puting it without the clearest evidence to a man or body 
of men of whose character and qualities we have otherwise 
formed a high opinion. But in Asia, where human life is 
held cheap, and religious fervour runs high, a different 
standard of morality prevails in this matter ; and we must 
beware of being unduly influenced in our judgment by 
our own sentiments. 

III. Additional information derived directly from 
Subh-i-Ezel. 

Mlrzd Yahjii Subh-i-Ezel is the son of Mfrzd, ‘Abb&s 
(better known as Mirzd, Buzurg) of the district of Niir in 
Mazandaivin, and the half-brother of Mi'rzd Huseyn ‘All 
Beha’u’llah (see note 2 on p. 56 supra), to whom he is 
junior by 13 years 1 . He was bom in Teher&n about the 
year ad. 1830 2 . His father died when he was 7 years old. 

1 This is according to the first statement made to Captain 
Young, but on another occasion the difference was stated as 11 or 
12 years. Since, however, Behd’u’Mh was, according to Nabfl 
(see B. i, p. 521, and B. ii, pp. 983 and 986), bom in the year ad. 
1817, and since Subh-i-Ezel would seem to have been bom in 
ad. 1830 or 1831, thirteen years is the probable difference 
between their ages. 

2 The Persians are, as a rule, very careless about dates, and 
even well-educated men are often unable to state their exact age. 
To this rule Snbh-i-Ezel is no exception. Thus in November 
1884 (according to official documents) he gave his age as 56, 
while in October 1889 he informed Captain Young that he was 
58 or 59 years old. Perhaps, however, the former figure may be 
due to a misunderstanding on the part of the official engaged in 
drawing up the report on the exiles, for several remarks which 
Subh-i-Ezel made to me point to the correctness of the latter. 
Thus on one occasion he said, pointing to his son ‘Abdu’l-Wahid 
(a youth of apparently about 17 years of age), “ I was quite young 


374 NOTE W —MIKZA YAHYA “ SUBH-I-EZEL.” 

When and how he was brought to embrace the Bid 
doctrines I have not been able to ascertain, but he wa 
appointed by the B&b as his successor after the deaths ( 
MulM Huseyn of Bushraweyh and MuM Muhammad ‘A 
of BArfuriish (who was killed in the summer of a.d. 1849' 
the appointment (for text and translation of which se 
B. ii, pp. 996—997) being written from Chihrik. Fror 
that time until a.d. 1852 he generally resided during th 
summer at Teheran or ShimrAn, and during the winte 
in the district of Nur in MAzaudarAn, being continual) 
occupied in teaching and diffusing the Mb! doctrines. A 
the time of the BAb’s martyrdom (July 1850) he wa 
residing at the village of Zargand^ near Teheran. Mfrz 

Aki Khan of Nur, who succeeded Mirzit Takl Khan a 
Prime Minister at the end of a.d. 1851 under the titl 
of Sadr-i-A‘zam, was related to Subh-i-Ezel. Althougl 
formerly, when living in retirement at K&sh&n, he hai 
pretended to be favourably disposed towards the B&bh 
and had even had several interviews with MuM Sheykl 
‘All Jenab-i- Azim, he now shewed the utmost hostility 
towards them, especially towards Subh-i-Ezel. Indeed hi 
brother, Ja'far-Kuli KMn, who was on extremely bat 
terms with him, strongly advised Subh-i-Ezel to keep ou 
of his power, and, if possible, to avoid both Teheran ant 
Niir. 

When the attempt on the Shah’s life was made ii 
August 1852, Subh-i-Ezel was at Nvir, and so escapee 
arrest, though the Skill offered a reward of 1000 tmndn. 

like him when I left Persia” (in a.d, 1852). “About seventeen V 
I enquired. “ No,” he answered, “more than that; about 20 o: 
21.” A Turkish dervish who, impelled by curiosity to see s< 
celebrated a heresiarch, visited him soon after his arrival ii 
Cyprus, remarked with surprise ^ “ He is still but ; 

child !” Gobineau (p. 277) makes his age only 16 at the time o 
the BAb’s death (a.d. 1850), but it is more probable that this wa 
his age when he was designated by the BAb as his successor 
in which case he would be about 19 when he actually succeeded 
Bearing in mind the extraordinary virtue attributed by the BAbl: 
to this mystical number, we may well believe that such a coinci 
dence would strongly influence the choice of the faithful in hi: 
favour. 


THE RAID ON NTJR. 


375 


for his capture, and though ou oue occasion he actually 
met and conversed with au Arab who had been sent to 
apprehend him but failed to recognize him. It was probably 
immediately after this that he set out, disguised as a 
dervish (pp. 51—52 and p. 354 supra), for Baghdad, where 
he arrived, according to his own statement, “ in the year 
a.h. 1268, a few days after the arrival of Behh’u’flih.” 
Since, however, Behati’llah was imprisoned in Teherdn for 
four months after the attempt on the Shdh’s life, i.e. till 
December 1852, and since the year a.h. 1268 ended on 
October 14th, 1852, this date would appear to be erroneous. 

Forty days after the attack on the Shdh, after Subh-i- 
Ezel had fled in disguise as above described, a raid was 
made on Xur by two regiments of soldiers under the 
command of Mirz& Abu Tdlib Khbn. It appears that the 
Sh&h was induced to sanction this raid by representations 

made by Mirza Ak& Khdn the Sadr-i-A zam to the effect 
that Subh-i-Ezel had “ arrived there, declared himself to be 
the Imdm-Mahdi, and collected about a thousand followers.” 
Mfrzd Abu TAlib Khdn, though related to Subh-i-Ezel by 
marriage (his sister being wedded to Subh-i-Ezel’s eldest 
brother), shewed no compunction in carrying out the designs 
of his uncle the Sadr-i-A‘zam with the utmost rigour, and, 
indeed, totally disregarded the remonstrances and pleas for 
mercy which some of his .subordinate officers ventured to 
advance on its appearing that, so far from there being any 
rising, such of the inhabitants of the doomed village as had 
not fled into the mountains were unarmed and entirely 
unprepared for resistance. The village (containing some 
sixty houses) was sacked and plundered; two of its in¬ 
habitants, who were Bdbis, were killed; Subh-i-Ezel’s house 
was occupied by the principal officers; and his female 
relatives were confined to the upper rooms. A day or two 
after this a pursuit of the fugitives was organized; a 
shepherd betrayed their retreat; and the soldiers, falling 
upon them unawares, killed some (including Mirzd Muham¬ 
mad Taki Kh&n), wounded others (including Mulld Fatffih, 
who subsequently died in prison), and carried off 26 or 27 
(amongst whom were two women) to Teheran as captives. 
These captives, except the two women, were compelled to 
perform the journey on foot and in chains. On their 


376 NOTE W—SlfliZA YAHYA “ SUBH-I-EZEL.” 

arrival at Teherdn they happened to meet the Russia} 
Ambassador, who was moved with compassion at the sigh 
of their misfortunes, and addressed a remonstrance to thi 
SMh. He, finding on enquiry that there had been n< 
insurrection at till, ordered them to be set at liberty; bu 
the Sadr-i-A'zitm contrived to detain them in prison oi 
various pretexts, and there most of them died of erysipelas 
gaol-fever, and other diseases which rage in Persian prisons 
or were secretly made away with. The ravaged district o 
Nut was made over to the Sadr-i-A'zam, and one of tin 
two houses possessed by Subh-i-Ezel in Teherdn was confis 
cated by the Shrill, the other being sold by BehdVlldh. 

As I have embodied in previous footnotes all the mori 
important particulars which I learned from Snbh-i-Eze 
relative to the expulsion of the Bdbls from Baghdad (p. 84 
uote 2 supra), the journey from Baghdad to Coustantinoph 
(p. 90, note 1 supra), and the expulsion of the BAbfs fron 
Adrianople (p. 99, note 1 supra)] and as the Ezell versioi 
of the state of things which prevailed in the Bdbl com 
munity at Baghdad and Adrianople is sufficiently set fortl 
in the earlier portion of this note, I may now pass on ti 
consider the evidence afforded by the state archives pre 
served in Cyprus. 

IV. State papers preserved by the Cyprus Government. 

These documents, to which, as explained in the Intro 
duction, the kindness and courtesy of Sir Henry Bnlwe 
allowed me so free an access during my stay in Cyprus, an 
very numerous, and range from August 1878 (the year o 
the English occupation) to June 1889. The majority o 
them are written in English, and to those written in Turkisl 
English translations are always appended. All the paper 
of importance bearing on the subject, with the exception o 
certain despatches, were placed at my disposal, and durinj 
the four days for which they remained in my hands I wa 
able to make a complete transcript of them. This transcrip 
occupies 32 pages of foolscap. 

With these documents a desire to avoid undue prolixit; 
compels me to deal as briefly as may be. Many of then; 


THE CYPRUS EXILES. 


377 


indeed, would not be worth reproducing in full in any case, 
while others are abrogated by fuller and later reports, and 
there are naturally a good many repetitions, besides dis¬ 
cussions of the basis whereon the pensions of the exiles are 
to be calculated, which may well be omitted or abbreviated: 
but, were space of no object, there are several which I 
would fain have inserted in full. As it is, I can only give 
the substance and not the form of the papers; while, to 
save explanations and prevent confusion, I have normalized 
the spelling of names in accordance with the system 
adopted throughout this work, besides correcting obvious 
errors. With these preliminary observations I proceed to 
the examination of the documents in question. 

When the Turks evacuated Cyprus in 1878 they left 
behind them certain prisoners who had been iuterned in 
the fortress of Famagusta. In August of that year the 
Chief Secretary requested the Commissioner of that town 
to report on the number of these prisoners, their terms of 
imprisonment, their offences, and the like. The Com¬ 
missioner of Famagusta stated in a brief reply (dated 
August 8th, 1878) that the prisoners in question were 
five in number, to wit (1) a Greek named Katirji Yfinf, 
sentenced for life for robberies committed in Syria; (2) a 
Bosnian named Mustafa, (3) a Turk named Yusuf, sentenced 
for life for “ speaking against the Turkish religion,” and 
two Persians, (4) Subh-i-Ezel, and (5) Mushkin Kalain, 
whose crime and punishment are described as follows:— 
They wished to invent some new religion, and, wheu 
pressed, fled from Persia and settled in Turkey. After a 
time they again tried to carry out their maduess, and were 
consequently condemned by the Turkish authorities to 
imprisonment for life.” 

Yearly three, months after this date further information 
concerning the prisoners was demanded by the Chief Secre¬ 
tary, with the especial object of determining the amounts of 
the pensions or allowances which they were drawing. Iu 
his reply (dated Xovember 5th, 1S78; the Commissioner of 
Famagusta states that he “cannot get any official in¬ 
formation about them. The Kuzi says if there were any 
papers about them the late Kaim-w.ikam destroyed them, 
or his secretary lost them, for there are none forthcoming 


378 NOTE W —MiRZA YAHYA “ SUBH-I-EZEL.” 

now.” He then proceeds to speak of the two Persian 
prisoners as follows, premising that all the information 
which he has been able to obtain was “ gathered from the 
men themselves”:— 

“ 1st, Subh-i-Ezel. Handsome, well-bred looking man, 
apparently about 50. In receipt of pias. 1193 per month 
(the Kazi only gets pias. 1020). States that he was for a 
long time at the Persian Court, where his brother' was 
next officer in rank to the vizier. He afterwards went to 
Stamboul and then to Adrianople, where he was accused 
of plotting against the Porte and the religion of Islhin. 
Sentence—for life. Been here 11 years. 

“2nd, Mushkm Kalam. From Khurds&n. Allowed 
pias. 660 per month. Sentence—for life. Been here 11 
years. Came here at same time as Subh-i-Ezel. Sentenced 
for religious offence against Porte. Is 53 years old. Has 
two families, one here, and one in Persia. In appearance 
is a dried-up, shrivelled old man, with long hair almost to 
the waist.” Similar accounts of the other prisoners follow, 
and the report concludes with the statement that the late 
Ka’im-makam had left some old books, which, being 
alleged to contain only accounts for past years, were used 
in the office as Account and Military Police books, but 
that some old books still left would be searched for further 
particulars. 

The next document of interest is a petition from 
Mushkln-Kalain addressed to “His Excellency the High 
Commissioner of Cyprus” and dated August 15th, 1879. 
The original of this petition (apparently written by Mushkln 
Kalam himself) is in Turkish, but an English translation is 
appended. In it Mushkln Kalam states that he is a native 
of Khur&s&n; that, having proceeded to Mecca by way of 
Diyhr Bekr, he had extended his journey to Adrianople to 
see his “Sheykh” Mlrz4 Huseyn ‘All [Behd'u’lldh ]; that, 
after accomplishing this object, he was arrested in a.h. 1284 
(“ a.d. 1867 ”)" and exiled to Famagusta, where he had now 

1 Probably this is a mistake for “ father,” as Subh-i-Ezel 
repeatedly described the position of his father Mirzd Buzurg in 
these very words. 

2 A report from the MuhasdbdjVs (Accountant’s) Office dated 
December 10th, 1884, states that, although the original fermdn ol 


THE CYPRUS EXILES. 


379 


resided for 12 years; and that he has suffered much grief 
by reason of hh long banishment and separation from his 
family. In conclusion, he begs the High Commissioner 
“to pity his position, deprived so long of his family, and 
to deliver him from such a hard punishment.” The im¬ 
mediate effect of this petition was to call forth another 
demand for filler information from the Chief secretary, 
who desired especially to he informed on what authority 
Mrnshkm Kalam had been permitted to reside outside 
Famagusta 'his petition having been sent in from Nicosia). 
The Commissioner of Famagusta replied that the permission 
in question had been granted by a letter from the Chief 
Secretary dated .June 20th, 1879, and that, in the absence 
of any official Turkish regdster, a report based on the 
statements of the prisoners themselves and information 
supplied by the Turkish Ka im-maMm had been compiled 
by the Local Commandant of Military Police. This report 
discusses the cases of seven “prisoners." to wit those five 
previously mentioned, a woman named Khadfja charged 
with incendiari-rn, and an old blind man named Khudd- 
verdi, formerly in the Turkish artillery, who proved not to 
be a prisoner at all but a pensioner! That portion of the 
report which deals with the cases of dubh-i-Ezel and Mush- 
kin Kalam is as follows:— 

“No. 3. Subh-i-Ezel of Iran. Trade ? Nil. Crime'. 
Falsely accused of preaching against the Turkish religion. 
Where i Adrianople. Who ica.s charge made by !■ A man 
of Irdu By whom tried ' Came from Baghdad and went 
to Adrianople where charge was made. Valf of Adrianople 
ordered him to Constantinople, where he was examined by 
Kd.mil Pfisha (Prime Minister). When ) Twelve years ago. 
Precious imprisonment before coming here' Five months 
in Constantinople. before coming here under arrest, five 
years at Adrianople. Undergone here'. Twelve years. 

banishment cannot be found, an unofficial copy of it, received at 
the rime, gives the date of their banishment as RaC. vJ.-AH.ir oth 
A.H. 12so OJuIt 26th, a.d. lS6e , and there is no doubt that this 
is the correct date. The reckoning called Rtiml. Turkish , which 
is more than a year behind the hijra, was probably used by 
Mushkfn Kalam, and misapprehended by the translator. 


380 NOTE W—MIEZA YAHYA “ SUBH-I-EZEL.' 


Pension ? 38 J piastres a day current. Do. before ? 38J 
piastres a day Government exchange. Has a family of 17. 
His father was Chief Secretary of State to the present Shd.h 
of Persia (Ndsiru’d-Dln Shdh). 

“No. 4. Mushkln Kalam Efendl. Tracts'? Writer. 
Grime ? Being in company with a preacher against Ma¬ 
hometanism who came from Persia and Acre in Syria. 
Where? Constantinople. Punishment ? Transported for 
life, and to be imprisoned in Famagusta fortress. By 
whom? Authority of Sultdn ‘Aziz. Date? November 
a.h. 1284 (a.i>. 1868) *. [In the original document the 
corresponding Christian year is erroneously given as “a.d. 
1876’ J. Precious Imprisonment ? Six months in Constanti¬ 
nople. Has undergone? Twelve years. Any lodging? 
The fermdn ordering banishment stated that he was to get 
free lodging, but he has not had any [sc. free] lodging. 
This man has sent a petition to government about a week 
ago. 23/6/’79.” 

A document based on records of the Temylz Court and 
dated March 8th, 1880, first mentions Bdblism (“ i.e.” it 
explains, “communism”) as the crime with which Subh-i- 
Ezel and Mushkln Kalam were charged. It is "further 
stated that they were deported under Imperial Fermdn, 
and not sentenced by a judicial tribunal. The next docu¬ 
ment (undated), embodying the results of further enquiries 
at Famagusta, gives the date of their arrival in the Island 
as August 24th, a.h. 1284. [As the month and year are 
seemingly given according to the Turkish style, this would 
correspond to September 5th, a.d. 1868.] In this document 
mention is first made of Sheykh ‘All Sayydh, who arrived 
as an exile at Famagusta, accompanied by his wife and five 
children, in a.ii. 1285 (a.d. 1869—70)\ lie died 1 2 on July 

1 See preceding footnote. 

2 According to a statement made to mo by Subh-i-Ezel, 
Sheykh ‘All Sayydh (who was only about 35 years old) died very 
suddenly as though from poison, scarcely having time to summon 
his wife to his side ere he expired. He was arrested in company 
with ‘Abdu’l-Ghaffdr and Muhammad Bdkir (immediately to be 
mentioned), and banished with them to Famagusta. He con¬ 
tinued till his death to profess friendship towards Subh-i-Ezel, 
declaring that his only object in keeping on good terms with the 


THE CYPRUS EXILES. 


3S1 


•Jind. a.h. 1087 (‘'August 4th. a.h. 1871 ’and an allowance 
of '2\ piastres a day to his widow and each of his children 
was made hy the government. Mnshki'u K a lain subse¬ 
quently married the widow, and drew her pension in 
addition to his own. At the end of this document it 
is mentioned that “ a note in the Register of Orders in the 
Mu/hitt I’&jts [Accountant’s] office states that an allowance 
of 4 piastres a day for 14 persons in all, and 2 servants 
at o piastres the two” was granted to Suhh-i-Ezel, Sheikh 
‘Ah Sayyall, Mushkhi Kalam, and their respective families. 

The next document of importance is a report in Turkish, 
dated March 11th, 1880, from the Jluftii&'bt’if's office, to 
which an English translation is appended. Prom this it 
appears that the original number of Babi exiles sent to 
Famagusta was 14 ; that these were accompanied by 2 
servants; that to each of the former 4 piastres a day and 
to each of the latter 21 piastres a day (making a total of 
61 piastres a day) were allowed; that Abdn'1-Gliaffiir 
succeeded in effecting his escape from the Island on Sep¬ 
tember 17th, a.h. 1286 1 y Sept. 29th, a.d. 1870”); that 
[Sheikh] ‘Ah' Sayyah of Kara-Bagh died on July 22nd, 
a.h. 1287 (see preceding paragraph); that Fatima, one of 
Subh-i-E.:el's daughters, died on August 17th, a.h. 1287 
t” Aug. 29th, a.h. 1871 '); and that Muhammad Bakir died 
on November 10th, a.h. 1288 (“Nov. 22nd, a.h. 1872 "); 
that in consequence of this diminution in the number of 
the exiles a deduction of 16 piastres a day was made, 
thus reducing the daily allowance to 45 piastres ; but that 
subsequently, by an order dated September 25th, a.h. 1289 
(? Oct. 7th, a.h. 1873), 21 piastres a day were allowed to 

Behais was to endeavour to bring about a reconciliation and heal 
the schism. Suhh-i-Ezel, however, held aloof from him, and dis¬ 
regarded his overtures. Fl-om the Hash; Bih ish t l sec p. 352, supra ' 
it would appear that the first communications between the Bah 
and Subl;-i-E..el passed through him. 

1 In this and the succeeding dates wherein Christian months 
are combined with Muhammadan years the Turkish reckoning 
(which, as already noted, is more than a year behind the normal 
Muhammadan reckoning! seems to be employed. The Christian 
dates here given in inverted commas are derived from another 
document dated October 13th, 1884. 


382 NOTE \V-—MfRZA YAHYA “ SUBH-I-EZEL.” 

the widow aud each of the five children of She.ykh ‘Ah' 
Sayy&h, thus raising the daily allowance of the exiles again 
to 60 piastres 1 . 

The following document in Mr Cobham’s handwriting, 
dated March 11th, 1880, gives some additional statements 
made by Mushkln Kalam about himself: - 

“ It appears that in 1867 Mushkln Kalam Efendl came 
from Mesh-hed in Khur&s&n to Constantinople. His fame 

as a scribe had preceded him, and Fu’Ad and ‘All P Ash As 
asked him to remain in Constantinople. He refused both 
pension and presents offered him by [SulUn] ‘Abdu’l-‘Azlz, 
for whom he executed some illuminations. 

“ Presently he was accused by one Subh-i-Ezel, a Persian 
then at Adrianople, himself a member of some schismatic 
sect, of heresy. He had lived six months at Constantinople, 
where he was imprisoned, without question or trial, for 
another six months, and then sent to Famagusta. 

“Subh-i-Ezel was exiled at the same time on a similar 
charge of heresy.” 

The next document of importance is a petition in 
Turkish addressed by Subh-i-Ezel to the Commissioner 
of Famagusta, bearing the date April 27th, a.d. 1881. 
From this it appears that on the 24th of the preceding 
month Subh-i-Ezel had been informed that he might con¬ 
sider himself free to go where he pleased. For this per¬ 
mission he expresses the warmest gratitude, and further 
prays that, if it be possible, he may become an English 
subject, or be taken under English protection, so that 
he may with safety return to his own country or to Turkey. 
To this request, however, the Government did not see fit to 
accede. 

The next group of documents belong to the latter part 
of the year 1884, when a fresh attempt was made to 


1 It appears that Sheykh ‘All Sayy&h’s wife and five children 
(or such of them as were then born) joined him in Cyprus some 
time subsequently to his banishment, and hence were not in¬ 
cluded in the enumeration of the original exiles, and were not 
entitled to a pension. But in any case the rule appears to be 
that, unless specially continued by the Government, pensions to 
the families of exiles cease on the death of their head. 


THE CYPRUS EXILES. 


383 


establish the amount of the pension paid to the exiles on a 
definite basis. To this end it became important to discover 
(1) who were the original exiles ; (2) which of them had died 
or quitted the island, and when ; (3) which of their children 
had been born previously to and which subsequently to their 
banishment. For the elucidation of these points several 
lengthy reports were compiled in the Muhasebeji s (Ac¬ 
countant’s) office. As it was also decided that any one of 
the exiles entitled to a pension lost that pension on quitting 
the island, but might recover it on returning thither, their 
subsequent movements were carefully recorded. The details 
of apportionment of these pensions are of little historic 
interest, and I therefore omit them; but it is a most 
fortunate circumstance that they were apportioned in this 
way, inasmuch as the full record of facts embodied in these 
documents is entirely due to this circumstance. These 
various reports and tables I have striven to combine in 
the following tabular form, wherein is incorporated also 
information derived from Captain Young and Mr Houston 
independently of the reports. The names of the original 
exiles (described as 14 “masters” and 2 servants) are 
printed in italics, and after each of these is placed in 
heavier type the number which they bear on the pension- 
roll. The names of those who subsequently settled or 
were bom in the island are printed in ordinary type. To 
the names of all alike ordinal numbers are prefixed. 


384 


NOTE W—MfRZA YAHYA “ SUBH-I-EZEL. 


3 g J-.3 8 ts -2 £ 

1 9 g-S 2 

<3 0-2 7 i £ 

eq c § - Si 3 a o 
-■s5i'8'nJog.5“ 
° c d a n mQ 

g ® § 3)q> g o||^ 

03 Jh m O , ed 

a g & M .2*2 n 

*3.2 S ® 3 »o ^ a 
Is t .2 p ‘ o! 5>>,“-s 

2 » ES a ll £ c -ft 

o - as 53 g«- 2 ^ 

cj 3 fl a) _. 2 fl 

o2l<s l-l '^'2t32ts 


8.951 " g M •« - 8 
a ”° g'.,® SSg 

„ M 0 ) ® i « 1 _£3 fl r-H 

£ -S XI .2 '& CD .a ® ” O ft 

g J •“ ft,? > ~ ftjj 1 .” CO 
ft>-5 ° m £t £ E-(- fl § ft 1 ™ 
-a! 


S £ g.3 o g 

ro £ g>° 

“ M-a * £> 3 -* 
'S § S ~g e2 2 

3 2 - x o Ea - 

*-1 as .2.3 8 

2® _* „ *-• ^ ca fl 

CfJ r$ Q) , G jj fn 

2 o>.fl ° ft-S 

»H •*» 08.2 

■5 I gi?£° S 
.J.S 5 a S-.S 

W _| <3) O Ps Jd 

s S-°> g-g*. 

n. aj >-, a) « > <a 

a-Ssara^ 

S .—< ° ,-_ 

bC a3 'fl D ^ fl <£> 

3 rfl 8 N £ -2 N 

•fl _ q.Cl3 o 'UH 
O -07 c ^7 


TJ ,fl 

•-* fl t>. 

.2 e3 GO 

* © fl ^ 
® 2 o a 

ilfi 

fl g 

3 8 8^ 
fl ° £ 

° n S 

Q) *fl fl 
W *W* 


GO U bd fl C3 ^ fl 
03 fl CD CQ. fl .5 02 

fe 


' fl o m 08 
« w oj ta 
. o fl A to 


THE CYPRUS EXILES. 


385 


Q. <» 

s'-a 
«s* 
© 

X to 

eh-2 

3 

j a 


.► Ph 

'T © a 

o X --j 


qo a 
oo .2 

rH « 
T3 Jh 

co .a 


o “ 
p > 


l cS 
a pP 


O ' 


c3 

&H 

a 


§ p 

rn *r! 


o d O 


£ CO* M 
00 $ 

X 


© _ r; 
£ a < 


at s 

sU“.2 S 

g.j .aw 

§ 3“^-2ra 

O —- Ph^? 
rrt O 0) 

«s ?! GG 


>© 
^3 ert 

f . . 03 

O Ph 

at - 

a_ 

S a 


o g 

© o 


c 

— cJ 

-g-a 

a 


1.9 <s 


i <* “ g ^ 


P fl »3 


3 d>oo 

oo H fe ri 


D +3 

O CM 

* Ji 

i'S I 

a s 

3s 
"S a 

o 

__ m 

a a 
*£ 

a ° 

*a 

H § 

-§1 

!■§« 
'•. tj (T 


Ph 


£Q Sc 


= rS I 
.£* •• 
^a.s 

Cq.2-3 
2 +3 Ph 
P 

ffl 2 n 

-g a ° 
© 

go5 

g toe 
o C d 

^’5 a 

§ o g 

a^ ° 

o o 

E t *- 1 

-•£ § 
'g^hS 
PP ‘P © 

© J? -+3 


-3 


^ o 

a ^ 

^ a 

c |fj 
*’ H r 0) 

03 N 

cpq 
© *? 
a & 

W rO 

i> o. 
‘c CQ-“. 

^ 3 

CO -J A! 

’= *S>M 


P — 
6 ? 


.a «e 


© 


3 8 © 

S-g 


© 


H3 ^ 
%X 


s 

bo 

o3 

a 

c3 

P 


'S 


.2 a, 05 S 
a o B ° 
^.S § \f 

si' " 

o =3 - 
§ “■« 

< 


Jh TS 


CM r-< O 

CM CM CM 


c 

o 

m 


'S) 

§ 

p 


c3 

P 


c4 co lo 


CD 


Tji 


3 

m 


=§ 


>c 

e 


J3 


O CD CO 


os 


B. 


25 


386 


NOTE W—MflWA YAHYA “ SUBH-I-EZEE.’ 


S 

5 

9 

« 


a 


3 -3 


o fl 


bO 

Pi 

eg 

Q 


a 

o 


i i 


T3 

eg 

a 

a . 

eg 13 

-3'? 

pCH 


^ £ 52 o 

% O C8 

o 5^ d 

n3 ft 3 

- 


rP 

Nj..to 

TO 'tS 

3 B 

3 


3 17=1 
§ s 


^ r w 

<D 9^ 


to <D 

P £ 

bC« 

eg 

a 


3 
h "3 

i—i 0 

ft 


y 43 □ 

o d » £ 

rd « 


<D 3 
S P 43 

^ eg 


d 

<u 

a 

s a 

g 2 

** 

eo 

O 1-4 

“ (H 


d 

■h id ■« 

o fl S„ 

t 1 
a 


a S 


S2 

ft5 
ts ~ a -s 

/ii ij) TO 


[I ^ g 

a- 


6 o 
53 **"* 

<D 
<d jd 

d +3 . 

TO . rd 

d ® 

'§ s-c 

P'd 
^ § o 
. 

^ CO ^ 

«-d jy 


o 


bo 

Pi 

eg 

ft 


T) 

3* 


a 

"d 

*4 


h 

eg 


3. 

eg 

H 


3 

<!’ 


a 

+j* 

£ 


T3 

'<1 


ft 

P- M 

«s 

oj a 


3 

t- O 

00 M 
0> 

a -e 


4-3 Prt 

2fl 
to 03 
P •* 
<1 £ 

*3 §< 
QJ <o 


$> . 
JS bJ 

‘/J v£g 

wM 

•th eg 
<g 

®*S 

-«g 


MushHn-Kalam , 12, | Head. — From the colophon of a MS, transcribed by 


^88 NOTE W—Ml'RZA YAHYA “SUBH-I-EZEL.’ 


S 3 tM O O 

.C , et-, 

t*»o tc' EI ° 

-Q **-• . CD CD 

■g § 
3 | S-S » 

o *3 oj 
co « +» 

<U a - 

ft .2 <d -3 o 

_r] ta e 3 

3 . 0.9 f! | 

S g-g^.23 

*J gS-^ 

3S S'" 1 , 

■y o a q ® 

i® s-3 a * 

ssL-aJL-a 


,,J 


• CO » CO rrt rrt 

3g$3oS 

a p,s 42 a 

3 hH CD w O 
0^ & 
s3 o 52 d 
= § £ d 

O _5^ rC p D4_, 

■H -— 1 bD O O d 
h a d S h «3 
3 a w (u h 
V c3 % u .2 nd 

.-go 

d sd. w « a> 5 

_ ^ d i-h ■*» o 
3 o i o **-* 

33.2 n ,| M 

L, on r* 3 53 

5 ift'° ■§ g -u- 
H«si» 
; «bftS0 
I 2 .£ S a 

d .S g 
o k m g>S o 
Sw-S-obY-S 


bO <U a> 

.S rfi 's: ® 

s ^ 

H ffl ti | ® 
ffi ti ^ ^ (H 

CC 3 ^ O 

« t> d <d 

?3 0.S^ 
s^H-So -2 

■ ^ t3 i ^ 2? o 

fts^-ss 
3 3| 

d S? a o-fl 
^ j 3 .d <1 t-H 
d IS c a> 
,rH g ^ .S <u 
. £ cu cd ,_ “ 

,-+^ <1 ^ O *43 rj 
fl . 1—1 CQ d 

1-2 g o „2 

s -w 1 —I OT 
° tn o u* ^ ^ 

§;.§ ^ g Aj S 

OHj W co W j_ ( 


possession of both the servants allotted 
to the exiles. “ It is not clear," observes 
the Keceiver General, “why Mushkin 
Kalam should have both the servants, 
but Government need not, I think, object 


THE CYPRUS EXILES. 


o> 

N 

fciO 

o 
P ^ 

co 


£ 

§o M 
03 o 


«r 

** fl 
o © 


1 o p -e 
. to O S 


•g a 

3 

© Fr 


I Cfl rP * 


©^•2 
2^ 
o 5 

© P 'P 

CTt © 

2 © do 

© to P 
* 


C3 « 


fl 2 

c-S §..i 

03 .^5 -*» ^Ej' 

> ( 
a >>■* 
p P a 

2*3 S M 

.£ p Ph 2 

Sh 

© O o o 
© 

£<» fl " 


4.2^ 


pq <3 

. o3 T3 +3 
© n 
Xi.>0 

bo o ^ 

p o 
o © © 

^ ** w 

~ ►> 

Ti C3 

. 

- ., cj a) 

I SS S 

§ § 


3 


P 

CM 

CM 


£ 

P 


'TS 00 


w 


§* 

§ 


8 


*ss. 

^ . 

2 

S<3 

S-'g 


389 


390 


NOTE X—THE SUPERSCRIPTION OF 


NOTE X. 

Translation of the superscription and exordium of 
the Epistle to the King of Persia. 

My original purpose was to give in this note nothing 
more than a translation of that portion of the “Epistle to 
the King of Persia” which is omitted in the text, but the 
permission so generously accorded to me by Baron Rosen 
to make full and free use of the proof-sheets of his still 
unpublished work enables me to add the text and trans¬ 
lation of the instructions given to the bearer of the missive. 
[See p. 102 supra, and footnote.] The text of these 
instructions is as follows:— 

uLLJLJ! L a j a 

Lti I 

ijc euJai L j J a-iLs ^ oL» <ul jJlJ 

O L -. io VI ^ aj^J?J 1 j j ^ O V 1 

- S- 

OliaL*J1 Jj> L hi j db j 

j JjAjj OiL ^tS3l j ^yu 

^ Jj^ hi ^5 oLhhJl >■ J 1 '‘tr— 

_9 djli ol Ja-I j oliH ^3 

^‘■^‘“11 >—J^gJa l_>l j a j.mr. 


391 


THE EPISTLE TO THE KING OF PERSIA. 

oliaUI L 61 6b Jc 6y6 61 a! 3 6y*~JI 

J^i j IjaJI JL Jl jdb j v^ia^. V JAIL 

»j _? J®Li b „lJ-| bil \—i J i_$l 

t/'^-JI ^ cW ^ btjc^i bLL- 6 a^l^bll 
jyOi v j jjoi 6r W ^ bl>V 1*1I 
-ui-1 JJ Jyn aJc ju U j aJj 61 j J..JJ 1 j 
d J bj-ti L _j bisb^i a~Aj J jALAI oj L 
bU- 6 (j^j^l ol Aojl J J _j bib- 
j ^ ^ bl>l ij jf~ bo jl L jjjSbl j 

* jjd I ^J*ll Cil j bbai 6 Lo Jel V 

Translation. 

“ This is a copy of what was written on the hack of the 
Epistle to the King. 

‘ He is God, exalted is He. 

‘We ask God to send one of His servants, and to detach 
him from Contingent Being, and to adorn his heart with 
the decoration of strength and composure, that he may 
help his Lord amidst the concourse of creatures, and, when 
he becometh aware of what hath been revealed for His 
Majesty the King, that he may arise and take the Letter, by 
the permission of his Lord, the Mighty, the Bounteous, and 
go with speed to the abode of the King. And when he shall 
arrive at the place of his throne, let him alight in the inn, 


392 NOTE X—EPISTLE TO THE KING OP PERSIA. 


and let him hold converse with none till he goeth forth one 
day and standeth where he [i.e. the King] shall pass by. 
And when the Royal harbingers shall appear, let him raise 
up the Letter with the utmost humility and courtesy, and 
say, “It hath been sent on the part of the Prisoner 1 .” 
And it is incumbent upon him to be in such a mood that, 
should the King decree his death, he shall not be troubled 
within himself, and shall hasten to the place of sacrifice 
saying, “ 0 Lord, praise be to Thee because that Thou 
hast made me a helper to Thy religion, and hast decreed 
unto me martyrdom in Thy way! By Thy Glory, I would 
not exchange this cup for [all] the cups in the worlds, for 
Thou hast not ordained any equivalent to this, neither 
do Kawthar and Salsabfl 2 rival it!” But if he [i.e. the 
King] letteth him [i.e. the messenger] go, and interfereth 
not with him, let him say, “ To Thee be praise, 0 Lord of 
the worlds! Verily I am content with Thy good pleasure 
and what Thou hast predestined unto me in Thy way, even 
though I did desire that the earth might be dyed with my 
blood for Thy love. But what Thou wiliest is best for me: 
verily Thou knowcst what is in my soul, while I know not 
what is in Thy soul; and Thou art the All-knowing, the 
Informed.” ’ ” 

Baron Rosen, after quoting the version of Mfrz4 Badf ’s 
mission and martyrdom which I published at pp. 956 — 957 
of my second paper on the B&bfs in the J.lt.A.S. for 1889 , 
observes that, considering the text of the above instruc¬ 
tions, and the minute obedience yielded by Behi’u’lUh’s 
followers to his slightest wish, this version is extremely 
improbable. He says:—“ S’adresser au souverain de la 
Perse, en lui disant ‘j’ai un ferman pour vous’ etc.,—cela 
n’est certes pas l’humiliW parfaite dont parle l’hdriSsiarque.” 
The opinion thus expressed by Baron Rosen is entirely 
borne out by the present work (see pp. 102—105 supra), 
and I am now quite convinced that it is correct. He 
further adds, “ Quant k la date de l’dvdnement, j’ai toutes 
raisons de croire qu’il s’est passd au mots de Juillet de 
1’aniVe 1869 , indiqude par M. Browne.” 

1 Cf. p. 104 supra. 

2 The names of two rivers in Paradise. 


THE ARABIC EXORDIUM. 


393 


Translation of the Exordium of the Epistle. 

\oW 

“ This is what was revealed in the ‘ HeykaP ’ for His Majesty 
the King. ' He is God, exalted is His state [/'«] 
Might and Power. 

‘ 0 King of the earth, hear the voice of this servant. 
Verily I am a man who hath believed in God and His 
signs, and I have sacrificed myself in His way; to this do 
the afflictions wherein I am (the like of which none amongst 
mankind hath borne) testify, and my Lord the All-knowing 
is the witness to what I say. I have not summoned men 
unto aught save unto thy Lord and the Lord of the worlds. 
In love for Him there hath come upon me that whereof the 
eye of creation hath not beheld the like: in this will those 
servants whom the veils of humanity have not withheld 
from confronting the Chiefest Outlook bear me out, and 
beside them He with whom is the knowledge of all things 
iu a Preserved Tablet. Whenever the clouds of fate rain 
down the darts of affliction in the way of God the Lord of 
the Names, I advance to meet them; to this testifieth 

1 These numerals, as remarked by Baron Rosen (pp. 146— 
147), clearly stand for the equivalent letters , Behd. 

2 Concerning the SUra-i-Heykal (of which the Epistles to the 
Kings collectively form only a portion) see note 1 at the foot of 
p. 108 supra; B. ii, p. 954 ; and p. 149 of Baron Rosen’s forth¬ 
coming work. My Kirmdn MS. lacks this heading, for which the 
following is substituted :—“ This Epistle was revealed in Adria- 
nople specially for His Majesty the King. This servant, the con¬ 
fidential attendant of their Excellencies [apparently Behd-’u’lldh 
and his sons], sends it for you to peruse. The meanings of sundry 
Arabic phrases which were in my mind have been written down 
agreeably to the command of God’s Most Mighty Branch 
[ Qhusnu’lldhi ’l-ajam].” The original from which the Kirmdu 
text and the glosses appended to it (which agree almost exactly 
with those given by Baron Rosen) were derived would therefore 
appear to have been communicated to the B&bls in Persia by 
Akd MIrz4 Ak4 Jdn (“ Jendb-i-Khddimu'Udh ”) at the command 
of Behd’u’lHh’s eldest son ‘Abb4s Efendt. [See Introduction ; 
Note W, p. 361 supra; and B. i, pp. 518—519.] 


394 NOTE X—EPISTLE TO THE KING OF PERSIA. 


every fair and rightly-informed person, flow many are 
the nights wherein the wild beasts rested in their lairs, and 
the birds in their nests, while this servant was in chains 
and fetters, and found for himself none to succour, nor any 
helper! Remember the grace of God towards thee when 
thou wast in prison with sundry others, and He brought 
thee out thence, and succoured thee with the hosts of the 
Invisible and the Visible, until the King sent thee to 
‘Irak 1 after that We had disclosed to him that thou wast 
not of [the number of] the seditious. Verily such as follow 
[their] lusts and turn aside from virtue, these are in 
evident error. And as for those who work sedition in the 
earth, and shed blood, and falsely consume men’s wealth, 
we are quit of them, and we ask God not to associate 
us with them either in this world or in the world to come, 
unless they repent unto Him; verily He is the Most 
Merciful of the merciful. Verily it behoveth him who 
turneth towards God to be distinguished in all actions from 
what is apart from Him, and to conform to that which is 
enjoineduj)on him in the Book: thus is the matter decreed 
in a Perspicuous Book. As for such as cast the command 
of God behind their backs and follow after their lusts, they 
are in grievous error. 

1 0 King, I conjure thee by thy Lord the Merciful to 
regard [His] servants with the gaze of pitiful eyes 2 , and to 
rule with justice in their midst, that God may award His 
favour unto thee: verily thy Lord judgeth as He pleaseth. 
The world shall perish with whatsoever of glory and abase¬ 
ment is therein, while dominion remaineth unto God, the 
Supreme and All-knowing King. Say, Verily He hath 
kindled the Lamp of the Beydn *, and He will continue 
it with the oil of ideas and expression: exalted is thy Lord 
the Merciful beyond this, that created beings should with¬ 
stand His command. Verily He will shew forth what He 
pleaseth by His authority, and will guard it with a cohort 
of the Proximate Angels. He controlleth His handiwork 
and compelleth His creation : verily He is the All-knowing, 
the Wise. 

1 i.e. Baghdad. 

2 Literally, “ with the glances of the eyes of thy clemeucy.” 

3 Or “of Utterance” or “ Revelation.” 


THE ARABIC EXORDIUM. 


395 


‘ 0 King, verily I was as [any] one amongst mankind, 
slumbering upon my couch. The gales of the All-Glorious 
passed by me and taught me the knowledge of what hath 
been. This thing is not from me, but from One [who is] 
Mighty and All-knowing. And He bade me proclaim 
betwixt the earth and the heaven, and for this hath there 
befallen me that whereat the eyes of those who know 
overflow with tears. I have not studied those sciences 
which men possess, nor have I entered the colleges: enquire 
of the city wherein I was, that thou mayst be assured that 
I am not of those who speak falsely. This is a leaf which 
the breezes of the Will of thy Lord the Mighty, the 
Extolled, have stirred. Can it be still when the rushing 
winds blow ? No, by the Lord of the Names and Attri¬ 
butes ! Rather do they move it as they list, [for] Being 
belongeth not to Nonentity in presence of the Eternal. 
His decisive command did come, causing me to speak for 
His celebration amidst the worlds. Verily I was not save 
as one dead in presence of His command, the hand of thy 
Lord the Merciful, the Clement, turning me. Can any one 
speak on his own part that for which all men, whether low 
or high, will persecute him ? No, by Him who taught the 
Pen eternal mysteries, save him who is strengthened by 
One Mighty and Strong. 

‘ The Supreme Pen addresseth me, saying, “ Fear not; 
[but] relate unto His Majesty the King what hath come 
upon thee. Verily his heart is between the fingers of thy 
Lord the Merciful: perchance He will cause the sun of 
justice and kindness to dawn from the horizons of his 
heart.” Thus was the command revealed from the All- 
Wise. 

‘ Say, “ 0 King, look with the gaze of justice upon thy 
servant; then decide according to the right concerning 
what hath befallen him. Verily God hath appointed thee 
His shadow amongst [His] servants 1 , and the sign of His 
Power to the dwellers in the land: judge between us and 
those who have oppressed us without proof or clear warrant. 
Verily those who surround thee love thee for their own 
sakes, while [thy] servant loveth thee for thine own sake; 


1 See footnote on p. 156 supra. 


396 NOTE X-—EPISTLE TO THE KING OF PERSIA. 


nor doth lie desire aught save that he may bring thee nigh 
unto the station of Grace and turn thee unto the right 
hand of Justice: thy Lord is witness unto that which 
I say.” 

‘ 0 King, if thou wouldest hear the cry of the Supreme 
Pen, and the murmur of the Dove of Eternity on the 
branches of the Lote-tree beyond which there is no passing 1 
in praise of God, the Maker of the Names, the Creator of 
the earth and the heaven, verily this would cause thee 
to attain unto a station whence thou wouldest behold in 
existence naught save the effulgence of [God] the Adored, 
and [whence] thou wouldest regard dominion 2 as a thing of 
least account in thine eyes, leaving it to him who desireth 
it, and turning toward a horizon illumined with the lights 
of [God’s] countenance; neither wouldest thou ever endure 
the burden of dominion, unless [it were] to help thy Lord, 
the High, the Supreme. Then would the people of the 
Supreme Concourse magnify thee [saying], “How good is 
this most glorious state,” if thou wouldest [but] ascend 
thereunto by authority accorded unto thee in the Name of 
God. 

‘ Amongst mankind are some who say that this servant 
desireth naught save the perpetuation of his name, and 
others who say that he desireth the world for himself, 
notwithstanding that I have not found during the days of 
my life a place of safety such that I might set my feet 
therein, but was ever [overwhelmed] in floods of affliction, 
whereof none wots save God: verdy He knoweth what 
I say. How many were the days wherein my friends were 
disquieted for my distress, and how many the nights 
wherein the sound of wailing arose from my family in fear 
for my life ! None will deny this save him who is devoid of 
truthfulness. Doth he who regardeth not [his] life [as 
assured] for less than a moment desire the world ? [I] 
marvel at those who speak after their lusts, and wander 
madly in the desert of passion and desire. They shall be 
questioned as to that which they have said; on that day 
they shall not find for themselves any protector nor any 

1 See Kur’dn, liii, 14. 

2 Or, “ the world,” for the word tu, bears this meaning also. 


THE ARABIC EXORDIUM. 


397 


helper. And amongst them are those who say, “ Verily he 
denieth God,” notwithstanding that all my limbs testify 
that there is no God but Him, and that those whom He 
quickened with the truth and sent for [men’s] guidance are 
the manifestations of His Most Comely Names, the day- 
springs of His Supreme Attributes, and the recipients of 
His revelation in the realm of creation; by whom the Proof 
of God unto all beside Himself is made perfect, the 
standard of the [faith of the] Unity is set up, and the 
sign of renunciation becomes apparent; and by whom every 
soul taketh a course towards the Lord of the Throne. We 
bear witness that there is no God but Him; everlastingly 
He was, and there was nothing beside Him; everlastingly 
He will be, even as He hath been. Exalted is the Merciful 
One above this, that the hearts of the people of wisdom 
should ascend unto the comprehension of His Nature, 
or that the understanding of such as inhabit the worlds 
should rise to the knowledge of His Essence. Holy is He 
above the knowledge of all save Himself, and exempt is He 
from the comprehension of what is beside Him: verily in 
Eternity of Eternities was He independent of the worlds. 

‘ Remember the days wherein the Sun of Bat-h4 1 shone 
forth from the horizon of the Will of thy Lord, the High, 
the Supreme, [how] the doctors turned aside from him, and 
the cultured found fault with him ; that thou mayst under¬ 
stand what is now hidden within the Veil of Light. Matters 
waxed grievous for him on all sides, until those who were 
[gathered] round him were dispersed by his [own] com¬ 
mand 2 : thus was the matter decreed from the Heaven of 
Glory. Then remember when one of them came in before 
the NfjashP and recited unto him a sura of the Kur’&n. 
He said to those around him, “Verilyit hath been revealed 
on the part of One All-knowing and Wise. Whosoever 
accepteth what is best, and believeth in that which Jesus 
brought, for him it is impossible to turn aside from what 

1 i.e. Muhammad. Bat-ha is here synonymous with Mecca. 

2 Allusion is made to the flight of the persecuted and unpro¬ 
tected Muslims from Mecca in the fifth year of Muhammad’s 
mission. 

3 Nejdshl is a generic name for the Kings of Abyssinia, as 
Kisra is for the Persian, and Kaysar for the Roman emperors. 


398 NOTE X—EPISTLE TO THE KING OF PERSIA. 


hath been read: verily we testify nnto [the truth of] it, 
even as we testify unto [the truth of] what is with us of 
the books of God 1 the Protecting, the Self-Subsistent.” 

‘ By God, 0 King, if thou wouldest hear the strains of 
the dove which cooetli on the branches with varied notes 
by the command of thy Lord the Merciful, thou wouldest 
assuredly put away dominion behind thee and turn unto 
the Chiefest Outlook, the station from the horizon of which 
the Book of the Dawn is seen, and wouldest spend what 
thou hast, seeking after that which is with God. Then 
wouldest thou find thyself in the height of glory and 
exaltation, and the zenith of greatness and independence: 
thus hath the matter been written in the primaeval reve¬ 
lation 2 by the Pen of the Merciful One. There is no good 
in what thou dost possess to-day, for another shall possess 
it to-morrow in thy stead. Choose for thyself that which 
God hath chosen for His elect: verily He will bestow upon 
thee a mighty dominion in His Kingdom. We ask God 
that He may help thy Majesty to hearken unto the Word 
whereby the world is illumined, and preserve thee from 
those who are remote from the region of nearness. 

‘ Glory be to Thee, 0 God! 0 God, how many heads 
have been set up on spears in Thy way! How many breasts 
have advanced to meet arrows for Thy good pleasure! 
How many hearts have been riddled for the exaltation of 
Thy Word and the diffusion of Thy Religion ! How many 
eyes have overflowed [with tears] for Thy love! I ask 
Thee, 0 King of kings, Pitier of thralls, by Thy Most 
Great Name, which Thou hast made the day-spring of Thy 
Most Comely Names and the manifestation of Thy Supreme 
Attributes, to lift up the veils which intervene between 
Thee and Thy creatures, withholding them from turning 
towards the horizon of Thy revelation; then draw them, 0 
God, by Thy Supreme Word from the left hand of fancy 
and forgetfulness to the right hand of certainty and know- 

1 i.e. the Sacred books which we now possess, the Gospel. 

2 Literally “ the Mother of Revelation'” or “ of the Beydnf a 

phrase evidently copied from the expression which 

occurs in several places in the Kur’an {Miras iii, 5 ; xiii, 39 ; xliii, 

3, &c.). 


THE ARABIC EXORDIUM. 


399 


ledge, that they may know what Thou, in Thy bounty and 
grace, desirest for them, and may turn towards the Mani¬ 
festation of Thy religion and the Day-spring of Thy signs. 
0 God, Thou art the Gracious, the Lord of great bounty; 
withhold not Thy servants from the Most Mighty Ocean, 
which Thou hast made to produce the pearls of Thy 
Knowledge and Wisdom, neither repel them from Thy 
Gate, which Thou hast opened unto all who are in Thy 
heaven and Thy earth. O Lord, leave them not to them¬ 
selves, for they know not, and flee from what is better for 
them than whatsoever hath been created in Thine earth. 
Look upon them, 0 Lord, with the glances of the eyes of 
Thy favours and bounties, and free them from passion and 
lust, that they may draw nigh unto Thy Supreme Horizon, 
and may discover the delight of remembering Thee, and 
the sweetness of the table 1 which hath been sent down 
from the heaven of Thy Will and the air of Thy Bounty. 
Everlastingly hath Thy Grace encompassed [all] contingent 
beings, and Thy Mercy preceded 2 3 [all] creatures: there is 
no God but Thee, the Forgiving, the Merciful. 

‘Glory be to Thee, 0 God! Thou knowest that my 
heart is melted about Thy business, that my blood boils 
in my veins with the fire of Thy love, aud that every drop 
thereof crieth unto Thee with dumb eloquence 11 [saying], 
“ 0 Lord Most High, shed me on the earth in Thy way,” 
that there may grow from it what Thou desirest in Thy 
books, but hast concealed from the sight of Thy servants, 
save such as have drunk of the Kawthar 4 of knowledge 
from the hands of Thy grace, and the Salsabtl of wisdom 
from the cup of Thy bounty. Thou knowest, 0 God, that 
in every action I desire nothing save Thy business, and 
that in every utterance I seek naught but Thy celebration, 
neither doth my pen move except I desire therein Thy 


1 Cf. Kur’an v, 112, 114. 

2 See note 1 on p. 113 supra. 

3 Literally, “the tongue of [its] state” (JlAl OU), which, as 
contrasted with “the tongue of utterance” (Jlhll OU), signifies 
the words wherewith the state of an inarticulate thing may ap¬ 
propriately be described. 

4 Kawthar and Salsabtl, the names of two rivers in Paradise. 


400 


NOTE Y—RECENT PERSECUTIONS. 


good pleasure and the setting forth of what Thou hast 
enjoined upon me by Thy authority. Thou seest me, 0 
God, confounded in Thine earth: if I tell what Thou hast 
enjoined on me, Thy creatures turn against me; and if I 
forsake what Thou hast enjoined on me on Thy part, I 
should be deserving of the scourges of Thy wrath, and far 
removed from the gardens of nearness to Thee. No, by 
Thy Glory, I advance toward Thy good pleasure, turning 
aside from what the souls of Thy servants desire : and 
accept what is with Thee, forsaking what will remove me 
afar off from the retreats of nearness to Thee and the 
heights of Thy Glory. By Thy Glory, for Thy love I flinch 
not from aught, and for Thy good pleasure I fear not all 
the afflictions in the world: this is but through Thy 
Strength and Thy Might and Thy Grace and Thy Favour, 
not because I am deserving thereof.’” 

The Epistle then continues as in the text (pp. 108—151 
supra). 


NOTE Y. 

The Martyrs of Isfahan, the martyrdom of Mirza 
Ashraf of A bade, and the persecutions of Si-dih. 

(1) The Martyrs of Isfahan. 

Of the martyrdom of Seyyid Hasan and Seyyid Huseyn 
(called by the Behhh's Mahbubu’sh-shuliadd “the Darling of 
Martyrs ” and Sultohni sh-skuhada “ the King of Martyrs”), 
with which the present history concludes, I gave the 
substance of what I had heard at Isfahan and Shi'rhz at 
pp. 489—592 of my first paper on the Bdbls in the 
J.R. A.8. for 1889. That account will be found to agree 
in all material details with the version contained in this 
work, and, as regards the actual facts of the case, I have 
but little to add, except that, according to Subh-i-Ezel, one 
of his followers named MuM K&zim (of whose martyrdom 
the Beh&’ls make no mention) was put to death in Isfahan 
at or about the same time (see B. ii, p. 995, note on p. 490). 


THE MARTYRS OF ISFAHAN. 


401 


During my stay in Kirmdn, however, I became intimate 

with a certain Sheykh S- (not the B&bf courier whom, 

in Note Z, I have designated by the same abbreviation), 
a dervish endowed with considerable intellectual gifts not 
yet wholly destroyed by excessive indulgence in narcotics 
and stimulants, who had spent the greater part of his life 
in that eager and restless search after religious novelties 
called by such as pursue it seyr-i-kulub (an expression 
which I can render but clumsily as “spiritual sight-seeing”), 
and who, so far as the prevailing antinomianism of his 
character can permit one to describe him as holding any 
definite religion at all, was an adherent of the B&bl faith, 
for which in his youth he but narrowly escaped martyrdom. 

One evening this Sheykh S-, being in a communicative 

mood, gave me an account of a conversation alleged to 
have taken place between himself and the Shfih’s eldest 
son, the Prince Zillu’s-Sult&n, relating in part to the 

martyrdom of these two Seyyids. That Sheykh S-’s 

story is substantially true I see no reason to doubt, inas¬ 
much as many other things which he related to me have 
subsequently been confirmed by other testimony, and, so 
far as I could judge, untruthfulness was not one of his 
faults. At all events his narrative is too characteristic to 
be consigned to oblivion, and I therefore give it for what it 
is worth as nearly as I can remember in his own words. 

“When I was at Isfahan,” said Sheykh S-, “I was 

for some time living on the bounty and in the house of one 
of the ZiUu’s-SuMn’s attendants, just as I am now living 

at the expense of Mfrzft, - . This man was himself one 

of the ‘Friends’ (i.e. the Bhbfs). Through him, as I 
suppose, the Zillu’s-SulUn learned that I had visited Acre. 
At any rate, one evening he summoned me into his presence. 
On entering the room where he was sitting, I halted near 
the door and made my obeisance. ‘ Come nearer,’ said lie. 
I advanced a few paces, and again halted. ‘ Nearer,’ said 
he again. In short he continued to bid me approach until 
I was close to him, when he commanded me to be seated. 

‘ Now,’ said he, ‘ I hear that you have been to Acre. I do 
not ask whether you are a B4bf or not. A man may go 
amongst the Jews or the Christians or the Guebres out of 
curiosity without becoming one of them, and I will suppose 

B. 26 


402 


NOTE Y—RECENT PERSECUTIONS. 


that yon went amongst the B&bfs for the same reason. 
I ask you, then, being myself curious, what you saw and 
heard from the time that you entered Acre to the time 
when you left it two stages behind you ? ’ Seeing his 
humour, I perceived no better course than to relate to him 
all that I saw and heard, even as I have related it to you 1 . 
When I had finished, the Prince said, ‘ Stand up.’ I did 
so, and he cast over my shoulders a costly shawl, exclaiming 
as he did so, ‘Bravo! You have told me the truth without 
exaggeration or suppression. ’ Then he asked me to let him 

see the epistle with which I had been honoured. 

I gave it to him, and he read it attentively. When he had 
finished it he laid it down and remained silent for a while 
wrapped in thought. Then he said, 1 Let me keep this 
by me to-night: I will return it to you to-morrow.’ I 
accordingly withdrew, leaving the epistle in his hands. On 
the morrow, when I went to receive it back, the Prince said, 
‘ You have heard, of course, how I killed those two Seyyids 
here because they were Bfibfs V ‘I was not in Isfahan at 
the time,’ I answered, ‘but of course I heard about it.’ 
‘Well,’ said the Prince, ‘I will tell you how it happened. 
The Imfim-.Jum'a and Sheykh Bfikir owed those two Seyyids 
money, and coveted their rvealth and possessions, wherefore 
they fell to compassing their death, so that they might 
plunder their houses and recover the bonds which they had 
given to them. On their information and complaint I 
arrested the two Seyyids and cast them into prison, for I 
feared these doctors of religion, and they had said to me, 
“ Either you will slay these two Seyyids, or you will cease 
to be governor of Isfahan.” On the second or third day 
after this, in the evening, I, being alone with the Bmanu’l- 
Mulk and my secretary, caused the two Seyyids to be 
brought before me, and thus addressed them:— “ I do not 
wish to kill you. I would not willingly shed the blood of a 
Seyyid. But I fear Sheykh B&kir and the IiiAm-.Tum'a. 
If you will but curse that Seyyid of Slifr&z 2 , I will at 

1 The substance of Sheykh S-’s narrative, which I heard 

him repeat several times, will be found at p. 519 of my first paper 
on the Bfibis in the J. R. A. S. for 1889. 

2 i.e. Mirzfi ‘Ah' Muhammad the Bfib. 


THE MARTYRS OF ISFAHAN. 403 

once release you, and thenceforth neither I nor the clergy 
will have any right to interfere with you further.” “We 
cannot,” they replied, “do this thing which you ask of us.” 
I then said, “ Look at the matter in another way; either you 
regard this Seyyid as God, or you do not. If you do not, 
then curse him. If you do, then he is a boundless sea of 
light, and your cursing him will no more harm him than 
casting a dog into the ocean would render it impure.” 
When I had said this, the younger of the two brothers, 
Seyyid Huseyn, raised his head and answered, “You are a 
prince and the King’s son; such words beseem you not.” 
On hearing these words I was overcome with anger, and, 
standing up, smote the speaker on the face. Directly I had 
done so I was sorry, and ordered them to be taken back 
to prison. As they still refused to recant, they were 
executed in the Meydan-i-Shlh. Afterwards their bodies 
were dragged by the feet through the streets and bazaars, 
and cast out of the gate beyond the city walls.’ When 
the Prince Zillu’s-Sult&n had concluded his narrative he 
swore thrice ‘by the death of JaUlu’d-Dawla' (‘ bi-marg-i- 
Jaldlu’d-Dawla’Y saying, ‘for three days after this I could 
neither sleep nor eat for thinking of those Seyyids.’ There 
was a third brother, younger than the two who were killed, 
who cursed the Bdb, abjured the Bhbl faith, and was 
released." 

1 To swear by the death of any one presumably dear to one’s 
self is a very common form of asseveration amongst the Persians. 
The oath implies “ may So-and-so die if I speak falsely.” Hence 
the dearer the friend whose death is sworn by, the more binding 
and solemn the oath. This is why a Persian always swears 
“ bi-marg-i-khudat” (“by thy death”), never li bi-marg-i-khudam" 
(“by my own death”), for, since one is bound to regard one’s own 
life as of little value, the latter oath would be considered far less 
solemn. Jaldlvld-Dawla is the title of Prince ZiUu’s-Sultan’s 
eldest son, who was, till March 1888, governor of Shiraz and the 
province of Fars. 


26—2 


404 


NOTE Y—RECENT PERSECUTIONS. 


(2) The Martyrdom of Mtrzd Ashraf of Abdde in- 
October 1888. 

Concerning this event, which occurred very shortly 
after I left Persia, but of which I heard for the first time 
from General Houtum-Schindler at the meeting of the 
Royal Asiatic Society on April 15th, 1889, before which I 
read my first paper on the Babfs, I received on August 3rd 
a letter from one of my Persian friends at ShfrJz dated 
July 3rd, 1889. Of this letter I published a translation at 
pp. 998—999 of my second paper. As the matter is of 
considerable interest and is not likely to be chronicled 
elsewhere, I think it will not be out of place to reproduce 
here the original text of the letter, which runs as follows:— 


lAoLgA J (Jjj j 

a I.,,* Hmw J' a j 11 h. i' 

J)\ &>l j v£JL » 


a ^ aMv LAI Lj i d I h. 

a^jJ aj^^ jijl I Jj)\ aabl I J till 

iOl olUJI aal^klA jU ajJjjl 

UJ IJ J-k* J iS' JOS' Oil 


a aal^&lA tAl^-aal aL>- 


I !i>l tS' j\ jO .j Jla>- j\ ajj^us Ijjl 

tjXc-if j ^jla aaU ja ^Lc C^lzxzS' o jJX 


MARTYRDOM OF MIRZA ASHRAF. 


405 


Jx ^ 

oLaJ _^Lj l I L 3 I a 3^$^ 3 l_fl-l.pl ! 


Ij_jS Jlui Lu ^O I IJ^3 I 9 I 0^>* wl&JLo 

O ^wwl 1 ISI jl ajI^&Li. J)jjl ^o a3l^&L^ J tyd&£ j 

J&vAoo i_jj^>» AfijUaol ^1 djT^ Jil^la JI^m/ 

0^3^ *•— ^ ^ \ ^Al^^N^kA |^ua«j 

a3^&Li/ ap^L^I^i ( Jj*l aJ^j ^&li» l^l i£jb 

oj^Ja) ^ 3 jS\aa iSj^B LJc j\ ^jQj Jj>- j\ 

^3^a ^ IaI^ 3^**J I < A_$^ 

p^> {3**^ 3^ a 3^ 3 ^ Lie ^ 33^ -A 

^3ja l 5 IdfijLlo ^jl _j\ dS' a3^jf^ 

^ <A-^ wLw^0 ^k>- ^ Ol^-L jl cJ wJj J JS 

^jji3 <Aj a3i^&L< Ol 3 ^ yAfcJ 33^^ ‘11 ■■•“I 3J)^ 

*A^*—<a 1 -33^ 3*** ^3 ^ +*> A_^j" jl^9 ^1 1 33^3 ^ 

^j _'■ jl IwA***— j^" ^ 1 33^ ^’l ^ 


406 


NOTE Y—RECENT PERSECUTIONS 


JL J3 Li! O jL\ I j J*.a Li I Li (OjA- 

— s- 

LJIi Ltil j ^jio I j[h\ &S^ \wt 


^^0^1 Jl ■ . ft ^ .WO Aj {_}* Jo Ji^O I 


3 (J jQah jj .J LwJ J Ja>- ^x/^>- ^ 


Ij_jl ^L j>jul JAj oJJ 3 J iJ \AA1 JL 


# ( j r )_^>- jL*> ^^3 <yj>- jl ^jo a LJ js 

On August 4th, the day after I received the above 
letter, I wrote to a friend at Isfahan, on whose kindness I 
felt sure I might rely, for information which no one was 
better qualified than himself to give. On October 8th, 
just a year after Mlrzd, Ashraf’s martyrdom, I received his 
answer, which bore the date September 6th, 1889. “ Yes,” 
he wrote, “ it is quite true that Aga Mirza Ashraf of AbM6 
was put to death for his religion in the most barbarous 
manner in Ispahan about October last. The hatred of the 
Mullas was not satisfied with his murder, but they muti¬ 
lated the poor body publicly in the mnidnn in the most 
savage manner, and then burnt what was left of it.” 


(3) The persecutions of Si-dili and Najafabad. 

The same letter from which the above extract is quoted 
continues immediately as follows:—“Since then we have 
had two other persecutions of Bdbfs, one in Sihdih and the 
other in Nejifabad. In Sihdih, where the Bdbi community 
is small, their houses were burned and their wives and 
children ill-treated. The men saved themselves by flight 
to Tehran, and I am told that about 25 of them have just 
returned to Ispahan and are in the Prince’s Stables in 
bast 1 . In Nejifabad there are about 2000 Bdbls. They 
1 Sanctuary. 


AT SI-DIH AND NAJAFABAD. 


407 


tried the same game with them, but some hundreds of 
them took refuge in the English Telegraph Office in Julfa, 
and the Prince [Zillu’s-Sulthnl took their part and banished 
from Nejifabad to Kerbela the Mujtahid who persecuted 
them. So the result is that they are freer now than they 
have ever been. I take very great interest in the poor 
people, not only for their own sakes but for the sake of 
Persia also, as if liberty is gained for them it will be a 
great step towards shaking the power of the Mullhs and 
getting liberty for all. Just before the last persecution 
of the Bhbis the Mujtahids in Ispahan, especially H4ji 
Nejifi, tried a persecution of Jews also, and threatened 
Christians with the same. The 13 rules of Omar (I 
believe, at least, most of them may be traced to him) 
were enforced for a short time:—(1) That no Jew should 
wear an ‘aba'. (2) That they should wear a mark on their 
dress. (3) Not to ride any beast of burden in the city. 
(4) Not to leave their houses on a wet day 1 2 3 . (5) Not to 
purchase merchandize from a Moslem. (6) That when a 
Jew meets a Moslem he is to salute him and walk behind 
him. (7) Not to return abuse. (8) Not to build a house 
higher than a Muslim neighbour. (9) Not to eat in 
presence of a Muslim during the Ramazan, &c.” 

On May 16th, 1890, I received from one of my friends 
in Teherdn a letter dated April 13th. Knowing the interest 
which I took in the Bdbls, he was kind enough to include in 
this letter a brief account of these persecutions, which runs 
as follows :— 

“You have doubtless heard of the late Bdbl massacre 
at Isfahan, and I will only therefore tell you, in case you 
have not, the principal points. They are inhabitants of 
a district called Seh-deh, and last summer a number of 

1 A kind of cloak worn over the kabd. 

2 All non-Muhammadans are regarded by the Persian Shi'ites 

as unclean ( najis ), but, as is the case with other impurities, the 
true believer is only defiled by touching them or their garments 
when they are moist, for what is dry does not pollute. Hence 
this enactment, which is generally enforced against the Zoroas- 
trians at Yezd. I have heard of a Zoroastrian being punished 
with the bastinado for venturing into the bazaars with wet 
clothes on a rainy day. 


408 


NOTE Y—RECENT PERSECUTIONS 


them, owing to constant persecution, left their villages and 
came to Isfahan, whence after a time they returned home, 
with the exception of a certain number who came to 
Tehran. On the return of these men to their homes about 
six weeks ago they were attacked by a mob headed by a 
man called Agha Nedjefy, and seven or eight of them were 
killed and their bodies burnt with oil. They then, took 
refuge at the Telegraph Office, and finally, after persistent 
representations from this [i.e. the British] Legation, have 
been received by the Deputy Governor. It is hoped that 
on the Zil’s 1 return in a few days they will be able to 
go home. Agha Nedjefy has been summoned to Tehran 
and well received. Of course they are said to be B4bis, 
though there seems to he no real proof that they are of 
that persuasion. When the murders took place they were 
under the care of an escort which was intimidated by the 
mob and left them.” 

From a comparison of the above extracts it would 
appear that the Bhbfs of Si-dih and Najafhbhd were sub¬ 
jected to two separate persecutions. The first of these, 
which took place previously to September 1889, seems to 
have been limited to the destruction of property, and not 
to have resulted in actual bloodshed. The second, which, 
according to the last extract cited, must have taken place 
about March 1st, 1890, was brought about by the return of 
the fugitive Bhbfs to their homes, and resulted in the death 
of seven or eight persons. 

Almost at the very time when the second letter from 
which I have quoted was being written, I heard at Acre 
some account of the latest phase of this episode. On the 
last day of my sojourn there (April 20th, 1890) Ak& Mfrzd 
Ak4 Jhn “ Khddimu’lldk ” came into the room where we 
were sitting, hearing in his hand a letter which had just 
arrived from Persia. From this letter he read out what 
purported to be an exact copy of a telegram sent from 
Teher&n by the Prince Zillu’s-Sultan to his deputy at 
Isfahan. The message was a long one and I had no 

1 i.e. the Zillu’s-Sultdn, the Shah’s eldest son, till February 
1888 Prince-Governor of the greater part of Southern Persia, and 
still Governor of Isfahan and the surrounding districts. 


AT SI-DIH AND NAJAFABAD. 


409 


opportunity of copying it, but its general tenour I re¬ 
member perfectly well, while some of the expressions 
contained in it were too remarkable to be forgotten. It 
contained the most positive orders couched in the most 
emphatic language to put an effectual stop to these un¬ 
provoked molestations of the Bhbfs. “If you do not 
instantly restore order and quiet, silence these mischief- 
makers who disturb the peace of my government, and give 
efficient protection to quiet law-abiding folks, I will come 
myself, post, and give you a lesson.” Then followed a string 
of threats and reproaches, ending in these most significant 
words —“After all you know me. It is not necessary for 
me to introduce myself'.” That the contents of a telegram 
sent from the Prince-Governor of Isfahan to his deputy 
should be known at Acre may appear astonishing, but I 
have more than once been amazed at the rapidity and 
completeness with -which the B&bfs become informed of all 
that concerns their interests. 

The intercession of the British Minister with the 
Persian Government on behalf of the persecuted B4bfs 
called forth a violent protest from the Teheran corre¬ 
spondent of the Akhtar 2 . Of a portion of this article, 
which was dated Sha'ban 9th, a.h. 1307 (= March 31st, 
1890) from Teheran, and appeared in the issue of Shaw wail 
8th (= May 26th) of the same year, I append a translation. 

“ Some little time ago troubles arose in Isfahan by 
reason of an assault made by a party of Jews on a 
[Musulman] student [of theology], and the towns-folk 
attacked tne Jews, with whom it went ill. After that 
again a disturbance occurred in Si-dih of Isfahan, and 
several of the innovators 3 , who were wont to disparage 
the conduct of the Musulmans, suffered injury and loss. 

* £ jXa I O—J p jV JUhIiAa I JC ^ft.1. 

2 The Akhtar (Star) is the chief Persian newspaper, and 
almost the only one which contains any news as we understand 
the word. It is published weekly at Constantinople, and has 
a large circulation throughout the East. Lately, however, it has 
for some reason been suppressed. 

3 A euphuism for the Bibis, whom other Persians are as 
a rule very loath to mention by name. 


410 


NOTE Y—RECENT PERSECUTIONS. 


The Imperial Government made strenuous efforts to put a 
stop to the mischief, and did not allow the flame of that 
disturbance to spread; but the most astonishing thing is 
the interference of the English Embassy in such matters, 
and the submission of the ministers of the Persian Govern¬ 
ment to such conduct, which oversteps the rights of states 
and nations, on the part of the afore-mentioned Embassy. 
What has come to the English Embassy that, in face of the 
autonomy of the Persian Empire of eternal duration, it 
should send a special representative to Isfahan for the 
investigation of this matter, take down the names of these 
mischievous and seditious innovators, and thus embolden 
these misleaders of men, who are hostile alike to Church 
and State, and are, indeed, enemies to the whole human 
race, in their sedition ? 

“All these things are the result of the heedlessness of 
that day when the ministers of state first admitted the 
interference of foreigners under the guise of benevolent 
intercession in such contingencies, until now they have 
changed intercession into arrogance, and benevolence into 
hostility, and have carried intervention to such a pitch 
that within the Persian dominions they meddle in a quarrel 
between two subjects of the SMh between whom and 
themselves no sort of connection or relation subsists, and 
send thither the second secretary of the Embassy to conduct 
investigations. Yet no one asks of them, ‘ Sir Ambassador, 
what concern of thine is it ? Should such an event happen 
in your country, would you allow another to meddle with 
it? Show us then by what right you have been led to 
interfere in this matter ?' ” 

On the whole, however, the B&bis are much less liable 
to suffer molestation now than they were formerly, and not 
uncommonly the malicious attempts of their inveterate foes 
the Mullks to inaugurate a persecution prove abortive, as 
is shewn by the following translation from a letter written 
to me from Shir4z on October 19th, 1888, by the correspon¬ 
dent whose account of Mirz& Ashraf’s martyrdom I have 
already quoted. 

“ You asked me concerning the trouble about the B£bls 
in ShMz. It was not of such consequence as to be worth 
writing about. A black maid-servant had stolen sundry 


CHECKS TO FANATICISM. 


411 


articles from the house of K-Khin, and, out of mere 

enmity towards her master, had got possession of a copy of 
the lkan which was amongst his books. This she laid 
before Seyyid ‘All Akbar, one of the ‘Ulamd of Shlrhz 
notorious for boundless fanaticism. He attempted to induce 

the authorities of Shirdz to put K-KMn and several 

other persons to death, but the Government paid no heed to 
his representations, and, indeed, censured and upbraided 
him. A telegram also came from Teherhn sternly forbidding 
him. When he perceived that he was not supported or 
countenanced by the Government authorities, he was dis¬ 
comfited and reduced to silence. 

“ In Bushire also one of the Mullhs wished to act ill 
towards several persons of this sect. Sa'du’l-Mulk, the 
Governor of Bushire, promptly issued an order for the 
expulsion of the MulM himself; though at length, by much 
intercession, it was decreed that he might remain on con¬ 
dition of never [again] meddling in such matters.” 

An event which took place still more recently in the 
Russian dominions may perhaps have a salutary effect in 
checking the ferocious intolerance of the MulHs, at any 
rate outside Persia. Baron Rosen has described this occur¬ 
rence, from notes made on the spot by M. Toumansky, in 
connection with two epistles from Behh to the “revelation” 
of which it gave rise. This account, together with the text 
of these epistles, will be found at pp. 247—250 of the 
forthcoming sixth volume of the Collections Scientifiques <lr. 
Availing myself of Baron Rosen’s generous permission to 
make full use of his still unpublished work, I conclude this 
note with a translation of his narrative. 

“ At 7 a.m. on September 8th (August 27th, old style) 
1889, two fanatical Persian Shi'ites, Mash-hadi ‘All Akbar 
and Mash-hadi Huseyn, threw themselves, dagger in hand, 
on a certain Hdji Muhammad Rizh of Isfahan, who was 
peaceably traversing one of the most frequented streets of 
‘Ishkibhd, and indicted on him 72 wounds, to which 
he succumbed. Hhji Muhammad Rizii was one of the 
most respected of the Bhbis of Tshkhbhd. The crime was 
perpetrated with such audacity that neither the numerous 
witnesses of the occurrence, nor the constable who was on 
the spot could save the victim of this odious attack. The 


412 NOTE 2—ZEYNU ’L-MUKARRABfN 

assassins yielded themselves up to the police without any 
resistance ; they were placed in a cab and conveyed to the 
prison. During the transit they fell to licking up the blood 
which was dripping from their daggers. _ The examination, 
conducted with much energy by the military tribunal, gave 
as its result that Muhammad Riz4 had fallen a victim to 
the religious bigotry of the Shi'ites. Fearful of Muhammad 
Rizd’s influence, the Shi'ites of Tshk&b&d, acting in ac¬ 
cordance with the orders of Mull&s who had come expressly 
for this purpose from Khurdskn, resolved to cut short 
the Bdbl propaganda by killing Hhjl Muhammad Rizl 
Knowing well, however, that the crime would not remain 
unpunished, they left it to chance to determine wfliat 
persons should sacrifice themselves for the Shi'ite cause. 
Thus it was that the individuals named above became the 
assassins of Muhammad Rizh, who had never injured them 
in any way. The sentence of the tribunal was severe: 
‘All Akbar and Huseyn, as well as two of their con¬ 
federates, were condemned to be hanged, but the penalty 
of death was commuted by His Majesty the Emperor to 
hard labour for life. 

“This sentence was hailed by the B4bfs with an en¬ 
thusiasm easy to understand. It was the first time since 
the existence of the sect, i.e. for nearly fifty years, that a 
crime committed on the person of an adherent of the new 
religion had been punished with all the rigour of the law. 
The impression produced on the chief of the sect, Beh4, 
appears to have been equally profound. The two reve¬ 
lations which we shall submit to the reader sufficiently 
prove this. They are also interesting from another point 
of view : they are almost the only B&bf documents of which 
we can understand all the meanings, all the allusions.” 

NOTE Z. 

ZEYNu’L-MuKARRABfN, HIS COLOPHONS, AND THE LIGHT 
THROWN BY THESE ON THE BABf METHOD OF RECKON¬ 
ING TIME. 

The information which I possess about Zeynu’l-Mukar- 
rabln the Behii’f scribe (or, as he prefers to call himself, 


AND HIS COLOPHONS. 


413 


Harfuz-Zd “ the Letter Z ”) is, unfortunately, very seanty. 
Before I visited Acre, I had heard his fame in Kirmdn, but 
all that I learned definitely about him was that his real 

name was Zeynu’l-'Abidin ; that he had resided for many 
years at Mosul; that all the best and most correct manu¬ 
scripts of the sacred books were written or revised by him; 
and that Sheykh S#****, the Bhbi courier mentioned at 
pp. 496—498 of my first paper in the J. B. A. S. for 1889, 
visited him yearly on his return journey from Acre to 
Southern Persia. 

During my stay at Acre in April 1890 I learned that 
he had resided there for some years, but I did not see him, 
at any rate to my knowledge. Many manuscripts were, 
however, lent me to read while I was there, and all of 
these, so far as I remember, were written by his hand. 
From some of these I transcribed the colophons of which I 
shall speak directly. Two manuscripts written by him 
were given to me on my departure from Acre, viz. the 
present history, whereof the text is now offered to the 

public in facsimile, and a copy of the Ikdn. His industry 

must be prodigious, the aforesaid ms. of Ik'in, for instance, 
being, as stated in the colophon, the 67tli copy which he 
had transcribed! The present history, being written to 
some extent for general circulation, is dated only in the 
Muhammadan fashion ; but all mss. of the sacred books 
proper are also dated according to the Babi method. 
Though I have not ascertained exactly when Zeynu’l- 
Mukarrabin came from Mosul to Acre, it appears from 
the colophons directly to be quoted that in a.h. 1296 
(a.d. 1879) he was still at the former place, and that in 
a.h. 1305 (k.D. 1887—8) he was already at the latter. 

Of the Bhbi system of reckoning time, and of the names 
applied to the days and months, I gave an account at 
pp. 921—922 of my second paper in the J. R. A. S. for 
1889. Beiug uncertain as to whether these names had 
been fixed by the Bib himself or by the Beh4 is, I was 
careful to enquire about them from Subh-i-Ezel, not telling 
him, of course, what I had heard previously. He wrote 
down their names for me, and this list which he gave me I 
here reproduce. It will be found to correspond with the 


414 NOTE Z—ZEYNU ’L-MUKARRABlN 

information obtained from the Beh&’ls, save that the 8th 
and 9th months are transposed ; and from this I assume 
that these names were fixed previously to the schism, 
probably by the Bfib himself. Gobineau also, in his trans¬ 
lation of the Kitdb-i-Ahkam, mentions tbe month “Aid” 
as the last of the 19 months of the year. 

List of the 19 Bfibf months in order, as given 
by Subh-i-Ezel. 


ojji \r 


.A LI/ Y 

V. ' 

JjA \ i 


LJ A 

* 

o 

J 


JUT A 

JU- r 


Zjjc \ • 

\r>C. £ 

oLLL \y 


\\ 

jy 0 

&L \A 


A 


$■ 

% \\ 


As the year contains 19 months, so does the month 
contain 19 days, and the same names therefore serve for 
both 1 . Provisionally, however, the following new nomen¬ 
clature has been applied to the old week of seven days:— 

Sunday, 


Wednesday, JljJI 

Monday, JLfUl 


Thursday, 


Tuesday, JlAall 

Tap 

Friday, 


Saturday, 


1 The analogy between this and the system of nomenclature 
in the Zoroastrian calendar is very remarkable. 


AND HIS COLOPHONS. 


415 


Of this arrangement Subh-i-Ezel said nothing, so that it 
may possibly have originated with the Beh&’fs. I now 
proceed with the transcription and translation of three 
colophons copied by myself at Acre from manuscripts 
written by Zeynu’l-Mukarrabfn, concluding with a fourth 
appended to the ms. of the Ikdn above mentioned. 

1. Colophon from a ms. written at Mosul in a.h. 1296 
(= a.d. 1879). 

ajIs aL) Ls*"” ( j f o ^js 

tjys — jJjji A ft l a»l l (_y> aJjlfll! 

I 

Aj^— Lft ^33 ot-J! A ha. i 

C—< a ' * Ajlill (_£aLa>- ^LU iajLloft 

liy>- l^j> jc I I ^y> oilVI Jju U j _9 

Ai-Jl aj&> jj ^3 313 ^ _j A^ _j 

Ah Afti-I _j ft— JIJ^J Ah! ^j^3 iuLJl 

^ j Lkl) ^ j^>] 3 

“ There ceased from the transcription of this its poor 
writer the Letter Z4 on the day of Istijldl [Thursday], the 
day of Kudrat [the 13th day] of the month ‘Azimat [the 
4th month] of the 36th year, [that is the year] Bahi [the 
seventeenth] of the second Vahid after the manifestation 
of the Point of Revelation [i.e. the Biibl (may the life of 
all beside him be his sacrifice), corresponding to the 7th of 
the month Jerri<4df II of the months of the year 1296, six 
and ninety and two hundred after the Millennium of the 
Flight of the Prophet (upon its fugitive be a thousand 


416 


NOTE Z—ZEYNU ’L-MUKARRABIn 


salutations and greetings). And I was [at this time 
resident] in [Mosul] al-Hadbd '. And this is the seventh 
copy which God hath helped me to write according to this 
arrangement. Praise be to God first and last, inwardly and 
outwardly.” 

2. Colophon from a ms. written at Acre in a.h. 1305 

(=a.d. 1887). 

1 Ails Jl t—iLdl aLS^ ^ya 

iiLo/ jJyj iJ*JI ^1*11 JL-fLl I _)Jl 

^j>vt (_y> li Uio iAJ Li-11 Jo~\ I _jj_jl I 

di&l All ^ ^ &1)Aa *3 A-—* 

“ There ceased from the transcription of this perspicuous 
book its poor writer the Letter Zfi on the day of Kerned 
[Monday] the day of ‘Ilm [the 12th day] of the month of 
‘Izzat [the 10th month] of the 44th year [that is the year] 
Vdv [the sixth] of the third Vahid, corresponding to the 
MustakiW [first] of the month of Muharram the sacred 
[a.h.] 1305 in the city of ‘Ayn \‘AHd or Acre]. Praise be 
to God as beseems Him.” 

3. Colophon from a MS. written at Acre in a.h. 1306 

(= a.d. 1889). 

AjLS^ ^y—tjl *—)Lk3l 

ai Iaaj LALU ^ (JL-L-I Ijll 

1 See note 2 on p. 139 supra. 

2 This word I misread and transcribed as which gives 
no appropriate meaning. To the kindness of Baron Rosen I am 
indebted for the correction here made, which is evidently needed. 


AND HIS COLOPHONS. 


417 


a L-i 0 ot® J . **■'****' IfljlJsA (jiJ [*S 1 a>"|^I I cj* “OVI 

oil aj^JI o^>c^JI ^£> a ' ijldl 

A>-L*J 1 ^Jj ' Aiw*- A^UjV l£a!I Ali AwA- ^ ^ 

\ • flj*) AIjAo ^ Aw A3 

“ There ceased from the transcription of this perspicuous 
book its poor writer the Letter Z4 on the day of Jemal 
[Sunday] the day of ‘Aid [the 19th- day] of the month of 
Malic [the 18th month] of the 45th year [that is the year] 
Abaci [the seventh] of the third Vahid , corresponding to 
the twenty-third of the month of Jemd,dl II in the year 
1306 after the Flight of the Prophet (upon its fugitive be a 
thousand salutations and greetings). Praise be to God who 
hath helped me to complete it, such praise as is worthy of 
the court of Plis sanctity. 

In the city of ‘Ayn [‘ilia]. Number 10.” 


4. Colophon from my ms. of the Ikdn written at. Acre 
in a.h. 1306 (=a.d. 1889). 

aLI I^JI v_9^>- AoLS””" AjLS jJj/s 

A»-l^1 A>VI a]_w v_9^wll jJjjj JiLuJI aU 

1 

^J_jVI i_5aU>- ^ L^wl>-V LlJ lill 

ajl 

^ I dLo L&j di 1 ^ ^ ^ 

"iv ^&>-Lol 


418 


NOTE Z—ZEYNU’L-MUKARRABfN 


“ There ceased from the transcription of this its poor 
writer the Letter Z4 on the night of Jemal [Sunday] the 
night of Masd’il [the 15th day] of the month of SharaJ 
the 16th month] of the 45th year [that is the year] Abad 
the seventh] of the third Vahid, corresponding to the 
eleventh of the month of Jem4di I of the months of the 
year 1306 after the Flight of the Prophet (upon its fugitive 
be a thousand salutations and greetings). Praise be to 
God who hath helped me to complete it, such praise as is 
worthy of the Court of His sanctity. 

Number 67.” 

For the further elucidation of the matter I here re¬ 
produce the single B4bl colophon which I was able to cite 
in my second paper in the J. B. A. S. for 1889 (p. 922). 

5. Colophon from a Commentary on the Kitdb-i-Akdas 
seen at Shlrdz in April 1888. 

jy ' jV" I ^y„ a a j j>- 

^ A -1 wt>-I^Jl wt-i 1 ALu 

“ He wrote it on the day of Kemdl [Monday] the day 
of ‘Aid [the 19th day] of the month of Nmr [the 5th 
month] of the year Badi [which would be the 16th year, 
but, for the reason given in the footnote, there can be no 
doubt that this is a mistake for Baht, the seventeenth year] 
of the second Vahid, a.h. 1296.” 

From the above colophons we perceive that, besides the 
division of the year into 19 months of 19 days each, the 
years elapsed since the ‘ Manifestation ’ are also arranged 

1 sic in copy, but from analogy the word y appears redundant. 

2 This is evidently a mistake for for, as we see from 

the first colophon quoted in this note (supra, p. 415), the 13th 
day of the 4th month of the year BaM (i. e. the 36th year of the 
‘ Manifestation or the 17th year of the second Vahid of nineteen 
years) fell in a.h. 1296, the same year in which this colophon was 
written ; and in all that relates to the Bibi method of reckoning 
time Zeynu’l-Mukarrabin’s authority is incontrovertible. 


AND HIS COLOPHONS. 


419 


in Vahids or cycles of 19, and that to each year is given a 
name 1 which, by the sum of its component letters, indicates 
the position of the year in its own Vahid, e.g .— 

The 36th year after the Manifestation is called “ the 

year Balu + ^+ ^> = 10 + 5 + 2 = 17] of the second 
Vahid” [19 + 17 = 36], 

The 44th year after the Manifestation is called “the 
year Vdv [j = 6] of the third Vahid ” [(2 x 19) + 6 = 44]. 

The 45th year after the Manifestation is called “the 
year Abad [j+^_j + ! = 4 + 2+1 = 7] of the third Vahid ” 
[(2 x 19) + 7 = 45]. 

The general arrangement of the BAbi calendar is now 
sufficiently clear, and, inasmuch as all Bdbi colophons 
would appear to give the Muhammadan date as well as 
the B&bi date, this is perhaps all that we need know. 
Nevertheless, since mss. may subsequently be discovered in 
which the date is given according to the B&bl method 
only, and since the matter is one calculated to arouse 
our curiosity, I feel impelled to discuss two questions 
which must be solved ere we can feel that we have fully 
mastered the problem before us. 

These questions are :— 

(1) From what fixed point does the reckoning begin ? 

(2) Does the year consist of 361 (i.e. 19 x 19) days 
only, or is any system of intercalation adopted to keep it in 
correspondence with the solar year ? 

1 That some special method of enumerating years was em¬ 
ployed by the Babis I conjectured in my second paper in the 
•/. R. A. (S', for 1889 (p. 922, note 1), but, having only one colophon 
before me, I altogether failed to understand its application, or to 
perceive that the numerical value., not the meaning, of the name 
of each year was the true guide to its position in the Vahid 
or cycle of years. Hence I failed to see that Badi {jV} was 
a mere numerical expression or chronogram, and, imagining that 
it meant “first," vainly perplexed myself over the chronolo¬ 
gical difficulties involved in this supposition. However, as I 
have already pointed out, Badi in this colophon is clearly a mis¬ 
take for Baht (^), so that I might have failed to deduce the 
truth even if 1 had guessed it. 

27—2 


420 


NOTE Z—BABI CALENDAR. 


Before discussing these questions further, let us see 
what is said on the matter (1) by the B&b in the Persian 
Beydn, aud (2) by Beh&VIMh in the Kitdb-i-Akdas. 


(1) Ordinances of the Bdb concerning the arrangement of 
the calendar. 

[From the Persian Beydn .] 


o\ijC- <jln i * olbll ._>L11 


J ijlr 


a .5 |J ^ dSslI , >!> ^Jjjl ^a 2 cia 

JJC Oil) j\ j 5 ^>- ^a!) I jlLu 

*- Si- 

J ajh j\j3 ajj^i 1^)1 y, JjT Jjc !j,JiLv 

jl J_S^ dSCi Li jj^9 JJJ ajjji 

4-5^ jl ^JL*» aJl ^Jjuo t (Ja>* (JjdlsflJ 
_2 JijUj jLjj J >-\j wol^-6 jjb 


* * * * * 0 wX*iol) I J^>-l J) * I^j 1 

Jjp- J 3 ^ 0^-1 3 

^jLw« ^ O^J jJjlo ja~^> j}\ (Jia _« ^ftjLU 

{3ji^a l^jl ^ uI.ujI ^jLI^o ^JjLo 33^° 

yAj j)\jk>- j\ ^ ^jf"*** ^ ^ adO l^jl ^ &j£> 


PERSIAN BEYAN QUOTED. 


421 


Jf—" (J—^ aj^olj *1^1 

-2 4x1 Sy^JsJ J tL*ul l^jl ^ 


_y a ^ IJ l ".....t A>.3' 

t -~* w ^ 1 ^ajI ^11 V 61 j3jy> J^l ^ j* 

^ J— ^ 4—5^ OliJ dJoiSi j ^ y l6 

\J hr> j) wUjUijLa J yO jf\ \S y+A ^ J )yLy ^i>- 
*" > 

(ji^ __J ajlj jl^S £^>JI y -^J>j > ‘ dl>1.5 uLi dJaflj 

Si a *j j! ‘j s jJ_^ 9 £ uii a sf~^ 21 - u* j*j c j 


“ The third chapter of the fifth Ydliid. In explanation 
of the knowledge of the years and the months. The quint¬ 
essence of this chapter is this, that the Lord of the 
Universe hath created all the years by His command, and 
by the manifestation of the Bey&n hath appointed ‘the 
Number of All Things’ [361 = 19 x 19] as the number of 
every year, and hath appointed it [to consist of] nineteen 
months, and hath appointed each month nineteen days; 
that all may advance through the nineteen degrees of the 
‘ Letters of the Unity ’ from the point of entrance into [the 
sign of] the Ram to the limit of its conrse which terminates 
in [the sign of the] Fish. And He hath called the first 

month Belid and the last ‘Aid . 

“And the first month is the month of the ‘Point,’ and 

around it revolve the months of ‘the Living’ [^>- = 18]; 
and it is like unto the sun amidst the months, the other 
months being like mirrors wherein shineth forth the light 
of that month, and wherein naught is seen save that month. 
And it hath been named by the Lord ‘ the month of Belid ’ 


422 


NOTE Z—BABf CALENDAR. 


\i.e. splendour or brightness] in this sense, that the bright¬ 
ness of all the months is in that month. And [God] hath 
set it apart for ‘ Him whom God shall manifest/ and hath 
assigned every day of it to one of the 'Letters of the 
Living.’ And the first day [thereof], which is the Nawrus, 
is the day of ‘ there is no god but God ’; the like of that 
day is as the ‘Point’ in the Beydn, from which all are 
created, and unto which all return. And lie hath made 
the manifestation thereof in the ‘ Point of the Beytin/ the 
‘Person of the Seven Letters,” and hath made it the throne 
of ‘ Him whom God shall manifest ’ in this manifestation.” 

The fourteenth chapter of the sixth Ydliid is entirely 
devoted to the glorification of the Naicruz and the de¬ 
scription of the ceremonies and rejoicings with which it 
should be observed. This ancient festival, here called ‘ the 
day which the Lord of the Universe hath set apart for 
himself amidst the days, and hath named ‘the Day of 
God ’ ” ( Yawmu’llah), is defined as “ the day when the sun 
passes from the sign of the Fish into the Ram,” and it is 
ordained that the actual moment of this passage “ whether 
it occur during the night or during the day ” shall be the 
signal for the inauguration of these ceremonies. 


(2) Ordinances of Bch^’u’llhh concerning the arrangement 
of the calendar. 

[From the Kitdb-i-Akdas .] 

^ Ll/ *b¥1 % L JS JcYl ^ L 61 
IfJLsI wAw 3 wl ^ LI ^Lu^.11 

Otail >—-'uAl—i] 1 (Jj- 6 okJI SIjS' 

II qC ojiljll ol v_jLJI j *jull (iJlL 


1 See p. 230 supra. 


KITAB-I-AKDAS QUOTED. 


423 


j ^Wll (JjJ S l^JI j&Uaa Ia>U*:>- II ^LmJI jfJZ J.3 

IjJI 1*5 jj*l II _? a*JI L IJ! 

L—J t * l^flfi] I ^ ^fll I _y i^-3 l^^jiJaj t3l 

J C./^ [*fV OJsy^j j Jw _j 0 _^5C _j 
1*5 jJjU-jJ ilL^a^l J-9 ^ LLl&VI |>U C*ttJ Ijl j iaLjYI 
j ^sLJI jc fbYl f^>~ . A A\. i ^ ■» ^>La]l 

^Je «U)I Ej 3 " (Jr* J J 

Abl A°J»- eUL <_>l3s^JI ^j^jJI All ajtc ^o ^Ua9 
^al^ol) l^iw^j ^1 ^]VI ^_^1_^ i I 1*5 pjiil! (J^o 0^9^ 


^...gll (J ^o\ l_jj>-l 1 ( Jyfi 


jjtll 


V ^ a>LJo.| j <u)l 


\yiS^ ^lib_ji/l _j O y.lsW \^ju}\ Uj j_j ajjI (J ^s\ \jju _j 


fti JyVI Jl ^JUJI 't j _/“H S |^~-ajI 


ij j33 <_5jH JJaflSI IJ& ^JjC i_5 j^JI 


“0 Supreme Pen! Say, ‘0 concourse of creation, We 
have ordained unto you the fast during [a] limited [number 
of] days, and We have appointed the Nawruz as a festival 
unto you after the completion thereof; thus doth the Sun 
of Revelation shine forth from the horizons of the Book on 
the part of the Lord of origin and return. Place the days 


424 


NOTH Z —BAlii CALENDAR. 


which are in excess over the months' before the month of 
fasting; verily We have made them types of the [letter] 
Ha [ 5] amongst the nights and the days, therefore were 
they not included within the limits of the year and the 
months. In them it is ineumberit on those who are in 
Ih'hd to feed themselves and [their] relatives, then the 
poor and the needy, and to confess and magnify and glorify 
and praise their Lord with joy and gladness. And when 
the days of giving before [the days of] abstinence are 
ended, let them enter upon the fast. Thus ordaineth the 
Lord of men: there is no obligation [to fast] on the 
traveller, on him who is sick, on the pregnant woman, or 
on her who giveth suck; these hath (Ltd excused as a 
favour on J1 is part; verily He is the Mighty, the Bountiful. 
These arc the ordinances of God which have been written 
by the Supreme Pen in the hooks and the epistles: hold 
firmly to the commands of God and His ordinances, and he 
not of those who adopt their own principles and fling God’s 
principles behind them for that they follow imaginations 
and fancies. Abstain from eating and drinking from dawn 
till sundown; beware lest lust withhold you from this 
favour which hath been decreed in the Book.’” 

From all this it would seem that the restoration of the 
old Persian solar year in place of the Arabian lunar year; 
the solemn sanctioning of the great national festival of the 
Nturrdz, which corresponds with the beginning of this 
solar year, the quickening of the earth, after its winter’s 
torpor, and the entry of the Sun into the sign of Aries; 
the division of the year into 19 months of 19 days each; 
and the nomenclature certainly of some and probably of 
all of these months were integral portions of the system 
devised by the B&b; while the provision of the five inter¬ 
calary days (corresponding to what the Muhammadans call 

&“the stolen five”) and the enactments relating 

to their observance were supplementary details introduced 
by Behi. The fast of one month of 19 days (or, in the 
case of those who have not reached maturity, 11 days, 

1 i.e. the days required to bring the PAhl year of 361 (19 x 19; 
days into correspondence with the solar year. 


COMMENCEMENT OF ERA. 


425 

‘‘according to the number of «*’’) is also enjoined in the 

Persian Bey an (1 YthiJ viii, ch. 13h but the month does 
uot appear to be there specified, though in the Kit(ib-i- 
Ahh'tm (Gobiuean, p. 525'' the month of 'MM, the last in 
the Babi year, is appointed for it. The only part of the 
Babi calendar a* it at present exists with which Beha can 
be credited \aud that not certainly) is the introduction 
of the intercalary days needed to bring the Babi year into 
correspondence with the solar year. It is evident, more¬ 
over. that only so many of these live intercalary days are 
to be used as may be necessary to bridge over the interval 
between the last day of the month 'MM and the Xatrruz. 

Lastly it is clear that the Babi era commences not, as 
we might primd facie have expected, on May 23rd a.p. 
1344 \see p. 3 and note, and pp. ..1 —.'.'6 tupra), but on 
the Xa "- r -‘.; of that year (a.h. 1260'. which, according to 
the X t - tat-Taicdr 'AA , fell on Wednesday the last day 
iAifA*' of Satar (Wednesday. March 20th, a.p. 1344\ We 
can easily verify this by working out the dates in the above 
colophons. Let us take one only, the first, as an example. 
In it the Babi date is the 13th day of the 4th month of the 
30th year, t.e. tS \ ltd - 13 = To days after the Xawrttz. 
which always tails on or about March 20th. Seventy days 
from this brines us to May 20th (11 davs in March - 30 in 
April - 20 in May TO days'. Looking out the Muham¬ 
madan date iu the colophon yTth of Jemadi II. a.h. 12961 
in Wusteufeld's table- we hud that it does actually corres¬ 
pond with Mnv 20th, IST9. The Babi year being, like our 
own. solar, is easily calculated by counting the number of 
complete years which have elapsed since March 20tli a.p. 
1344. the commencement of the era. In this case, for 
instance, the 35th year terminated on March 19th, a.p. 
Is T9 A >44 t 35), and the 36th year therefore extends from 
March 20th. 13T^ to March 19th, 13s0. 


INDEX. 


Abad, the year, 417—419 
‘AbbasEfendi,Beha’u’lIah’s eldest 
son (entitled Ghusn-i-A'zam 
andAfat Sirru’lldh), xxxv— 
xxxvi, 360, 370, 393, n. 2 
‘Abhas, Mirza, commonly called 
Mirza Buzurg, the father of 
Beha’u’llah and Subh-i-Ezel, 
56, n. 2, 373 

‘Abhas, Sheykh, of Teheran, one 
of the martyrs of 1852, p. 329 
‘Abbas-kuli Khan of Larijan, 38, 
176—8, 190 

‘Abdu’l-Ahad, secedes from Bella 
’u’Uah, 362 

‘Abdu’l-'Ali, Subh-i-Ezel’s son, 
xxiii—xxvi, 369, 385 
‘Abdu’l-'Azim of Kliuy, Seyyid, 
307 

‘Abdu’l-'Aziz, Sultan, 380, 382 
‘Abdu’l-Ghaffar, one of the Cyprus 
exiles, 361, 380, n. 2, 381, 
389 

‘Abdu’l-Hamid Khan, the ddriiglid 
of Shiraz, 10, 11, 262—3 
‘AbduT-Karim, of Kazvin, Mulla. 

See Ahmad-i-Katib 
‘Abdu’l-Karim, one of those who 
assassinated the Ezells, 361, 
363 

‘Abdu’l-Kasim, of Kashan, one of 
the Ezelis assassinated, 371 
‘Abdu’llah, Aka, brother of Aka 
Muhammad ‘All of Tabriz, 
182' 


‘Abdu’llah, Akii, son of Aka 
Muhammad Ja‘far, acquitted 
with Beha’u’llah, 186, 327 

‘Abdu’llah, Aka, of Mazandaran, 
slain in attacking Sheykh 
Tabarsi, 177 

‘Abdu’llah, Mirza, called Ghau- 
ghd, claims to be “ Him whom 
God shall manifest,” 357 

‘Abdu’llah b. Ubayy, a strenuous 
opponent of Muhammad, 135 
aud n. 4 

‘Abdu’l-Majid, Haji, father of 
Mirza Badi‘, 102, n. 1 

‘Abdu'l-Muttalib of Isfahan, Haji, 
239, 337 

‘Abdu’r-Bahim, Mirza, disciple of 
Jenab-i-‘Azim, 185 

‘AbduT-Wahhab, Mirza, of Shiraz, 
one of the martyrs of Teheran, 
185, 271, n. 1, 274, 323, n. 1, 
329 

‘Abdu’l-Wahid, one of Subh-i- 
Ezel’s sons, xxiv, 373, n. 2, 
386 

Abdus, Ibn, follower of ash-Shal- 
maghani, 229 

Abu ‘Abdi’lliih, 330. See Huseyn 
of Milan 

Abu’l-Kasim, Mirza, the Imam- 
Jum‘a, 185 

Abu’l-KAsim, Mirza, the Bakhti- 
yari, earns the title of “Phle- 
botomist of the Divine Unity, ’ ’ 
363 


428 


INDEX. 


Abu Talib Khan, Mirza, conducts 
a raid on Nur, 375 
Abu Turab, Sheykh, of Ashta- 
hard, 5, 247 
Abwab, pi. of Bab, q.v. 

Acre, my object in visiting, xx— 
xxi 

,, account of visit to, xxvii—xliii 
,, Beha’u'llah and liis followers 
exiled to, 101 and footnotes, 
155, n. 1, 361 

,, called “the most desolate of 
cities” ( akhrabu’l-bilad ), xxx, 
14G 

,, Laurence Oliphant’s account 
of the Babi settlement at, 
209—210 

,, Ezelis assassinated at. See 
Assassination 

,, MushkinKalam leaves Cyprus 
for, 387—388 

,, Prince Zillu’s-Sultan ques¬ 
tions Sheykh S— concerning 
his visit to, 401—2 
,, called in colophons “the City 
of *Ayn,” 416, 417 
‘Adda, Subh-i-Ezel’s grand¬ 
daughter, 386 

Adrianople (EdirnA), BAbi chiefs 
exiled to, 73, 92, 112, 358 
„ causes of removal of Babis 
from, 99, n. 1, 360—1, 369 
., date of removal of Babis from, 
119, n. 1, 155, n. 1, 378, n. 2 
, called “this most remote place 
of banishment,” 146 and n. 1 
,, BehAVllAlTs claim advanced 
in, xvii, 359 

,, schism begins in, 358—361 
,, called “the Land of the 
Mystery,” 361 and n. 2 
Afcha, a village near Teheran in 
which Beha’u lla.h was resid¬ 
ing in 1852, 51, 52 
Ahmad, name of the Bab’s son 
who died in infancy, 250 
Ahmad, one of Subli-i-Ezel’s sons, 
385, 386 

Ahmad AhsA’i, Sheykh, the 
founder of the Sheykh! school, 
30, 184, 197—8, 234—244 


Ahmad AhsA’i, Sheykh, his doc- 
trinesi wherein accounted 
heterodox, 236 
,, his works, 237—8 
Ahmad, Aka Seyyid, of Tabriz, 
imprisoned with the Bab, 
43, n. 1, 320 and n. 1 
Ahmad-i-KAtib, Mirza, (= MullA 
‘Abdu’l-Karim of Kazvin), 
41 and n. 1,42, 62, 320, n. 1, 
331, 338, 341, 356 
Ahmad, Haji Mirza, brother of 
Haji MirzA Jani of KashAn, 
assassinated by Beha’is at 
Baghdad, 332, 359, 371 
Ahmad, Mirza, Imam-Jum'a of 
Tabriz, present at Bab’s ex¬ 
amination, 19, 278 
Ahmad, Mirza, of the Persian 
Embassy at Constantinople, 
99, n. 1 

Ahmad, Mirza, of Azghand, 5, 
245—6 

Ahsanu’l-Kisas. See Commentary 
on the Siira-i-Ynmf 
AjudAn-bAshi. See Huseyn KhAn 
Aka, ‘AbbAs Efendi so called by 
the BehA’is, xxxvi 
Aka, Haji, of Tabriz, secedes 
from Beha’u’llAli, 362; is 
assassinated, 363 
Aka Jan Beg “Kaj-Kulah,” one 
of the Ezelis assassinated at 
Acre, 99, n. 1, 360—1, 370 
Aka Jan Beg of Khamsa, officer 
in charge of Bab’s execution, 
44 

Aka JAn, MirzA, of KAshan. See 
Khadimu’llah 

‘Aka’idu’sh-Shi'a, work of Shi'ite 
theology, 233, 302, 303—4, 
304—6 

Aka Khan of Nur, Sadr-i-A‘zam, 
185, 374—6 

Aka KhAn, governor of Yezd in 
1850, 255 

Aka Sirru’llah, a title of ‘Abbas 
, Efendi, q.v. 

Akayan, Karim Khan’s sons so 
called by the Sheykhis, 244 


INDEX. 


420 


Akdas, Ivitiib-i-, quoted, 79, n. 2, 
93, n. 1, 151, n. 1, 152, 249, 
n. I, 370, 422—4 
Akdas, Kitab-i-, formerly mis¬ 
named Lawh-i-Akdas, 211 
Akliir, Ism-i-, a title of Mulla, 
Mubammad 1 Ali ofBarfurush, 
340' 

Akhtav, Persian newspaper, 409, 
n. 2, 410 

Alfeyn, or Alifeyn, Kitab-i-, 340 
Aliiyya quoted, 288 
‘Ali Piislni, 382 

‘Ali, of Kazvin, assassinates Haji 
Ja‘far, 362 

' Ali b.Abi Tfilib, the first Imam,296 
‘Ali, Hiiji Mulla, uncle of Kur- 
ratu’l-'Ayn, 197, 310 
‘All, Mirza (or Haji) Seyyid, the 
Bab's maternal uncle, 2, 6, 
11, 47, n. 1, 211—218, 250 
‘Ali, Aka Seyyid, the Arab, one 
of the “Letters of the Liv¬ 
ing,” assassinated in Tabriz, 
363 

•Ali, Mulla, of Bist&rn, called 
llukaddas - i- Khurdsdnl, 5, 
248—9 

‘Ali, Mulla Sheykh, called by the 
Balds Jt'U’th-i -,;j :4a, xxi, 53, 
n. 1, 184—5, i91—2, 261, 
271, 274—6, 324, 329, 339, 
342, n. 1, 374 

‘All Akbar, Mulla, of Ardistan, 5 
‘Ali Akbar, Seyyid, of Shiraz, a 
fanatical divine, 411 
‘All Akbar, Mash-kadi, assas¬ 
sinates a Babi at ‘Ishkabad, 
411—412 

‘AllAsgliar, Mulla (or Haji Mirza), 
Sheykhu’l-Islam, 20, 278 
‘Ali Asghar, Mulla, a Babi mis¬ 
sionary, 1*4 

‘AH ‘Askar Klian, his sons kill 
Seyyid Taliya, 184 
‘Ali Khan, Haji, Hdjibu'd-Daiola, 
the Farrash-bashi, 52, 54, 
185, 204, 215, 329 
‘Ali Khan, warden of Maku, 17, 
274 -5 


‘Ali Iihan, Mirza, nephew of 
Prime Minister, takes part 
in massacre of Teheran, 329 
‘All Khan, Seyyid, of Firuzkuh, 
present at siege of Zanj&n, 
180, 190 

‘Ali Mardtln Khan, Castle of, at 
Zanjan, 181 

‘All Muhammad, Aka, of Isfahan, 
one of the Ezells assassinated 
in Baghdad, 3G3, 371 
‘All Muhammad, Mirza (or Sey¬ 
yid)! See Bab 

‘Ali Naki, the tenth Imam, 297 
Alhihu abha, salutation used by 
Beha’is, xxxviii 

Allah-Yar, Haji, recovers Bab’s 
body, 47 

‘Allama (Jemalu’d-Din Hasan b. 
Yusuf b, ‘Ali of Hillaj, a great 
Shi'ite theologian, 237, n. 2, 
284, n. I 

Alwah-i-Salatin (Beba’u’llah’s E- 
pistles to the Kings), xiv, 69, 
n.l, 108, n. 1,208, 211. Sec 
also Corrigenda, p. lv, supra. 
Amir-Nizam (Mirza Taki Khan), 
32 and n. 3,40—41, 48,50,62, 
181—2, 185, 202, 203, 212, 
261, n. 1, 374 

Anis, a title given by the Babis to 
Suleyman Khan b. Yahya 
Khan, q.v. 

‘Anka, mythical bird, 79, n. 1 
Annas, 137 

Annihilation in God, defined by 
Jarni, 114, n. I 

Antichrist and his ass, 26, 304— 
305 
Arbil, 90 
Arz. See Land 
‘As, mocks the Prophet, 283 
Asadu’llah, Haji, an aged Babi 
killed by ill-usage, 312 
Asadu’llah, Mirza, of Tabriz. See 
Deyyan 

Asfar of Mullii Sadra, 270 
Ashraf, Aka, Mirza, of Abade, his 
martyrdom, 169, n. 1, 404— 
40G 


430 


INDEX. 


Ashraf Khan, governor of Zanjan, 
272, 273 

Asl&n Khan, governor of Zanjan, 
180 

Assassination of Ezells byBeha’is, 
93, n. 1, 99, n. 1, 343, 359— 
365, 370—1 

„ of a Babi at Ishkabad by 
Muhammadans, 411—412 
,, of Muhammadans by Babis, 
175, 198, 258, 311 
,, countenanced by the Prophet 
Muhammad, 135, n. 4, 371— 
372' 

„ ethics of, 371—3 
Assassins, Babis compared with, 
by Lady Sheil, 201 
Avicenna cited, 280, n. 3 
Avvalu-man-amana (the First to 
believe), Mulla Huseyn so 
called by the Bab', 241, 250; 
Akd Mirza Aka Jan of Kashan 
so called by Beha’u’llah, 361 
‘Ayn, city of. See Acre * 

Azakir, Ibn Abi, 229 
‘Azim, Aka Seyyid, the Turk, 
129, n. 2 

‘Azim, Jenab-i-. See ‘All, Mulla 
Shevkh 

‘Aziz Khan, Ajiklan-bashi, 181, 
330 


Bab ( = Gate, pi. Abwab), title of, 
its meaning, 3, 7, 226—234, 
244, 279—280, 298 
,, title of, conferred on those 
who had access to the Twelfth 
Imam during his seclusion, 
229, 233, 298 

„ title of, assumed by a heresi- 
arch of the tenth century, 229 
,, title of, conferred on Sheykh 
Ahmad Alisa’i, 233 
„ title of, conferred on Seyyid 
Kazim of Besht, 233 
„ title of, conferred on Mulla 
Huseyn of Bushraweyh, 230 
„ title of, its meaning as applied 
to Mirza ‘Ali Muhammad, 3, 
7, 226—234, 279—280 


Bab, Mirza ‘All Muhammad of 
Shirkz :— 

„ birth, date of, 2, 221—2, 249 
,, parentage, 2, 250, 289 
„ early life, 2, 249, 250, 253 
,, character, 217—218 
,, his mission foreshadowed by 
Seyyid Kazim, 238—240 
,, date and manner of his “Mani¬ 
festation,” 3—4, 218—226, 
227—228, 240—241, 250— 
251, 297, n. 1 

„ pilgrimage to Mecca, 5, 29, 
249—253 

„ arrest at Bushire, 6, 252—253 
„ imprisonment at Shiraz, 6, 
262 

„ flight to Isfahan, 11,262—264 
,, protected by Minuchihr Khan, 
11—13, 175, 186, 263—265, 
208 

„ conference at Isfahan, 12—13, 
264—268 

,, sent towards Teheran, 13—16 
„ sent to Malui, 15—17, 271— 
277 

„ sent to Clrihrik, 17—18, 275— 
277 

,, first examination at Tabriz, 
19—21, 189, 228, 277—290 
„ claims to be the Imam Mahdi, 
20, 24, 25, n. 1, 275, 288—9, 
290—295 

„ his death decided on, 40—41 
,, his last dispositions, 41—42, 
46, n. 1 

,, his condemnation, 42—43 
,, his last moments, 319—322 
,, his execution, 43—45, 182, 
190, 321—2 

,, disposal of his remains 45— 
46, 110, ri. 3 

,, accorded only a secondary 
rank by Beha’is, xv—xvi, 
xlv, 230 

,, other titles of, 229—230 
,, his writings, 3, 4, 8, 11, 27, 
n. 1, 41—42, 54—55, 335— 
347 

Babn’l-Bab, 230, 211. See Hu¬ 
seyn, Mulla, of Bushraweyh 


INDEX. 


431 


Badasht, conference at, 176, 189, 
212, 312 

Badi, the year, 418, and n. 2, 419, 
and n. 1 

Badi‘, Mirza, the bearer of the 
Epistle to the King of Persia, 
xlv, 102—5, 390—392 
Bad-ra’i, near Baghdad, first Babi 
martyr slain at, 248—9 
Badr-i-Jihan, name of Subh-i- 
Ezel’s wife, 384, 386 
Baghcha, xxxvii. See Behie 
Baghdad (generally alluded to as 
* Irak-i-'Arali , q-v.), Babis 

exiled to, 63—4, 84, n. 2, 85, 
89,90, 111, n. 1,112,354—358 
Bahi, the year, 415, 418, n. 2, 
419 and n. 1 

Bahjat-Kaf‘at, Subh-i-Ezel’s 
daughter, 385 
Bahman Mirza, 271, 273 
Bahram Mirza, 183 
Bakir, Imam Muhammad, 297 
Bakins, a sect of the Imamiyya, 

' 296 

Bakir, [Haji] Mirza, ratifies Bab’s 
death-warrant, 43, 182 
Bakir, Haji Seyyid Muhammad, 
mujtahid , of Isfabin, 285, 
n. 1 

Bakir, Muhammad, of Najafabad, 
one of the Babis killed in 
1852, 185, 323, n. 1, 330 
Bakir, Muhammad, of Kuhpay6, 
one of the Babis killed in 
1852, 332 

Bakir, Muhammad, one of the 
Cyprus exiles, 361, 380, n. 2, 
381, 389 

Bakir, Mulla, one of the B&b’s 
associates, 41 

Bakir, Sheykh, of Isfahan, 261, 
' n. 1, 402 

Baki’ul-Gharkad, cemetery of, 
' 235 

Bakiyyatu’llah (“Remnant of 
’ God”), 3, 297 

Balaghat, wherein it differs from 
fasuhat, 284, n. 3 
Balasaris, orthodox Shi’ites so 
called by Sheykhis, 243 


B&rfurush, execution of Babis at, 
307—309. See also Tabarsi, 
Sheykh; Muhammad ‘All, 
Mulla, of Barfurush; and 
Huseyn, Mulla, of Bushra- 
weyli 

Basil', Seyyid, the Indian, 196 

Bat-ha, a name of Mecca, 140, 

' 397 

Beating children forbidden by 
the B&b, 220 

Beha, derivatives of the word, 
42, 318—319 

Beha, month of, 421 

Beha, Sheykh, a philosopher of 
note, 269 

Beha’u’llah (Mirza Huseyn ‘All 
of Nur), 42, 51—4, 56—65, 
69, 82—4, 89, 91—2, 97— 
100, 155,186,195, 327, 355— 
373 

,, birth, date of, 373, n. 1 
,, parentage, 56, n. 2 
,, early life, 56—58 
„ adopts and preaches the Babi 
faith, 58—62 

,, corresponds with Bab, 62 
„ position accorded to him by 
Bab, xvi, 42, 62—3 
,, arrested ill 1852 at Teheran, 
52, 186, 327 

„ imprisoned for four months, 
54, n. 1 

,, acquitted and released, S3—4 
„ retires to Baghdad, 54, 63 
,, retires into seclusion in Kur¬ 
distan, 64—65, 356, 357, n. 1 
„ returns to Baghdad, 65 
„ at Baghdad, 82—3, 89 
„ at Constantinople, 90, 91 
„ at Adrianople, 92—101, 102, 
358—360 

,, at Acre, 101, 155 
„ personal impressions of, xxxix 
—xli 

,, seclusion observed by, xxvii, 
xli 

,, views of bis claim and charac¬ 
ter entertained by Beha’is, 
xvi, 59, 65—66, 69, 82—3, 
95—6, 107-8, 159 


432 


INDEX. 


Beha’u’llah, views of his claim 
and character entertained by 
Ezells, 343 and n. 1, 351, 355, 
n. 2, 356, 358—364 

,, writings, 27, n. 1, 69, n. 1, 
123, n. 1 

,, writings or words quoted in 
original, 57, n. 2, 77, n. 2, 
93, n. 1, 96, n. 1, 100, n. 1, 
364, 366—8, 390—1 

,, writings or words quoted in 
translation, xl, 52—3, 68—9, 
70—81, 108—154, 368—9, 
370, 391—400 

Beha’u’llah, Subh-i-Ezel so called, 
353 

Behjb, name of Behii’u’llah’s resi¬ 
dence at Acre, xxxvi—xli 

“Best of Stories” [Alisann’l- 
Kisas). See Commentary on 
the Sura-i-Yusuf 

Beyan, meaning of term, 343— 
346 

Beyan, Persian, when composed, 
274, 292 

,, purposely left incomplete, 353, 
n. 4 

„ quoted, 218—220, 222—226, 
231—234, 292—295, 317— 
318, 344—345, 347—349, 420 
—422 

Biddulph, Sir Robert, xxii, xxvi 

Bigotry, its evils exposed, 71,163 
—166 

Binanu’l-Mulk, 402 

Binning (Journal of Two Years’ 
Travel in Persia), 187, 201— 
202 

Biyuk Aka, 261 

“Block of Heedlessness” (Jar- 
thumu'l-ghiflat), 363 

“Blow,” “Place of the,” Tabriz 
so called, 322 

Bondage, Babis sold into, 129, 
n. 2 

Book, Most Holy. See Akdas, 
Kitab-i- 

„ of Fatima, 123, n. 1. See 
F&tima 

„ of Figures ( Kitub-i-heydhil ), 
339 


Book of Justioe(Kitfib-i-‘adliyya), 
340 

,, of Light ( Kitdb-i-mir ), 210, 
340—1 

,, of Names ( Kitdb-i-asmd ), 202, 
318, 338 

„ of Precepts (Kitdb-i-ahkam), 
203, 414, 425 

,, of Proof ( Kitdb-i-hujjatiyya), 
339 

„ of Recompense ( Kitab-i-jeza ), 
336—7 

„ of Seven hundred suras (Kitdb- 
i-haftsad sura), 339 
,, of Two Sanctuaries ( Kitub-i- 
hararneyn), 339—340 
Bulwer, Sir Henry, xxii, xxvi, 350, 
376 

Buzurg, Mirza, father of Beha 
’u’llah and Subh-i-Ezel. See 
‘Abbas, Mirza 

Buzurg, Mirza, of Kirmanshah, 
one of the Ezelisassassinated, 
371 

Buzurg Khan, Mirza, of Kazvin, 
Persian consul at Baghdad, 
84—5, 88, 110, n. 2, 111, 
n. 1 

Caiaphas, 137 
Calendar, Babi, 413—425 
Charvadar-kush, name of a star, 
125, n. 

Chihrik, 17, 18, 21, 41, 275—7 
Churchill, Mr S., 188, 193, 194 
Churchill, Mr H., 194 
Cobham, Mr C. D., xix, xx, xxii— 
xxiii, 382, 388 

Commentary on the Suratu'l'Asr, 
11, 264, 340, 346; Bakara, 
346; Hamd, 340 ; Kawthar, 
8, 346' 

„ on the Kur'dn, 335 
„ on the Names, 346, n. 1 
,, on the Surat-i-Yitsuf, 3, 208, 
230, 241, 250, 338, 339, 346 
Communism, Babiism described 
as a form of, 216, 261, 380 
Concord commended, 71, 154 
Constantinople, Babis seut to, 
90—92, 116 


INDEX. 


433 


Contingent Being (imkiin), mean¬ 
ing of term, 115, n. 1 

Cyprus, information about Babis 
exiled to, how obtained, xviii 
—xix 

„ object in visiting, xx—xxi 

,, description of visit to, xxii— 
xxvi 

„ documents relative to Babi 
exiles preserved in, xxii, xxvi, 
101, n. 3, 350—1, 376—389 

Dala'il-i-sab‘a (Seven Proofs), 27, 
n. 1, 221, 274, 352, n. 1 

Dallaku ’1-Hakikat (“ Barber of the 
Truth”), title conferred on 
oneof Beha’u’llah’sfollowers, 
362 

Daru’l-aman, Kirm&n so called, 
354, n. 2 

Daru’l-’ibadat, Yezdso called, 354, 
n. 2 

Daru’l-‘ilm, Shiraz so called, 294, 
354,n. 2 

Daru’l-khilafat, Teheran so called, 
354, n. 2 

Daru’s-salam, Baghdad so called, 
354, n. 2 

Daru’s-saltanat, Isfahan so called, 
354, n. 2 

Darugha. See'Abdu’l-HamidKhan 

Da’ud Mirza, killed at Vasaks, 
178 

Day of Invocation ( yawmu’t- 
taruid) = Day of Judgement, 
141, n. 1 

Days, names of, in Babi calendar, 
414 

„ intercalary, 419, 423—5 

Death, swearing by, of persons 
dear to one’s self, 403, n. 1 

Derivative Attributes, 42, 317— 
319 

Deyyan (Mirza Asadu’llah of 
Tabriz), 331, 357, 365 

“Direful Mischief” (fitna-i-say- 
lam), 356 et seq. 

Dorn, Babi writings described by, 
202, 318, 338 

Dyspepsia, swooning in, 280, 
n. 3 

B. 


Easter, how observed by Syrian 
Christians, xxxiii—iv 
Elchek, an instrument of torture, 
260, n. 1 

England commended, 162—3 
Epistles to the Kings. See Al- 
wah-i-Salatin 

Essence, identical or not identical 
with Attributes, 281 
Ethe, Dr H., essay on Babiism, 
207 

Eyres, Mr, British consul at Bey- 
rout, xxviii—xxxiii 
Ezel, title of Mirza Yahya, 95, 
n. 1. See Subh-i-Ezel 
Ezells, sect of Babis, xvii—xviii 
,, assassination of. See Assas¬ 
sination 

Fagnan, M. E., review of Baron 
Rosen’s work, 209 
Famagusta, xix, xx, xxiii—xxvi, 
101, n. 3, 155, 361, 369, 377 
—389, passim 

Fandariski, Mir, a philosopher of 
note, 269 

Farahil, sack of, 37, n. 2 
Faraju’llah, Mirza, one of the 
Babi officers at Zanjan, 180 
Farhad Mirza ( SIu‘tamadu’d- 
dawla), uncle of the present 
Shah, 80 

Farkadan, Arabic name of two 
stars called in English 
“Guards” or “Guardians,” 
125, n. 2 

Farrk, sack of, 177 
Farrash-bashi. See ‘All Khan, 
Haji 

Farrukli Khan, brother of Haji 
Suleyman Khan, killed by 
Babis at Zanjan, 181, 190 
Fars, called the Land, of Fd, 79, 
n. 2 

,, called the Abode of Knowledge, 
294, 354, n. 2 

Fasa, Seyyid Yahya at, 183 
Fasahat, wherein it differs from 
baldgliat, 284, n. 3 
FassaduT-Ahadiyyat (“Phleboto- 
mist of the Divine Unity”), 

28 


434 


INDEX. 


title earned hy one of Bella 
’u’llah’s followers, 363 and 
n. I 

Fasting, ordinances of, 424 
Fathu’llah, Mulla, of Kum, one 
of those who attempt the 
Sh&h’s life, 53, n. I, 185, 
323—4, 329 

Fatima, Hidden Book of (or 
Hidden Wards), 123, n. I; 
quoted, 125—6 

Fatima, Subh-i-Ezel’s wife, 384 
,, his daughter, 381, 386 
„ his daughter-in-law, 386 
„ Sheykh ‘Ali Sayyah’s and 
afterwards Mushkin Kalam’s 
wife, 387 

Fattah, Haji, his son secedes from 
Beha’u'llah, 262 

Fattah, Mulla, a Babi slain at 
Nur, 375 

Fazlu’llah, Mirza ( Nasiru’l- 

' Mullc), 183 

Feyha, Al- (“ the spacious ”), 
Damascus so called, 143, n. 2 
First to helieve. See Avvalu-man- 
amana 

Firuz MirzA, 183, 257—8 
Five Grades ( Shidun-i-khamsa ), 
318, 335—6, 338—9, 343— 
347 

Four Relations, 284, n. 3 
Fourth Support ( Bukn-i-rdbi ‘), 
4, 242—4 

Freedom of conscience the right 
of all, 165 

Freemason, a Greek, xxxiv 
Fu’ad, Subh-i-Ezel’s son, 386 
Fu’ad PashA, 382 

Gate, Gates. See Biib, Ahw&b 
Gates of the Fire ( abwctbu’n-ndr ), 
234 

Ghawgha, Mirza ‘Ahdu’llah, 357 
Ghiyath, xvii 

Gliulam Huseyn, Mulla, of Kir- 
m4n, Sheykhi doctrines ex¬ 
plained by, 243 

Ghulamu’l-Khuld, title conferred 
hy Beh4'u’llah on one of his 
followers, 362 


Ghusn-i-Akhar, Ghusn-i-At-ht 
Ghusn-i-A‘zam, Titles 
Beha’u’llah’s sons, called ci 
lectively Aghsdn, 361, 3E 
n. 2. See also ‘Ahbas Efen 
Gilhert, M. T., notice on Bal 
settled in Kurdistan, 207 
Gobineau, M. le Comte de, ix —i 
xlvi, li, 202—3, aud throug 
out the work passim 
Golden Calf, Beha’u’llah likem 
to it hy Ezells, 355, n. 
362 

Goldsmid, Major-General S 
Frederic, xxii, 261 
Gordon, General, Babi exiles r 
leased from Khartum b' 
129, n. 2 

Gospels quoted, 137, n. 2 
,, alluded to in Persian Bevai 
224 

,, called the Alif llnjil ), 348 
Guardians (mikabd), 26, 303 
Guard-stars (called in Arahi 
Farkaddn), 125, n. 2 
Guebre couverted to Babiism, 3- 
Guillemard, Dr F. H. H., xix 
Gurgin Khan, succeeds Minuchih 
Khan in government of Isft 
han, 13 

Ha, the letter ( = 5), 424 
Hadba, Al- (“the prominent” 
Mosul so called, 139, u. i 
416 

Hadi, Suhh-i-Ezel’s son, 385 
Hadi, Haji Mulla, of Sabzawai 
the piiilosopher, 269 
Hadi Khan of Nur, B&bi deserter 
placed in charge of, 179 
Hadikatu’sh-Shi'a (“ Garden c 
the Shi'ites ”), work on Shi'it 
theology, 302 

Haifa, Laurence Oliphant’s work 
209—210, 370 

Hair, how worn hy Babis, xxxi 
n. 1, xxxiv 

Haji Mirza Akasi, 13, 18, 2], n. I 
22—4, 274—5, 292 
HAjihu’d-dawla. See ‘All KMn 
Haji 


INDEX. 


435 


Hamze Mirza, 41, 176, 182, 320 
Hasan, Imam, 297 
Hasan, a young Babi put to death 
at Yezd, 256 

Hasan, Aka Seyyid, of Yezd, 
brother of the Bab’s amanu¬ 
ensis, 43, n. 1, 271, n. 1, 
319—321 

Hasan, Aka, deputy-chief of the 
famishes, 332 

Hasan of Khamsa, one of the 
victims of the Teheran mas¬ 
sacre, 332 

Hasan Khan, Mirza, brother of 
Mirza Taki Khan Aimr- 
Nizdm, 41—3, 181—2, 190 
Hasan. Mir Seyyid (or Mirza), 
of Nur, the I’latonist, 12, 
265—8 

Hasan, Seyyid, of Khurasan, one 
of the victims of the Teheran 
massacre, 329 

Hasan, Seyyid, of Tabataba. See 
Isfahan, Martyrs of 
Hasan ‘Abdu’r-Rahman Efendi, 
husband of Subh-i-Ezel’s 
daughter Safiyya, 385 
Hasan ‘All, H4ji Mulla, of Tusir- 
kan, 265 

Hasan ‘Askari, Imam, 297 
Hashish, Babis charged with 
making use of, 203 
Hasht Bihisht, Ezell historical 
work called, 331, n. 1, 351— 
373 

Hayatu’l-kulub, work on Shi'ite 
theology, 123, n. 1 
Hayy (“ the Living ”), title of 
Subh-i-Ezel, 353 and n. 3 
Hazar-Jarib, attack on Babis at, 
176, 189 

Hazrat-i-A‘14, 229. See Bab 
,, -i-Ezel. See Subh-i-Ezel 
„ -i-Kuddus. See Muhammad 
‘Ali, Mulla, of Barfurush 
„ -i-Nukt6-i-Beyan,229. SeeB&b 
,, -i-Nukte-i-Ula, 229. See Bab 
„ -i-Rabbi-ul-A‘la, 229. See Bab 
Helpers (nujabd), 26, 303 
Hermaphrodite, 284 


He whom God shall manifest 
(Man yudh-hiruhu'lldh), xvii, 
18, n. 1, 55, 287, n. 1 
Heykal, Sura-i-, 69, n. 1, 108, n. 
1, 208, 211, 359, n. 2, 365, 
393 and n. 2. See also 
Corrigenda, p. Iv, supra 
Hidden Words ( Kalinidt-i-mak- 
mlna). See Fatima, Hidden 
Book of 

Houston, Mr G. L., xix 
Houtum-Schindler, General, 404 
Huart, M. C., 210, 340—1 
Hujjatu’l-lslam. See Muhammad, 
Mulla, Mamakani 
Hujjatu’llah, Imam Mahdi so 
called, 297 

Huruf-i-Hayy. See Letters of the 
Living 

Huseyn, Imam, 28, n. 2, 297 
Huseyn ibn Buh. See lbn Buh 
Huseyn of Milan (called Huseyn 
Jan and Abu ‘Abdi'llah), 
330—1, 357, 365 
Huseyn the Water-carrier, takes 
part in assassination of 
Ezelis, 361 

Huseyn, Aka Seyyid, of Yezd, the 
Bab’s amanuensis, 43, n. 1, 
44, 182, 205, 271 and n. 1, 
272, 274, 276, 319—322, 327, 
330, 338, 339 

Huseyn, Aka Seyyid, of Turshiz, 
one of the Seven Martyrs, 
212, 215 

Huseyn, Aka, of Ardistan, ac¬ 
companies Bab from Shiraz 
to Isfahan, 263 

Huseyn, Mirza, of Kum, 129, 
n. 2, 186 

Huseyn, Mulla, of Bushraweyh 
(called Jenub-i-Bdb, Jenab-i- 
Bdbu’l-Bdb, Avvalu-man-dm- 
ana, Ilarf-i-avval, Ism-i- 
avval, Ac.), xxi, xliii, 5, 29, 
35—8, 95, n. 1, 176—8, 184, 
189—190, 192, 195, 230, 240 
—1, 245, 250—1, 310, 374 
Huseyn, Mulla, of Khurasan, 110, 
n. 3, 327, 329 


28—2 


436 


INDEX. 


Huseyn, Seyyid, of Isfahan, or of 
Hindiyan, 331, 357 
Huseyn, Seyyid, of Tabataba. 

See Isfahan, Martyrs of 
Huseyn Khan, Ajiidan-bdshi, 
Governor of Fars, 10,11,175, 
189, 262 

Huseyn Khan, Hmhvru’d-dawla, 
Persian Ambassador at Con¬ 
stantinople, 85, n. 1, 358 
Huseyn ‘Ali, Mirza, of Niir. See 
Beha’u’llah 

Huseyn ‘Ali, of Kashan, one of 
the Ezelis assassinated, 371 

Ibn Hisham, narrative cited from, 
372 

Ibn Mihriyar, 26, 302—3 
Ibn Muljam, the murderer of ‘Ali 
b. Abi Talib, 296 
Ibn Buh, Huseyn, 25, 229, 233, 
298', 301—2 

Ibrahim, Haji, assassinated at 
Acre, 362, 371 

Ibrahim, Mulla, of Mahallat, 311. 
, 312 

Ikan, a controversial work of the 
Babis, xiv, xlii, 27, n. 1, 211, 
259, 411, 413, 415 
‘Ilmu’l-Huda, 197. See Murtaza, 
Seyyid 

Imamate, doctrine of, 296—9 
Imams, regarded as creative 
powers by Sheykli Ahmad of 
Ahsa, 236—7 

Imam-Jum‘a, of Isfahan, 402. 

See Muhammad Huseyn, Mir 
Imam kuli Mirza, governor of 
Kirmanshali, 184 
‘Imarat-i-Khurshid, 13, n. 2 
‘Imarat-i-Sadr, 13, n. 2 
Indian Believer ( Mu’min-i-Hindi ), 
196 

Intolerance deprecated, 71, 72 
‘Irak-i-‘Arab, 64, n. 1. See Bagh¬ 
dad 

Isfahan, conference of, 264—8 
,, martyrs of, xlv, 167—9, 400— 
403 

Islam perfected in this Manifesta¬ 
tion, 225 


‘Ishkabad, assassination of a Babi 
at, 411—2 

lsm-i-Akhir. See Akhir, lsm-i- 
lsma‘il, Haji Mirza, of Kashan, 
brother of Mirza Jani, 332 
Isma‘il, Haji Mulla, of Kum, one 
of the Seven Martyrs, 212— 
213 

lsma‘il, Sheykh, 331 
lsma‘ilis, 296 

lz-haku’l-Batil (“the Crushing of 
Falsehood ”), attack on Babi 
doctrines written by Haji 
Karim Khan, 242 


Jabal-i-Basit (“the Open Moun¬ 
tain ”), 276. See also Maku 
Jabal-i-Shadid (“ the Grievous 
Mountain”), 276. See also 
Chihrik 

Jabir, Haditli-i-, 259 and n. 1 
Jahir, Sultan, 267 
Jabra’il-i-Amin, one of Beha’u 
’llah’s followers so called, 362 
Jabulka, fabulous city of, 25, 
298—301 

Jabulsa, fabulous city of, 25, 
298—301 

Ja‘far-i-Sadik, Imam, 24 and n. 3, 
236,' 297 

Ja'far, Abu, Muhammad b. ‘Oth- 
man, 233, 298 

Ja‘far, Ahu, Muhammad b. ‘Ali 
ash-Shalmaghani, 229, 302 
Ja‘far, brother of Huseyn of Milan 
{q.v.), self-styled “King of 
Baghdad,” 331 

Ja‘far, Haji, murdered at Acre, 
362 

Ja‘far, Haji [Muhammad], of 
Tabriz, 100 and n. 1, 208 
Ja‘far-i-Kasbfi, Seyyid, the father 
of Seyyid Yahya of Darab, 
8, 183, 254 

Ja‘far-kuli Khan, officer of besieg¬ 
ing army at Sheykh Tabarsi, 
190 

Ja‘far-kuli Khan, brother of Sadr- 
i-A‘zarn, 329, 374 
Jalalu’d-Dawla, Prince, son of 


INDEX. 


437 


Prince Zillu’s-Sultan, 403 and 
n. I 

Jalalu’d-Din, son of Sheykh ‘All 
Sayyah,387 

Jalil, Mulla, of Urumiyya, 5, 248 
Jamalu’d-Din, son of Slieykh ‘All 
Sayyah, 387 

Jamaliyya, daughter of Sheykh 
‘All Sayyah, 387 
Jam! cited, 114, n. 1 
Janayn, name of one of Bella’u 
’llah’s gardens at Acre, 210 
Jani, Haji Mirza, of Kaskan, 263, 
271, 308, 332 

Jarthiimu’l-ghiflat (“ Block of 
Heedlessness”), 363 andn. 1 
Jawad, a title of the ninth Imam, 
267 and n. 1 

Jawad, Aka Seyyid [of Kerbela], 
an influential Ezeli who died 
about seven years ago at 
Kirman, 342, n. 2 
Jawad, Mirza, of Khurasan, ac¬ 
quitted with Beha’u’llah, 186, 
327 

Jemalu’d-Din Bey of Beyrout, xxx 
Jemalu’d-Din Hasan b. Yusuf b. 

‘Ali, of Hilla. See ‘Allama 
Jemalu'd-Din al-Afghan, Seyyid, 
199 

Jenab-i-‘Azim. See ‘Ali, Mulla 
Sheykh 

„ -i-Bab, or Babu’l-Bab. See 
Huseyn, Mulla, of Bushra- 
weyh 

„ -i-Kuddus. See Muhammad 
‘Ali, Haji Mulla, of Barfurusk 
„ -i-Mukaddas [-i-Khurasan]. 
See $adik, Mulla [Muham¬ 
mad], of Khurasan 
,, -i-Tahira. See Kurratu’l-‘Ayn 
Jesus Christ, 137, 224—5 
,, Beha’u’llah compared to, xvi 
Jews, persecution of, in Isfahan, 
407 

John the Baptist, the Bab com¬ 
pared to, xvi 
Jorjani cited, 303—4 
Joseph, Sura of, Commentary on. 
See Commentary 


Julfa, Christian priest of, 169 
Juzghands (candied walnuts) used 
by the Babis for conveyance 
of letters, 276 

Ka’ani, his poems cited, 199, 325 
—326 

Ka‘b h. Ashraf, a strenuous op¬ 
ponent of Muhammad, 135 
and n. 4 

Kafi, book of Shi‘ite traditions, 
259, n. 1 

Kahir. See Rajab ‘Ali, Mulla 
Ka’im, 28, 297. See also Mahdi, 
Imam 

Kalimat-i-Maknuna. See Fatima, 
Hidden Book of 

Kalin (or Kuleyn), village of, 14, 
79 

Kamalu’d-Din, son of Sheykh ‘All 
Sayyah, 387 
Kamil Pasha, 379 
Kannadu’s-Samadaniyyat (“Con¬ 
fectioner of the Divine Etern¬ 
ity”), 362 

Kanun of Avicenna, 280, n. 3 
Karavan-kush, name of a star, 
125, n. 1 

Karim Khan, Haji Muhammad, 
198, 241—2, 244 
Karkiik, 90 

Kashfi. See Ja‘far-i-Kashfi, 
Seyyid 

Kasht, in Mazandaran, 178 
Kasim of Niriz, one of the victims 
of the Teheran massacre, 332 
Kawthar, a river in Paradise, 118, 
392 

,, Commentary on Suratu’l-. 

See Commentary 
„ Suratu’l-, 283 

Kazem-Beg, Mirza, li—lii, 174, 
187, 204—5, and through¬ 
out the work passim 
Kazim, Haji Seyyid, of Resht, 

’ 29, 31,' 184, 195, 198, 228, 
238—241, 250 

Kazim KaJtuki, Haji, blown from 
mortar at Zanj&n, 181 
Kazim Khan Afskar, present at 
siege of Zanjan, 180 


438 


INDEX. 


Kazim Khan, Muhammad, Far- 
rdsh-bdshi, 28!) 

Kazim, Mulla, Ezeli killed at 
Isfahan, 400 

Kazim, Mulla Muhammad, muj- 
taliid of Shahiud, 176 
Kazim, Seyyid, of Zanjan, ac¬ 
companies Bab to Isfahan, 
11, 263 

Kazimeyn, shrine of, near Bagh- 
’ dad, 85, n. 2 
Kazvini cited, 299—301 
Kerbela, massacre of, 139, n. 3 
Ketman (concealment of religious 
conyictions), 216 
Khabbazu’l-Wahidiyyat (“Baker 
of the Divine Unity”), 362 
Khadijb, the Bab’s mother, 289 
Khadimu'llah (Aka Mirza Aka 
Jan of Kashan), xli, 355, n. 2, 
358—362, 393, n. 2, 408 
Khan-i-gandum-firushan, at Acre, 

362 

Khan-i-sharki, at Constantinople, 

363 

Khanlar Mirza, 176 
Khartum, Babis exiled to, 129, 
n. 2 

Khayyat-bashi, assassinated at 
Acre, 362, 371 

Khilafat, office of, how regarded 
by Sunnis, 296 

Khusraw of Kadi-kala, 36, 37, 
n. 2, 177 ’ 

Khutb4-i-Kahriyy6 (“the Sermon 
of Wrath”), 274—5 
Kinar-i-gird, 14 

Kisasu’l-’Ulama (Stories of Di¬ 
vines), work of Shi'ite bio¬ 
graphy, 86, n. 1, 197—8, 
235—6, 277—8 
Kishlak of Nur, CO and n. 2 
Kitab-i-Alfeyn or Alifeyn. See 
Alfeyn, Kitab-i- 

„ -i-Akdas. See Akdas, Kitab-i- 
Kitab. See Book 
Kiya-kala, in Mazandaran, 178 
Kremer, Baron A. von, 206—7, 
229, 242 

Kuch ‘All Sultan, one of the Bab’s 
executioners, 182 


Kulah-i-Firangi, summer-house at 
Shiraz, 258 

“Kur’4n of the Babis,” 198, 202 

Kurban ‘All, Mirza, the dervish, 
one of the Seven Martyrs, 
212, 214 

Kurdistan, Babis in, 207 
,, Beha’u’llah’s retirement into, 
64—5, 356, 357, n. 1 

Kurratu’l-‘Ayn (Zarrin-Taj, en¬ 
titled also Jenab-i-Takira), 
xxi, 30—32, 175, 186, 189, 
196, 197—8, 203—4, 207—8, 
247, 309—316, 327, 334, 342, 
n. 1 

Kursi, how used in Persia, 309, n. 1 

Lahsa’i (more accurately Ahsa’i), 
234. See Ahmad Ahsa’i, 
Sheykh 

Land of Alif ( = Azarbaijan), 79, 
n. 2 

,, of ‘Ayn ( = ‘Irak), 79, n. 2 
,, of Fa ( = Fars), 79, n. 2 
„ of Kaf and Ba ( = Kirman), 
79, n. 2 

,, of Kha ( = Khurasan), 79, n. 2 
,, of Mim ( = Mazandaran), 79, 
n. 2 

„ of T4 ( = Teheran), 79, n. 2 
,, of the Mystery ( = Adrianople), 
361 and n. 2 

Langar, near Kirrnan, present 
head-quarters of the Shey- 
khis, 244 

Lawh-i-Akdas, a misnomer for 
the Kitab-i-Akdas, 211. See 
also Akdas, Kitab-i- 
„ -i-Nasir, quoted, 96, n. 1 
„ -i-Ba’is, quoted, 100, n. 1 
„ -i-Sult4n, how sent and re¬ 
ceived, 102—8 

,, -i-Sultan, translation of, 108 
—15i, 390—400 

Lelb-Bashi, 188. See Biza-kuli 
Khan 

Letter, the First (Harf-i-avval), 
241, 250. See Huseyn, Mulla, 
of Bushraweyh 

Letters of Denial (Hunif-i-nafy), 
234 


INDEX. 


439 


Letters of the Living (Hurufat-i- 
Hayy), xvi, xxiv, 95, n. 1, 
353, 357, 421—2 
Leylatu’l-Kadr, 262, n. 1 
Lisanu’l-Mulk (Mirzi Taki, Mus- 
tawfi, better known aa Sipihr, 
author of the Nasikhu’t- 
Tawarikh, q.v.), 173, 187, 
203, 323 

Lovett, surveys on the road from 
Shiraz to Bam, 261 
Lutf-‘Ali, Muza, the chamberlain, 
' 8 

Lntf-‘Ali, Mirza, the secretary, 36 
Lntf-‘Ali of Shiraz, one of the 
victims of the Teheran mas¬ 
sacre, 331 

Madness attributed to Babis, 
xxxviii, 213 

Mahalla-i-Babi in Niriz, 261 
Mahan, burial-place of Shah Ni‘- 
matn’llah, 244 

Mahbubu’sh-Shuhada (“the Be¬ 
loved of Martyrs ”). See 
Isfahan, Martyrs of 
Mahdi, Imam, 25, n. 1, 259, 289, 
294, n. 2, 297—9 
„ Imam, Bab’s claim to be the, 
20, 24, 25, n. 1, 275, 288—9, 
290—5 

Mahdi, Aka,ilfal iku’t- Tvjjdr, takes 
part in Teheran massacre, 
332, 

Mahdi, Aka, of Kashan, entrusted 
with keeping of Bab’s body, 
46, n. 1; martyred at Teheran, 
330 

Mahdi, Mulla, of Kand, 5, 248 
Mahdi-kuli Mirza, 37, n. 2, 38, 
177—9, 190, 247, 306—7 _ 
Mahd-i-‘Ulya, one of Beha’u'llah’s 
wives so entitled, 361 
Mahmud Efendi, mufti of Bagh¬ 
dad, 249 

Mahmud, Haji Mulla, Nizdmu'l- 
‘ Ulamd, 19, 189, 278—289 
Mahmud Khan, the Kaldntar, 31, 
'261, n. 1, 312—313, 334 
Mahmud Khan, of Khuy, present 
' at siege of Zanjan, 180 


Mahmud, Mirza, acquitted with 
Beha’u’Uah, 186, 327 
Mahmud, Mirza, of Kazvin, one 
of the victims of the Teheran 
massacre, 330 

Malm (called by Bab “ Jabal-i- 
Basit,” q-v.), 15—17, 271—7 
Mallahu’i-Knds (“ the Sailor of 
Sanctity”), one of Beha’u 
’llah’s followers so entitled, 
362 

Ma’mun, the Caliph, his argu¬ 
ment with the Imam Riza, 
283, n. 1 

Manifestation ( zuhur). See Bab 
Maryam, Subh-i-Ezel’s daughter, 
386 

Masjid-i-Shah in Isfahan, 264—5 
Masnavi quoted, 23 and n. 1, 287 
and n. 2 

,, illustration from, 372 
Mast (curdled milk), letters con¬ 
veyed in, 276 

Mazandaran insurrection. See 
Tabarsi, Sheykh 

Mazandarani dialect, history com¬ 
posed in, 202, 205 
Mazdakites, Babis likened to, 201, 
209 

Merrick quoted, 123, n. 1 
Metempsychosis alleged to be a 
Babi tenet, 189 

Meydan-i-Shah, in Teheran, 213, 
n. 1 

,, in Isfahan, 403 
Mihr ‘All Khan of Nur, Shujd‘u’1- 
Mulk , 183, 257—260 
Milan, 47, 247, 272—3 
Minuchihr Ivhan, Mu‘tamadu'd- 
Dawla , 11—13, 175, 189, 
263—5, 277 

Miracles demanded of the Bab, 
287—8 

Mir Itamad, a philosopher of note, 
269—270 

Mir Fandariski, a philosopher of 
note, 269 

Mirza Buzurg. See Buzurg, Mir¬ 
za 

Mirza’is, Beha’is so called by 
Ezelis, 343, n. 1 


440 


INDEX. 


Mocbenin, M., his memoir on the 
BAbis, 205, 270 
Months, names of Babi, 414 
Mormons, Babis compared to, 201 
Moses, his dispensation, noticed 
in Persian Beyan, 224 
Mosul, 90, 208, 418 
„ called al-Hadbd, 139, n. 2, 
416 

Mu‘allim-i-Nuri (MnllA Muham¬ 
mad), 271 

Mubashshir, Hazrat-i-, Bab so 
called by iietia’is, 230 
Muhammad, Subh-i-Ezel’s son, 
'386 

Muhammad b. Maslama, slays 
Ka‘b b. Ashraf at the com¬ 
mand of the Prophet, 135, 
n. 4 

Muhammad, Aka, of Isfahan, one 
of those who conveyed the 
Bab’s remains to Teheran, 
110, n. 3 

Muhammad Beg, Chdpdrji, 16, 
'271—3 

Muhammad of Mazandaran, Bo- 
ha’n’llah’s servant, 357 
Muhammad of NajafabAd, one of 
the victims of the Teheran 
massacre, 330 

Muhammad, Haji (or Aka) Seyyid, 
of Isfahan, nutjtahid ,, 118 and 
n. 3 

Muhammad, Mirza Seyyid, of 
Isfahan, Ivutm-Jum'a, 266 
Muhammad Khan, Begler-begi , 
present at siege of Zanjan, 
180—1 

Muhammad Nabil, MirzA. See 
'Nabil 

Muhammad b. Snleyman-i-Tana- 
kalmni, Mirza, author of Kis- 
asu’l-‘Ulama, 197 
Muhammad, Mirza, of Niriz, one 
of the victims of the Teheran 
massacre, 53, n. I, 323 and 
n. I, 330 

Muhammad, Mnlla, Kurratn’l- 
‘Ayn’s husband, 311 
Muhammad, MullA, Mamakani, 
'19, 43, 182, 278, 285—6' 


Muhammad, Mulla, of Nur. See 
Mu‘allim-i-Nuri 

Muhammad, Mulla, of Nur, avoids 
discussion with Beha’n'llah, 
60—2 

Muhammad, (Haji) Seyyid, of 
Isfahan, the Ezell, 93 and 
n. 1, 97, 185, 356, 360, 361, 
370, 371 

Muhammad Shah, 7, 10, 21, 32, 
'62, 176, 189, 277 
Muhammad ‘Ali of Barfurush (or 
Mazandaran), [Haji] Mnlla 
(or Mirza), called by the 
Babis “ Jendb-i-Kuddm” 5, 
29, 95, n. I, 176—9, 195, 
253, 306—9, 374; his writ¬ 
ings, 30, n. I 

Muhammad ‘Ali of Zanjan, Mulla, 
'9—10,39,179—181 
Muhammad ‘All of Tabriz, Aka 
(or Mirza, or Mulla), 43, 46, 
n. 1, 182, 320—2 
Muhammad ‘Ali of Isfahan, Aka, 
secedes from Beha’u’llah, 
362—3 

Muhammad ‘Ali of Najafabad, 
one of the victims of the 
Teheran massacre, 330 
Muhammad ‘Ali the barber, one 
of those engaged in the assas¬ 
sination of the Ezells, 359, 
361 

Muhammad ‘Ali, Haji, a Babi 
killed at Kazvin, 312 
Muhammad ‘Ali, Haji, a Babi 
executed after the ZanjAn 
rising, 181 

Muhammad ‘Ali Khan Shahsivan, 
present at ZanjAn siege, 180 
Muhammad Bakir. See Bakir, 
Muhammad 

Muhammad Hasan, Aka Mirza, 
brother of Mulla Huseyn of 
Bushraweyh, 307 
Muhammad Hasan, HAji Mirza, 
of Khurasan, one of the Babis 
taken captive at Sheykh 
Tabarsi, 307 

Muhammad Hasan KhAu, of Eri- 
van, suspected of complicity 


INDEX. 


441 


in the plot against the Shah, 

191 

Muhammad Hasan, Mirza, of 
Nur, the Platonist, 266—8 
Muhammad Hasan, Sheykh, 86, 
n. I, 249 and n. 1 
Muhammad Huseyn, Aka, of Ar- 
distan, accompanies Bab on 
journey to Isfahan, 263 
Muhammad Huseyn, Mir, Imam- 
Jum'aof Isfahan (q.v.), 167— 
169 

Muhammad Huseyn, Mirza, of 
Tabriz, one of the Seven 
Martyrs, 212 

Muhammad Ja'far, Haji, of Fars, 
one of the clergy of Isfahan, 
265 

Muhammad Ja‘far, Mulla, of 
Nirak, remonstrates with 
Beha’u’lliih, 356 

Muhammad Jawad of Kazvin, 
murderer of Ezelis, 361 
Muhammad Mahdi, Aka, Kalbasi, 
one of the clergy of Isfahan, 
12, 265—6 

Muhammad Mahdi,Hajl,mention¬ 
ed in Kitdb-i-Jezd, 337 
Muhammad Riza, Haji, of Isfa¬ 
han, assassinated by Muham¬ 
madans at ‘Ishkabad, 411— 
412 

Muhammad Riza, Haji, one of 
the murdered Ezelis, 356, 359 
, Muhammad Riza, Seyyid, the 
Bab’s father, 2, 250, 289 
Muhammad Sadik. See Sadik, 
Mulla[Muhammad], of Khur¬ 
asan 

Muhammad Salih, Haji Mulla, of 
Kazvin, father of Kurratu’l- 
‘Ayn, 197, 310—1 
Muhammad Taki, Imam, 297 
Muhammad Taki Khan, Mirza, 
'killed at Nur, 375 
Muhammad Taki, Mirza, kills 
Khusraw of Kadi-kala, 36, 
n. 2 

Muhammad Taki, Haji Mulla, of 
'Kazvin, called Shaliid-i-Thd- 


litli, uncle of Kurratu’l-‘Ayn, 
175, 197—8, 236, 310-1 
Muhammad Taki, Mulla, of Herat, 
'185 

Muhammad Taki of Shiraz, one 
of the victims of the Teheran 
massacre, 330 

Muhayyisa, assassinates a Jew by 
command of the Prophet 
Muhammad, 372 
Muhsin, one of the muftis of 
Baghdad, 249 

Muhsin, Haji, a Babi executed 
after the Zanjan rising, 181 
Mujtahid, meaning of the term, 
266, n. 1 

Mukallid, meaning of the term, 
266, n. 1 

Mukaddas-i-Khurasan, 246. See, 
Sadik, Mulla [Muhammad], 
of Khurasan, and ‘Ali, Mulla, 
of Bistam, both of whom 
appear to have enjoyed this 
title 

Mumin-i-Hindi (“the Indian be¬ 
liever”), 196 

Murcht'-Khiir, near Isfahan, 13 
and n. 1 

Murgh Mahalla, in Shimran, 
Beha’u’liah’s residence, 81 
Murtaza, Sheykh, of Shushtar, 
an instance of true piety 
amongst the Shi'ite clergy, 
86 and n. 1, 129 

Murtaza, Seyyid, ‘Ilmu’l-Hudd, 
197 

Murtaza, Seyyid, accompanies 
the Bab to Maku, 271, n. I, 
272 

Murtaza-kuli, Haji [or Mulla], 
Marandi, 43, 278, 286—7 
Musa, brother of Beha’u’llah, 
xxxiv, 56, n. 2 

Musa Kazim, Imam, 85, n. 2, 297 
Musa Khan, takes part in mas¬ 
sacre of Teheran, 329 
Mushkin Kalam, xxiii, 360, 361, 
377—382, 387—9 
Mushkin-i-Ilahi, title conferred 
on one of Beha’u’ll&h’s fol¬ 
lowers, 362 


442 


INDEX. 


Mustafa, Mirz&, of Nirak, one of 
the murderers of the Ezells, 
363 

Mustafa Khan, Kajar, colonel of 
the Shakaki regiment, 180 
Mustafa-kuli Kh&n Kara-guzlu, 
takes part in suppression of 
Niriz insurrection, 183, 257 
Mustaghath, xvii 
Mu'tamadu’d-Dawla. See Minu- 
chihr Khan andFarhad Mirza 
Mutasharri‘s, sect of, 162 and n. 1 

Nabi, Mirza, of Damavand, one 
of the victims of the Teheran 
massacre, 330 

Nabil, Mirza Muhammad, of 
Zarand, “'the tongue-tied” 
( al-akhras ), his claim to su¬ 
premacy, 357 and n. 5, 365; 
his chronology, xvii, 54, n. 1, 
55, n. 3, 90, n. 1, 155, n. 1, 
373, n. 1 

Na‘im, Mirza, takes part in sup¬ 
pression of Niriz iusurrection, 
258, 259; his disgrace and 
punishment, 260—1 
Najaf of Khamsa, one of the 
victims of the Teheran mas¬ 
sacre, 331 

Najafabad, near Isfahan, perse¬ 
cution of Babis at, 406—110 
Najafi, Aka, persecutes Babis, 
408 

Najmiijer, Marie von, authoress 
of the poem Gurret-iil-Eyn, 
207—8, 309 

Naki, Haji Mirza, of Kirman, one 
of the Seven Martyrs, 212 
Namik Pasha, governor of Bagh¬ 
dad, 84, n. 2, 111, n. 1 
Namusi, a kind of mosquito-cur- 
tain, xxxv 

Narcotics. See Hashish, Opium 
Narjis Khatun, mother of Imam 
Mahdi, 289, 297 

Nasikhu’t-Tawarikh, 173 —188, 
205 ; quoted, 227—8, 251, 
265—8, 277—8, 324—5, 326, 
327, 328—334 


Nasiru’d- Din Shah, 20 and n. 2, 
' 151, n. 1, 278, 280, 287, 288 
,, attempt on life of, xlvi, 49— 
51, 53, n. 1, 191—2, 201, 
323—8 

„ Beha’u’llab’s epistle to. See 
Lawli-i-Sultdn 

Nasir, Haji, of Kazvin, taken 
captive at Sheykh Tabarsi, 
129, n. 2, 307 

Nasir the Arab, assassinates Mulla 
Eajab-‘Ali the EzeH, 363 
Nasiriyya regiment, 180—1 
Nasiru’l-Mulk. See Fazlu’llah, 
Mirza 

Nasru'llah, Aka Mirza, one of 
the Ezelis assassinated, 361, 
371 

Nasru’llah Khan, takes part in 
Teheran massacre, 332 
Navvruz, ordinances concerning, 
422—5 
Nejashi, 397 

Ni‘matu’llah, Sheykh, of Amul, 
taken captive at Sheykh Ta¬ 
barsi, 307 

NPmatu’llah, Shah, his shrine at 
Mahan, 244 

Niriz, insurrection at, 39—40, 47, 
n. 1, 183—4, 191, 195, 202, 
253—261 
Niyavaran, 52 

Nizamu’l-Mulk takes part in 
massacre of Teheran, 329 
Nizamu’l-‘Ulama. See Mahmud, 
Haji Mulla 

Noeldeke, Professor, li, 209 
Nubuvvat - i - Khassa (“ Special 

Mission ”), treatise on, by 
Bab, 11, 54 
Nujaba. See Helpers 
Nukaba. See Guardians 
Nukta, Hazrat-i-, xvi, 60, n. 1, 
229, 422. See also Bab 
Nur, Kitab-i-. See Book of Light 
Nur, raid on, 375—6 
Nuru’llah, Subli-i-Ezel’s son, 384 
Nuseyris, 14 and n. 1, 162 and 
n. 1 

Nushirvan, King, 201 


INDEX. 


443 


Oeeultation (ghaybat ) of Twelfth 
Imam, 25, 233, 244, 296—9 
Oliphant, Laurence, 209—210, 
370 

‘Omar, the 13 rules of, 407 
Opium, its use prohibited by Bab, 
133, n. 1 

Ordinances of God called “ Sealed 
Wine ” (rahik - i - maklitiim), 
77, n. 2 

Ordinances of God called “ Pure 
Wine,” 148 

‘Othmiin b. Sa'id, Abu ‘Umar, 
233, 298 

Paraclete, 293, n. 1 
Pilerinage, Journal du. See Zi- 
yarat-nama 

Persecution, disastrous conse¬ 
quences of, 100—1, 164 
,, uselessness of, 48, 49, 67, 157 
—158, 160, 165 

Persecutions, abortive, of Babis, 
410—411 

“ Phlebotomist of the Divine 
Unity” {Fass/idu’ l-Ahadiy - 
yat), 363 and n. 1 
Piggott, 207 
Pillon, F., 207 

Piri, Mash-hadi, one of the Babis 
of Zamjan, 180 
Point. See Nnkta and Bab 
Polak, Dr, 203^4, 313, 314 
“Preceding Mercy” ( rahmat-i-su- 
bika), meaning of term, 113, 
n. 1 

Querry, Droit ilusulman, 285, n. 

1 

Radagan, Hamze Mirza’s camp at, 
176 

Rafi‘, Mirza, of Nur, one of tbe 
victims of the Teheran mas¬ 
sacre, 330 

Rajab ‘Ali, Mulla, Kahir, one of 
the Ezells assassinated at 
Baghdad, 356, 359, 363, 371 
Rasul, Aka, deserts from Sheykh 
Tabarsi, 179 


Rawzatu’s-Safa, 188—192, 277— 
278 

Reinaud, M., his translation of 
Abu’l-Feda cited, 299 
Renan, massacre of Teheran how 
characterized by him, xlv 
Resurrection, how understood by 
Bab, 224, 225 

Riza, Imam, 282, 283 and n. 1, 

' 297 

Riza Khan, one of the Babis at 
Sheykh Tabarsi, 179 
Riza, Mirza, one of the Babis 
executed at the conclusion of 
the Zanjan siege, 181 
Riza, Seyyid Muhammad, the 
Bab’s father, 2, 250, 289 
Riza-kuli Khan, Lele-Bdshi, 188, 
323 

Riza-kuli, Mirza, of Tafrish, one 
of the Ezells assassinated at 
Acre, 93, n. 1, 361, 370 
Rizvan ‘All, Subh-i-Ezel’s son, 
xxiv, xxv, 385 

Rosen, Baron Victor, lib, 27, n. 1, 
69, n. 1, 96, n. 1, 102, n. 1, 
108, n. 1, 208—9, 210—11, 
365,390—2, 411—2,416, and 
passim throughout the work. 
See also Corrigenda, p. lv, 
supra 

Rukayya, Subh-i-Ezel’s wife, 384 
Rukayya, servant of Mushkin 
Kalam, 387 

Ruknu’d-Dawla, Muhammad ‘Ali 
Mirza, bestows ou Sheykh 
Ahmad Ahsa’i a yearly pen¬ 
sion, 235—6 

Russia, war of 1825 with Persia, 
118, n. 3, 119 

Russian ambassador intercedes 
for Babis, 376 

Russian government, assassins of 
a Babl punished by, 411—2 

S***.*, Sheykh, the Babi 
courier, 413 

S ***«*, Sheykh, his account 
of what passed between him 
and the Prince Zillu’s-Snltan, 
401 


U4< 


INDEX. 


Sabz-i-Meydan, in Teheran, 213, 
n. 1 

Sadducees, Babis likened to, 201 
Sadik, MullA, of Maragha, one of 
the Seven Martyrs, 212 
Sadik, Mulla [Muhammad], of 
Khurasan, called hy the Babis 
Jennb-i-Mukaddas and Mu- 
kaddas-i-Khurasan, 5, 129, 
n. 2, 195, 246—7, 307. See 
also ‘Ah, Mulla, of Bistam, 
who, according to Subh-i- 
Ezel (248—9), also bore this 
title 

Sadik, of Zanjan (or Milan), 49, 
53, n. 1, 185, 323—4, 332 
Sadr. See Aka Khan of Nur 
SadrA, Mulla, the philosopher, 
12, 268—271 

Sadru’d-Dawla, takes part in siege 
of Zanjan, 180—1 
Sa‘du’l-Mulk, governor of Bu- 
shire, 411 

Safiyya, Subh-i-Ezel’s daughter, 
384-5 

Sa'ida, the bearded woman, 306 
Sa‘id Khau, Mirza, Minister of 
Foreign Affairs, 110, 329 
Sa'id, Sheykh, the Indian, 5, 248. 
(It seems possible that this 
person may be identical with 
the “IndianBeliever” spoken 
of in the Tdrlkh-i-Jadid. See 
p. 196) 

Sa'iduT'Ulama, one of the clergy 
of Barfurush, 30, 35, 176, 
307—9 

Salih, Haji Mulla [Muhammad], 
of Kazvin, the father of 
Kurratu’l-‘Ayn, 30, 197, 310 
—311 

Salih, Mir, one of the Zanjan in¬ 
surgents, 180 

Salih, Mirza, of Shiraz, the 
murderer of Haji Mulla Mu¬ 
hammad Taki, 311—2 
Salih, Sheykh, the Arab, one of 
Kurratu’l-Ayn’s converts, put 
to death at Teheran, 311—2 
Salih TAhir, 312 


Sam Khan, colonel of the Christian 
regiment of Urumiyya, 43— 
44 

Sami Bey, 199 
Samiri, 355, n. 2, 362 
Sarkalu, the place of Bella’s re¬ 
tirement in Kurdistan, 64 
Sayyah, Sheykh (or Mirza) ‘Ali, 
one of the Cyprus exiles, 352, 
361, 380 and n. 2, 381, 382 
and n. 1, 386—7 
Sedition disavowed and censured, 
116, 152, 394 

Seven Letters, Person of the 
(Zdt-i-liitni/’-i-sab‘a), a title 
of the Bab,'230, 231, 421—2 
Seven Martyrs (Shuhadd-i-sab'a), 
xlv, 47,' n. 1, 196, 201, 211— 
218 

Seven Proofs. See Dala’il-i-sab‘a 
Sevruguin, M., his memoir on the 
Babis, 205, 248 
Seyfur, 184, n. 1 

Seyr-i-kulub (‘ ‘ spiritual sight¬ 
seeing”), 401 

Shah. See Muhammad Shah, 
and Nasiru’d-Din Shah 
Shah ‘Abdu’l-‘Azim, Shrine of, 
46, n. 1, 185,' 216, 332 
Shahbaz Khan, of Maragha, 
present at siege of Zanjan, 180 
Shahid-i-thalith. See Muhammad 
Taki, Haji Mulla, of Kazvin 
Shah Ni'matu’UAh, his shrine at 
Mahan, 244 

ShahzAdA Huseyn at Kazvin, 198 
Shakaki regiment at siege of 
Zanjan, 180 
Shalmaghani, ash-, 229 
Shawahid - i - Ilububiyya (“ Evi¬ 
dences of Divinity”), hy 
Mulla Sadra, 269—271 
Sheep, decapitation of, honour 
shewn to great men by, 326, 
n. 1 

Sheil, Lady, 200—1, 211—212, 
226—7 

Sheykhis, sect of the, 4, 162, 
234—244 

Sheykhi, a BAM executed at 
Zanjan, 180 


INDEX. 


445 


Sheykh Tabarsi, castle of. See 
Tabarsi 

Sheykhu’l-‘Ajam, author of a 
history of the Mazandaran 
insurrection in the Mazan- 
darani dialect, 205 
Shi‘ite doctrine, certain points of, 
296—306 
Shimr, 272 

Shimran, 50, 52, 81 and n. 1 
Shiraz, called Ddru’l-‘Ilm (“the 
Abode of Knowledge”), 294, 
n. 1, 354, n. 2 

Shuja‘u’l-Mulk. See Mihr ‘All 
Khan, of Nur 

Shu’un - i - khamsa. See Five 
Grades 

Si-dih, persecutions at, 169, n. 1, 
406—410 

Sidon, Babi agent at. xliii 
Sipihr. See Lisanu’l-Mulk 
Slane, Baron Mac Guckin de —'s 
translation of Ibn Khallikan, 
229, 302 

Slavery, Babis sold into, 129, 
n. 2, 247 

Smith, Joe,founder of thcMormon 
sect, Bab likeued to, 201 
Sofyan, appearance of, 26, 305— 
306 

Special Mission. See Nubuvvat- 
i-Khassa 

Straw, heads stuffed with, 258 
and n. 1 

Style affected by Babis, xlvi— 
xlviii 

Su’al u Jawab, work on Shi'ite 
jurisprudence, 285, n. 1 
Subh-i-Ezel (Mirza Yahya):— 
chief references : xv—xxvi, 
51, 63—4, 89—90, 93—101, 
349—389 

„ other titles, 95, n. 1, 353 

,, birth, date of, 373 and nn. 
1 and 2 

,, parentage and early life, 56, 
n. 2, 373 

,, first becomes prominent, 62— 
63, 352—4 

,, how regarded by Bab, xvi, 
xxiv, 95, n. 1, 350, 352—4 


Subh-i-Ezel, howregarded by Beha 
and the BehiVis, 93, n. I (Ki- 
tob-i-Akdas); 96, n. 1 (Lawh- 
i-Nas'ir) ; xlv ( Traveller's 
Narrative ) ; 195 ( Tdrikh-i- 
Jadid); xxiii (MushkinKalam) 
,, in Persia, 63, 354, 374 ' 

„ escapes to Baghdad, 51—2, 
354, 375 

,, at Baghdad, 63—4, 355—8 
,, departure from Baghdad to 
Constantinople, 89, 90, n. 1, 
358 

,, at Adrianople, 92 et seq., 99, 
n. 1, 358—361 

,, date of banishment to Fama¬ 
gusta, 101, n. 3, 373, n. 2, 
378, n. 2, 380, 382 
„ visited at Famagusta, xxiv— 
xxvi 

,, his family, xxiv, 384—6 
,, his statements quoted, 41, 
n. 2,46, n. 1, 84, u. 2, 86, n.l, 
202, 221, 248—9, 261, 262, 
308, 312—3, 314, 334, 335— 
344, &c. 

,, his writings, 210, 335, 340—2 
Sufis, Gobineau’s opinion of, x 
Suleyman, Mash-hadi, executed 
at Zanjan, 181 

Suleyman Khan Afshar, 179,182, 
239, n. 1 

Suleyman Khan, Haji, son of 
Yahya Khan of Tabriz, xxi, 
46—7, 185, 192, 239, n. 1. 
253, 322, 327, 329, 331,332— 
334 

Suleyman-kuli, Mirza, acquitted 
with Beha’u’llah, 186, 327 
Suleymaniyy6, visited by Beha’u 
’Hah, 64—5 

Sultan Huseyn Mirza, killed at 
Sheykh Tabarsi, 178 
Sultan, Sheykh, the Arab, con¬ 
verted by Kurratu'I-'Ayn, 311 
Sultanu'sh-Shuhada. Seclsfahan, 
Martyrs of 

Suneyna (or Subeyna), a Jew 
assassinated by command of 
Muhammad, 372 
Sura-i-Heykal. See Heykal 


446 


INDEX. 


Sura of Joseph or Yusuf. See 
Commentary 

Sura of Kawthar. See Com¬ 
mentary 

Sura of Wa’l-‘Asr. See Com¬ 
mentary 

Swooning in dyspepsia, 280 

Tabari, wherein his special value 
as a historian consists, li 
Tabarsi, Sheykh, castle of, xxi, 
n. 1,37—9, 95, n. 1,129, n. 2, 
177—9, 189, 195, 247, 306— 
307 

„ form of prayer appointed for 
visitation of, 338 
Tabataba, Seyyids of, 167. See 
Isfahan, martyrs of 
Tabayun, one of the “four rela¬ 
tions,” 284 and n. 3 
Tabriz, called Mahall-i-Zarb and 
Mash-had, 322. See also Bab 
Tahir, Mirza, 185 
Tahir, Sheykh, one of Kurratu’l- 
‘Ayn’s converts, 311—312 
Tahira, Jenab-i-. See Kurratu’l- 
‘Ayn 

Tahmasp Mirza, governor of 
Shiraz, 258 

Tahmasp-kuli Khan, 190 
Takiya (concealment of opinions), 

' 216 

Taki Khan, Mirza. See Amir- 
Nizam 

Taki’n’d-Din, Subh-i-Ezel’s son, 
xxiv, xxvi, 386 

Takur in Mazandaran, Subh-i- 
Ezel’s native place, 352 
Tal‘at, Subh-i-Ezel’s daughter, 
384—5 

Tang-i-Kaj&r, an instrument of 
torture, 260 

Tarikh-i-Jadid, xiv—xv, xlii, xliv, 
192—7 

„ cited or appealed to, 212—218, 
238—240, 245—8, 250, 254— 
259, 263, 264—5, 271—7, 291 
—292, 307—9, 309—312, 319 
—322 

Tasawi, one of the “four rela¬ 
tions,” 284 and n. 3 


Teheran, called “the Holy Land” 
(Arz - i- akdas), 56 ;—called 
“ the Land of Ta, ” 79, n. 2 
Teheran Gazette, 201 
Teymur, of KaTa-Zanjiri, put to 
death at Kirmanshah, 184 
Thielmann, 208 

Tobacco, use of, prohibited by 
Bab, xxvi, 133, n. 1 
,, avoided by Ezells, xxvi 
,, permitted by Beha, 133, n. 1 
Tolerance advocated by Babis, 
153, 163, 201. See also 
Bigotry 

Toumansky, M., 192, n. 1, 411 
Treason reprobated, 83. See also 
Sedition 

Tree of Truth ( Shajara-i-Haki- 
hat), Bab so called, 219, n. 12, 
224, 225, 230, 294 
Turks, Mulla ‘All Bistami put to 
death by, 249 

Turkish language in Persia, 44, 
n. 1 

Turkish protection sought by 
Babis, 88, 111 and n. 1, 117 
and n. 1 

Unity (Vahid), xvi, xxiv, 95, n. 1, 
421. See also Letters of the 
Living 

Urumiyya, Bab’s reception at, 
19 and n. 1 

,, Christian regiment of, 43 
Ussher, 120, n. 1, 204 

Vahid. See Unity 
Vali Khan, sent against Niriz, 184 
Vambcry, Professor Arminius, 
206, 333 

Varoshia, suburb of Famagusta, 
xxiii 

Vasaks, surprise of, 177, 190 
Vav, the year, 416, 419 
Victory ( nusrat ), meaning of, ex¬ 
plained by Beha’u’llah, 112— 
115 

Visitations. See Ziyarat 

Wahb b. Rahib, 135 and n. 4 
,, b. Yahudha, 135 and n. 4 


INDEX. 


447 


Wahb b. Zayd, 135 and n. 4 
Wahid, title of Subh-i-Ezel, 95, 
n. 1, 353 and n. 2 
Wa’l-‘asr, Commentary on Sura 
of. See Commentary 
Waraka-i-‘Ulya, title of one of 
Beha’u’llah’s wives, 361 
Watson, History of Persia, 180, 
189, n. 1, 205—6, 227, 229 
“White Hand,” 148 
White garments worn by Babis, 
xxxi and n. 1, xxxiv, xliii 
Wine, use of, contrary to Babi 
religion, 133 and n. 1 
Wright, Dr A. H., of Urumiyya, 
19, n. 1, 187, 200, 278 
Wright, Dr William, his canon 
of translation, xlviii—ix 

Yahya, Mirza. See Subh-i-Ezel 
Yahya, Aha Seyyid, of Darab, 
7—8, '39, 45, n. 1, 183—4, 
191, 202, 205, 253—261 
Yahya Khan the Kurd, warden of 
Chihrik, 17, 275, 292 
Yawmu’llak (“ the Day of God ”) 
=Nawruz, 422 
Yazid, 272 

Year of “after a while” (sene-i- 
ba‘da Mn), 55, n. 3, 63 
Yezd insurrection, 183, 201, 206, 
207, 255—6 

Young, Captain, xix—xxv, 350, 
373, nn. 1 and 2, 384 
Yusuf, Mulla, of Ardabil, 5, 247— 
248, 307 

Za, the letter, xlii, 170 and n. 1, 
412—419 

Zanjan, Babi doctrines first reach, 
9; a stronghold of Babiism, 
271—3; siege of, 39—40, 47, 


n. 1, 179—181, 186—7, 188, 
190, 192, 196, 201, 203, 204, 
206, 207 

Zanvazi, Aka Seyyid, ratifies 
Bab’s death-warrant, 182 
Zapiski, Baron Rosen’s, 210 
Zarb, Mahall-i-, Tabriz so called, 
322 

Zargandi', Subb-i-Ezel’s residence 
at, 374 

Zarrin Taj (“Golden Crown”). 

See Kurratu’l-‘Ayn 
Zawra, Baghdad so called, 139, 
n. 2, 143, n. 1 
„ Teheran so called, 177 
Zeynu’l-‘Abidin, Imam, 139 et 
seq. and n. 3, 297 
Zeynu’l-‘Abidin, Mulla, of Yezd, 
one of the Teheran martyrs, 
329 

Zeynu’l-‘Abidin Khan, governor 
of Niriz, 183, 191, 256, 258 
Zeynu’l-Mukarrabin, 362. See 
also Za, the letter, supra 
Zillu’s-Sultan, Prince, 401—3, 
407, 408, 409 and n. 1 
Ziyarat-nama (Gobineau's Jour¬ 
nal du Pelerinage), 205,337— 
338 

Ziyarat, other, 337—8, 339, 341 
Ziya’u’d-Din, Subh-i-EzeTs son, 
386 

Zoroastriau converted to Babiism, 
34 

Zoroastrians maltreated, 407, 
n. 2 

Zoroastrian calendar, analogy 
with Babi calendar, 414, n. 1 
Zuhur (Manifestation). See Bab 
Zu’l-Fikar Khan, takes part in 
massacre of Teheran, 329 


CAMBKIDGE: FEINTED BV C. J. CLAY, II.A. AND SONS, AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS. 


J 


cc 

IjJ 

c/) 

o 

o 


< 

V) 

r** 

co 

o>
