The Ring and the Book, Vol. 3 (Robert Browning, 1869)
=====================================================
Books 9–11 of the Roman murder epic. Public domain. Internet Archive (1868 vol. 3).

kM\$ 


m 


■ 


I'" 
'•'.nit1;' 


or 


£L 


?L„ 


PR 


THE 


RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 


BY 

ROBERT    BROWNING, 

M.A., 

HONORARY     FELLOW     OF     BALLIOL     COLLEGE,     OXFORD. 


IN    FOUR     VOLUMES. 
VOL.  III. 


SMITH,     ELDER    AND     CO.,     LONDON. 
1869. 

{The  Right  of  Translation  is  reserved.] 


♦ 


CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

pompilia i 

Dominus  Hyacinthus  de  Arciiangelis 90 

Juris  Doctor  Johannes-Baptista  Bottinius  175 


M558873 


THE 

RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 


VII. 

POMPILIA. 


I  am  just  seventeen  years  and  five  months  old, 
And,  if  I  lived  one  day  more,  three  full  weeks  ; 
'T  is  writ  so  in  the  church's  register, 
Lorenzo  in  Lucina,  all  my  names 
At  length,  so  many  names  for  one  poor  child, 
— Francesca  Camilla  Vittoria  Angela 
Pompilia  Comparini, — laughable  ! 
Also  't  is  writ  that  I  was  married  there 
Four  years  ago  :  and  they  will  add,  I  hope, 
When  they  insert  my  death,  a  word  or  two, — 

VOL.    III. 


THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 


Omitting  all  about  the  mode  of  death, — 

This,  in  its  place,  this  which  one  cares  to  know, 

That  I  had  been  a  mother  of  a  son 

Exactly  two  weeks.     It  will  be  through  grace 

O'  the  Curate,  not  through  any  claim  I  have ; 

Because  the  boy  was  born  at,  so  baptized 

Close  to,  the  Villa,  in  the  proper  church  : 

A  pretty  church,  I  say  no  word  against, 

Yet  stranger-like, — while  this  Lorenzo  seems 

My  own  particular  place,  I  always  say. 

I  used  to  wonder,  when  I  stood  scarce  high 

As  the  bed  here,  what  the  marble  lion  meant, 

With  half  his  body  rushing  from  the  wall, 

Eating  the  figure  of  a  prostrate  man — 

(To  the  right,  it  is,  of  entry  by  the  door) 

An  ominous  sign  to  one  baptized  like  me, 

Married,  and  to  be  buried  there,  I  hope. 

And  they  should  add,  to  have  my  life  complete, 

He  is  a  boy  and  Gaetan  by  name — 

Gaetano,  for  a  reason, — if  the  friar 

Don  Celestine  will  ask  this  grace  for  me 

Of  Curate  Ottoboni :  he  it  was 


POMPILIA. 


Baptized  me  :  he  remembers  my  whole  life 
As  I  do  his  grey  hair. 

All  these  few  things  35 

I  know  are  true, — will  you  remember  them  ? 
Because  time  flies.     The  surgeon  cared  for  me, 
To  count  my  wounds, — twenty-two  dagger-wounds, 
Five  deadly,  but  I  do  not  suffer  much — 
Or  too  much  pain, — and  am  to  die  to-night.  40 

Oh  how  good  God  is  that  my  babe  was  born, 

— Better  than  born,  baptized  and  hid  away 

Before  this  happened,  safe  from  being  hurt ! 

That  had  been  sin  God  could  not  well  forgive  : 

He  was  too  young  to  smile  and  save  himself.  45 

When  they  took,  two  days  after  he  was  born, 

My  babe  away  from  me  to  be  baptized 

And  hidden  awhile,  for  fear  his  foe  should  find, — 

The  country-woman,  used  to  nursing  babes, 

Said  "  Why  take  on  so  ?  where  is  the  great  loss  ?  50 

I  These  next  three  weeks  he  will  but  sleep  and  feed, 

I  Only  begin  to  smile  at  the  month's  end  ; 


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 


"  He  would  not  know  you,  if  you  kept  him  here, 

"  Sooner  than  that ;  so,  spend  three  merry  weeks 

"  Snug  in  the  Villa,  getting  strong  and  stout,  55 

"And  then  I  bring  him  back  to  be  your  own, 

"  And  both  of  you  may  steal  to — we  know  where  !  " 

The  month — there  wants  of  it  two  weeks  this  day ! 

Still,  I  half  fancied  when  I  heard  the  knock 

At  the  Villa  in  the  dusk,  it  might  prove  she —  60 

Come  to  say  "  Since  he  smiles  before  the  time, 

"  Why  should  I  cheat  you  out  of  one  good  hour  ? 

"  Back  I  have  brought  him  ;  speak  to  him  and  judge  !" 

Now  I  shall  never  see  him ;  what  is  worse, 

When  he  grows  up  and  gets  to  be  my  age,  65 

He  will  seem  hardly  more  than  a  great  boy  ; 

And  if  he  asks  "  What  was  my  mother  like  ?  " 

People  may  answer  "  Like  girls  of  seventeen  " — 

And  how  can  he  but  think  of  this  and  that, 

Lucias,  Marias,  Sofias,  who  titter  or  blush  70 

When  he  regards  them  as  such  boys  may  do  ? 

Therefore  I  wish  some  one  will  please  to  say 

I  looked  already  old  though  I  was  young ; 

Do  I  not  .  .  say,  if  you  are  by  to  speak  .  . 


POMPILIA. 


Look  nearer  twenty  ?    No  more  like,  at  least,  75 

Girls  who  look  arch  or  redden  when  boys  laugh, 

Than  the  poor  Virgin  that  I  used  to  know 

At  our  street-corner  in  a  lonely  niche, — 

The  babe,  that  sat  upon  her  knees,  broke  off, — 

Thin  white  glazed  clay,  you  pitied  her  the  more  :  80 

She,  not  the  gay  ones,  always  got  my  rose. 

How  happy  those  are  who  know  how  to  write  ! 

Such  could  write  what  their  son  should  read  in  time, 

Had  they  a  whole  day  to  live  out  like  me. 

Also  my  name  is  not  a  common  name,  85 

"  Pomp  ilia,"  and  may  help  to  keep  apart 

A  little  the  thing  I  am  from  what  girls  are. 

But  then  how  far  away,  how  hard  to  find 

Will  anything  about  me  have  become, 

Even  if  the  boy  bethink  himself  and  ask  !  90 

No  father  that  he  ever  knew  at  all, 

Nor  ever  had — no,  never  had,  I  say ! 

That  is  the  truth, — nor  any  mother  left, 

Out  of  the  little  two  weeks  that  she  lived, 

Fit  for  such  memory  as  might  assist :  95 


THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 


As  good  too  as  no  family,  no  name, 

Not  even  poor  old  Pietro's  name,  nor  hers, 

Poor  kind  unwise  Violante,  since  it  seems 

They  must  not  be  my  parents  any  more. 

That  is  why  something  put  it  in  my  head 

To  call  the  boy  "  Gaetano  " — no  old  name 

For  sorrow's  sake ;  I  looked  up  to  the  sky 

And  took  a  new  saint  to  begin  anew. 

One  who  has  only  been  made  saint — how  long  ? 

Twenty-five  years  :  so,  carefuller,  perhaps, 

To  guard  a  namesake  than  those  old  saints  grow, 

Tired  out  by  this  time, — see  my  own  five  saints  ! 

On  second  thoughts,  I  hope  he  will  regard 

The  history  of  me  as  what  someone  dreamed, 

And  get  to  disbelieve  it  at  the  last : 

Since  to  myself  it  dwindles  fast  to  that, 

Sheer  dreaming  and  impossibility, — 

Just  in  four  days  too  !     All  the  seventeen  years, 

Not  once  did  a  suspicion  visit  me 

How  very  different  a  lot  is  mine 

From  any  other  woman's  in  the  world. 


POMPILIA. 


The  reason  must  be,  't  was  by  step  and  step 

It  got  to  grow  so  terrible  and  strange  : 

These  strange  woes  stole  on  tiptoe,  as  it  were, 

Into  my  neighbourhood  and  privacy,  120 

Sat  down  where  I  sat,  laid  them  where  I  lay ; 

And  I  was  found  familiarised  with  fear, 

When  friends  broke  in,  held  up  a  torch  and  cried 

"  Why,  you  Pompilia  in  the  cavern  thus, 

f  How  comes  that  arm  of  yours  about  a  wolf?  125 

"  And  the  soft  length, — lies*  in  and  out  your  feet 

"  And  laps  you  round  the  knee, — a  snake  it  is  !  " 

And  so  on. 

Well,  and  they  are  right  enough, 
By  the  torch  they  hold  up  now  :  for  first,  observe,       130 
I  never  had  a  father, — no,  nor  yet 
A  mother  :  my  own  boy  can  say  at  least 
"  I  had  a  mother  whom  I  kept  two  weeks  ! " 
Not  I,  who  little  used  to  doubt  .  .  /  doubt 
Good  Pietro,  kind  Violante,  gave  me  birth  ?  135 

They  loved  me  always  as  I  love  my  babe 
( — Nearly  so,  that  is — quite  so  could  not  be — ) 


8  THE   RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

Did  for  me  all  I  meant  to  do  for  him, 

Till  one  surprising  day,  three  years  ago, 

They  both  declared,  at  Rome,  before  some  judge 

In  some  court  where  the  people  flocked  to  hear, 

That  really  I  had  never  been  their  child, 

Was  a  mere  castaway,  the  careless  crime 

Of  an  unknown  man,  the  crime  and  care  too  much 

Of  a  woman  known  too  well, — little  to  these, 

Therefore,  of  whom  I  was  the  flesh  and  blood  : 

What  then  to  Pietro  and  Violante,  both 

No  more  my  relatives  than  you  or  you  ? 

Nothing  to  them  !     You  know  what  they  declared. 

So  with  my  husband, — just  such  a  surprise, 
Such  a  mistake,  in  that  relationship  ! 
Everyone  says  that  husbands  love  their  wives, 
Guard  them  and  guide  them,  give  them  happiness  ; 
'Tis  duty,  law,  pleasure,  religion  :  well, 
You  see  how  much  of  this  comes  true  in  mine  ! 
People  indeed  would  fain  have  somehow  proved 
He  was  no  husband  :  but  he  did  not  hear, 
Or  would  not  wait,  and  so  has  killed  us  all. 


POMPILIA. 


Then  there  is  .  .  only  let  me  name  one  more  ! 

There  is  the  friend, — men  will  not  ask  about,  160 

But  tell  untruths  of,  and  give  nicknames  to, 

And  think  my  lover,  most  surprise  of  all ! 

Do  only  hear,  it  is  the  priest  they  mean, 

Giuseppe  Caponsacchi :  a  priest — love, 

And  love  me  !  Well,  yet  people  think  he  did.  165 

I  am  married,  he  has  taken  priestly  vows, 

They  know  that,  and  yet  go  on,  say,  the  same, 

"Yes,  how  he  loves  you!"     "That  was  love" — they 

say, 
When  anything  is  answered  that  they  ask  : 
Or  else  "  No  wonder  you  love  him" — they  say.  170 

Then  they  shake  heads,  pity  much,  scarcely  blame — 
As  if  we  neither  of  us  lacked  excuse, 
And  anyhow  are  punished  to  the  full, 
And  downright  love  atones  for  everything  ! 
Nay,  I  heard  read-out  in  the  public  court  175 

Before  the  judge,  in  presence  of  my  friends, 
Letters  't  was  said  the  priest  had  sent  to  me, 
And  other  letters  sent  him  by  myself, 
We  being  lovers  ! 


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 


Listen  what  this  is  like  !      180 
When  I  was  a  mere  child,  my  mother  .  .  that 's 
Violante,  you  must  let  me  call  her  so 
Nor  waste  time,  trying  to  unlearn  the  word,  .  .  . 
She  brought  a  neighbours  child  of  my  own  age 
To  play  with  me  of  rainy  afternoons  ;  185 

And,  since  there  hung  a  tapestry  on  the  wall, 
We  two  agreed  to  find  each  other  out 
Among  the  figures.     "  Tisbe,  that  is  you, 
"  With  half-moon  on  your  hair-knot,  spear  in  hand, 
"  Flying,  but  no  wings,  only  the  great  scarf  190 

"  Blown  to  a  bluish  rainbow  at  your  back  : 
"  Call  off  your  hound  and  leave  the  stag  alone  !  " 
"  — And  there  are  you,  Pompilia,  such  green  leaves 
"  Flourishing  out  of  your  five  finger-ends, 
"  And  all  the  rest  of  you  so  brown  and  rough  :  195 

"  Why  is  it  you  are  turned  a  sort  of  tree  ?  " 
You  know  the  figures  never  were  ourselves 
Though  we  nicknamed  them  so.     Thus,  all  my  life, — 
As  well  what  was,  as  what,  like  this,  was  not, — 
Looks  old,  fantastic  and  impossible  :  200 

I  touch  a  fairy  thing  that  fades  and  fades. 


POMPILIA. 


— Even  to  my  babe  !  I  thought,  when  he  was  born, 

Something  began  for  once  that  would  not  end, 

Nor  change  into  a  laugh  at  me,  but  stay 

For  evermore,  eternally  quite  mine.  205 

Well,  so  he  is, — but  yet  they  bore  him  off, 

The  third  day,  lest  my  husband  should  lay  traps 

And  catch  him,  and  by  means  of  him  catch  me. 

Since  they  have  saved  him  so,  it  was  well  done  : 

Yet  thence  comes  such  confusion  of  what  was  210 

With  what  will  be, — that  late  seems  long  ago, 

And,  what  years  should  bring  round,  already  come, 

Till  even  he  withdraws  into  a  dream 

As  the  rest  do  :  I  fancy  him  grown  great, 

Strong,  stern,  a  tall  young  man  who  tutors  me,  215 

Frowns  with  the  others  "  Poor  imprudent  child  ! 

I  Why  did  you  venture  out  of  the  safe  street  ? 

I  Why  go  so  far  from  help  to  that  lone  house  ? 

"  Why  open  at  the  whisper  and  the  knock  ?  " 

Six  days  ago  when  it  was  New  Years-day,  220 

We  bent  above  the  fire  and  talked  of  him, 
What  he  should  do  when  he  was  grown  and  great. 


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 


Violante,  Pietro,  each  had  given  the  arm 

I  leant  on,  to  walk  by,  from  couch  to  chair 

And  fireside, — laughed,  as  I  lay  safe  at  last, 

"  Pompilia's  march  from  bed  to  board  is  made, 

"  Pompilia  back  again  and  with  a  babe, 

"  Shall  one  day  lend  his  arm  and  help  her  walk  ! " 

Then  we  all  wished  each  other  more  New  Years. 

Pietro  began  to  scheme — "  Our  cause  is  gained  j 

"  The  law  is  stronger  than  a  wicked  man  : 

"  Let  him  henceforth  go  his  way,  leave  us  ours  ! 

"  We  will  avoid  the  city,  tempt  no  more 

"  The  greedy  ones  by  feasting  and  parade, — 

"  Live  at  the  other  villa,  we  know  where, 

"  Still  farther  off,  and  we  can  watch  the  babe 

"  Grow  fast  in  the  good  air ;  and  wood  is  cheap 

"  And  wine  sincere  outside  the  city  gate. 

"  I  still  have  two  or  three  old  friends  will  grope 

"  Their  way  along  the  mere  half-mile  of  road, 

"  With  staff  and  lantern  on  a  moonless  night 

"  When  one  needs  talk  :  they  '11  find  me,  never  fear, 

"  And  I  '11  find  them  a  flask  of  the  old  sort  yet ! " 

Violante  said  "  You  chatter  like  a  crow  : 


POMPILIA.  13 


I  Pompilia  tires  o'  the  tattle,  and  shall  to-bed  :  245 

f  Do  not  too  much  the  first  day, — somewhat  more 
"  To-morrow,  and,  the  next,  begin  the  cape 
"  And  hood  and  coat !  I  have  spun  wool  enough. " 
Oh  what  a  happy  friendly  eve  was  that ! 

And,  next  day,  about  noon,  out  Pietro  went —  250 

He  was  so  happy  and  would  talk  so  much, 

Until  Violante  pushed  and  laughed  him  forth 

Sight-seeing  in  the  cold, — "  So  much  to  see 

"  F  the  churches  !     Swathe  your  throat  three  times  ! " 

she  cried, 
"  And,  above  all,  beware  the  slippery  ways,  255 

"  And  bring  us  all  the  news  by  supper-time  !  " 
He  came  back  late,  laid  by  cloak,  staff  and  hat, 
Powdered  so  thick  with  snow  it  made  us  laugh, 
Rolled  a  great  log  upon  the  ash  o'  the  hearth, 
And  bade  Violante  treat  us  to  a  flask,  260 

Because  he  had  obeyed  her  faithfully, 
Gone  sight-see  through  the  seven,  and  found  no  church 
To  his  mind  like  San  Giovanni — "  There  's  the  fold, 
"  And  all  the  sheep  together,  big  as  cats  ! 


T4  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

"  And  such  a  shepherd,  half  the  size  of  life,  265 

"Starts    up    and    hears    the    angel"  —  when,    at    the 

door, 
A  tap  :  we  started  up  :  you  know  the  rest. 

Pietro  at  least  had  done  no  harm,  I  know ; 

Nor  even  Violante,  so  much  harm  as  makes 

Such  revenge  lawful.     Certainly  she  erred —  270 

Did  wrong,  how  shall  I  dare  say  otherwise  ? — 

In  telling  that  first  falsehood,  buying  me 

From  my  poor  faulty  mother  at  a  price, 

To  pass  off  upon  Pietro  as  his  child  : 

If  one  should  take  my  babe,  give  him  a  name,  275 

Say  he  was  not  Gaetano  and  my  own, 

But  that  some  other  woman  made  his  mouth 

And  hands  and  feet, — how  very  false  were  that ! 

No  good  could  come  of  that ;  and  all  harm  did. 

Yet  if  a  stranger  were  to  represent 

"  Needs  must  you  either  give  your  babe  to  me 

"  And  let  me  call  him  mine  for  ever  more, 

"  Or  let  your  husband  get  him  " — ah,  my  God, 

That  were  a  trial  I  refuse  to  face  ! 


POMPILIA.  15 


Well,  just  so  here  :  it  proved  wrong  but  seemed  right 

To  poor  Violante — for  there  lay,  she  said,  286 

My  poor  real  dying  mother  in  her  rags, 

Who  put  me  from  her  with  the  life  and  all, 

Poverty,  pain,  shame  and  disease  at  once, 

To  die  the  easier  by  what  price  I  fetched —  290 

Also  (I  hope)  because  I  should  be  spared 

Sorrow  and  sin, — why  may  not  that  have  helped  ? 

My  father, — he  was  no  one,  any  one, — 

The  worse,  the  likelier, — call  him, — he  who  came, 

AVas  wicked  for  his  pleasure,  went  his  way,  295 

And  left  no  trace  to  track  by  ;  there  remained 

Nothing  but  me,  the  unnecessary  life, 

To  catch  up  or  let  fall, — and  yet  a  thing 

She  could  make  happy,  be  made  happy  with, 

This  poor  Violante, — who  would  frown  thereat  ?  300 

Well,  God,  you  see  !     God  plants  us  where  we  grow. 

It  is  not  that,  because  a  bud  is  born 

At  a  wild  briar's  end,  full  i'  the  wild  beast's  way, 

We  ought  to  pluck  and  put  it  out  of  reach 

On  the  oak-tree  top, — say,  "  There  the  bud  belongs  !" 


r6  the  ring  and  the  eook. 

She  thought,  moreover,  real  lies  were — lies  told  306 

For  harm's  sake ;  whereas  this  had  good  at  heart, 

Good  for  my  mother,  good  for  me,  and  good 

For  Pietro  who  was  meant  to  love  a  babe, 

And  needed  one  to  make  his  life  of  use,  310 

Receive  his  house  and  land  when  he  should  die. 

Wrong,  wrong  and  always  wrong  !  how  plainly  wrgng  ! 

For  see,  this  fault  kept  pricking,  as  faults  do, 

All  the  same  at  her  heart, — this  falsehood  hatched, 

She  could  not  let  it  go  nor  keep  it  fast.  315 

She  told  me  so, — the  first  time  I  was  found 

Locked  in  her  arms  once  more  after  the  pain, 

When  the  nuns  let  me  leave  them  and  go  home, 

And  both  of  us  cried  all  the  cares  away, — 

This  it  was  set  her  on  to  make  amends,  320 

This  brought  about  the  marriage — simply  this  ! 

Do  let  me  speak  for  her  you  blame  so  much  ! 

When  Paul,  my  husband's  brother,  found  me  out, 

Heard  there  was  wealth  for  who  should  marry  me, 

So,  came  and  made  a  speech  to  ask  my  hand  325 

For  Guido, — she,  instead  of  piercing  straight 

Through  the  pretence  to  the  ignoble  truth, 


P0MPIL1A.  17 


Fancied  she  saw  God's  very  finger  point, 
Designate  just  the  time  for  planting  me, 
(The  wild  briar-slip  she  plucked  to  love  and  wear)      330 
In  soil  where  I  could  strike  real  root,  and  grow, 
And  get  to  be  the  thing  I  called  myself : 
For,  wife  and  husband  are  one  flesh,  God  says, 
And  I,  whose  parents  seemed  such  and  were  none, 
Should  in  a  husband  have  a  husband  now,  335 

Find  nothing,  this  time,  but  was  what  it  seemed, 
— i\ll  truth  and  no  confusion  any  more. 
I  know  she  meant  all  good  to  me,  all  pain 
To  herself, — since  how  could  it  be  aught  but  pain, 
To  give  me  up,  so,  from  her  very  breast,  340 

The  wilding  flower-tree-branch  that,  all  those  years, 
She  had  got  used  to  feel  for  and  find  fixed  ? 
She  meant  well :  has  it  been  so  ill  i'  the  main  ? 
,  That  is  but  fair  to  ask  :  one  cannot  judge 
Of  what  has  been  the  ill  or  well  of  life,  345 

The  day  that  one  is  dying, — sorrows  change 
Into  not  altogether  sorrow-like ; 
I  do  see  strangeness  but  scarce  misery, 
Now  it  is  over,  and  no  danger  more. 

VOL.    III. 


C 


T8       -  THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

My  child  is  safe  ;  there  seems  not  so  much  pain.        350 

It  comes,  most  like,  that  I  am  just  absolved, 

Purged  of  the  past,  the  foul  in  me,  washed  fair, — 

One  cannot  both  have  and  not  have,  you  know, — 

Being  right  now,  I  am  happy  and  colour  things. 

Yes,  every  body  that  leaves  life  sees  all  355 

Softened  and  bettered  :  so  with  other  sights  : 

To  me  at  least  was  never  evening  yet 

But  seemed  far  beautifuller  than  its  day, 

For  past  is  past. 

There  was  a  fancy  came,  360 

When  somewhere,  in  the  journey  with  my  friend, 
We  stepped  into  a  hovel  to  get  food  ; 
And  there  began  a  yelp  here,  a  bark  there, — 
Misunderstanding  creatures  that  were  wroth 
And  vexed  themselves  and  us  till  we  retired.  365 

The  hovel  is  life  :  no  matter  what  dogs  bit 
Or  cats  scratched  in  the  hovel  I  break  from, 
All  outside  is  lone  field,  moon  and  such  peace — 
Flowing  in,  filling  up  as  with  a  sea 
Whereon  comes  Someone,  walks  fast  on  the  white,      370 


POMPILIA.  19 


Jesus  Christ's  self,  Don  Celestine  declares, 
To  meet  me  and  calm  all  things  back  again. 

Beside,  up  to  my  marriage,  thirteen  years 

Were,  each  day,  happy  as  the  day  was  long : 

This  may  have  made  the  change  too  terrible.  375 

I  know  that  when  Violante  told  me  first 

The  cavalier, — she  meant  to  bring  next  morn, 

Whom  I  must  also  let  take,  kiss  my  hand, — 

Would  be  at  San  Lorenzo  the  same  eve 

And  marry  me, — which  over,  we  should  go  380 

Home  both  of  us  without  him  as  before, 

And,  till  she  bade  speak,  I  must  hold  my  tongue, 

Such  being  the  correct  way  with  girl-brides, 

From  whom  one  word  would  make  a  father  blush, — 

I  know,  I  say,  that  when  she  told  me  this,  385 

— Well,  I  no  more  saw  sense  in  what  she  said 

Than  a  lamb  does  in  people  clipping  wool ; 

Only  lay  down  and  let  myself  be  clipped. 

And  when  next  day  the  cavalier  who  came 

(Tisbe  had  told  me  that  the  slim  young  man  390 

With  wings  at  head,  and  wings  at  feet,  and  sword 


20  THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

Threatening  a  monster,  in  our  tapestry, 

Would  eat  a  girl  else, — was  a  cavalier) 

When  he  proved  Guido  Franceschini, — old 

And  nothing  like  so  tall  as  I  myself,  395 

Hook-nosed  and  yellow  in  a  bush  of  beard, 

Much  like  a  thing  I  saw  on  a  boy's  wrist, 

He  called  an  owl  and  used  for  catching  birds, — 

And  when  he  took  my  hand  and  made  a  smile — 

Why,  the  uncomfortableness  of  it  all  400 

Seemed  hardly  more  important  in  the  case 

Than, — when  one  gives  you,  say,  a  coin  to  spend, — 

Its  newness  or  its  oldness  ;  if  the  piece 

Weigh  properly  and  buy  you  what  you  wish, 

No  matter  whether  you  get  grime  or  glare  !  405 

Men  take  the  coin,  return  you  grapes  and  figs. 

Here,  marriage  was  the  coin,  a  dirty  piece 

Would  purchase  me  the  praise  of  those  I  loved : 

About  what  else  should  I  concern  myself  ? 

So,  hardly  knowing  what  a  husband  meant,  410 

I  supposed  this  or  any  man  would  serve, 
No  whit  the  worse  for  being  so  uncouth  : 


POMPILIA.        .  21 


For  I  was  ill  once  and  a  doctor  came 

With  a  great  ugly  hat,  no  plume  thereto, 

Black  jerkin  and  black  buckles  and  black  sword,         415 

And  white  sharp  beard  over  the  ruff  in  front, 

And  oh  so  lean,  so  sour-faced  and  austere  ! — 

Who  felt  my  pulse,  made  me  put  out  my  tongue, 

Then  oped  a  phial,  dripped  a  drop  or  two 

Of  a  black  bitter  something, — I  was  cured  !  420 

What  mattered  the  fierce  beard  or  the  grim  face  ? 

It  was  the  physic  beautified  the  man, 

Master  Malpichi, — never  met  his  match 

In  Rome,  they  said, — so  ugly  all  the  same  ! 

However,  I  was  hurried  through  a  storm,  425 

Next  dark  eve  of  December's  deadest  day- — 

How  it  rained  ! — through  our  street  and  the  Lion's-mouth 

And  the  bit  of  Corso, — cloaked  round,  covered  close, 

I  was  like  something  strange  or  contraband, — 

Into  blank  San  Lorenzo,  up  the  aisle,  430 

My  mother  keeping  hold  of  me  so  tight, 

I  fancied  we  were  come  to  see  a  corpse 

Before  the  altar  which  she  pulled  me  toward. 


THE    RING   AND   THE   BOOK. 


There  we  found  waiting  an  unpleasant  priest 

Who  proved  the  brother,  not  our  parish  friend,  435 

But  one  with  mischief-making  mouth  and  eye, 

Paul,  whom  I  know  since  to  my  cost.     And  then 

I  heard  the  heavy  church-door  lock  out  help 

Behind  us  :  for  the  customary  warmth, 

Two  tapers  shivered  on  the  altar.     "  Quick —  440 

"  Lose  no  time  ! " — cried  the  priest.     And  straightway 

down 
From  .  .  what's  behind  the  altar  where  he  hid — 
Hawk-nose  and  yellowness  and  bush  and  all, 
Stepped  Guido,  caught  my  hand,  and  there  was  I 
O'  the  chancel,  and  the  priest  had  opened  book,         445 
Read  here  and  there,  made  me  say  that  and  this, 
And  after,  told  me  I  was  now  a  wife, 
Honoured  indeed,  since  Christ  thus  weds  the  Church, 
And  therefore  turned  he  water  into  wine, 
To  show  I  should  obey  my  spouse  like  Christ.  450 

Then  the  two  slipped  aside  and  talked  apart, 
And  I,  silent  and  scared,  got  down  again 
And  joined  my  mother  who  was  weeping  now. 
Nobody  seemed  to  mind  us  any  more, 


POM  PI  LI  A.  23 


And  both  of  us  on  tiptoe  found  our  way  455 

To  the  door  which  was  unlocked  by  this,  and  wide. 

When  we  were  in  the  street,  the  rain  had  stopped, 

All  things  looked  better.     At  our  own  house-door, 

Violante  whispered  "  No  one  syllable 

"  To  Pietro  !     Girl-brides  never  breathe  a  word  L"      460 

"  — Well  treated  to  a  wetting,  draggle-tails  !" 

Laughed  Pietro  as  he  opened — "  Very  near 

"  You  made  me  brave  the  gutter's  roaring  sea 

"  To  carry  off  from  roost  old  dove  and  young, 

"  Trussed  up  in  church,  the  cote,  by  me,  the  kite  !      465 

"  What  do  these  priests  mean,  praying  folk  to  death 

"  On  stormy  afternoons,  with  Christmas  close 

"  To  wash  our  sins  off  nor  require  the  rain  ?  " 

Violante  gave  my  hand  a  timely  squeeze, 

Madonna  saved  me  from  immodest  speech,  470 

I  kissed  him  and  was  quiet,  being  a  bride. 

When  I  saw  nothing  more,  the  next  three  weeks, 

Of  Guido — "  Nor  the  Church  sees  Christ  "  thought  I  : 

"  Nothing  is  changed  however,  wine  is  wine 

"  And  water  only  water  in  our  house.  475 


24  THE   RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

"  Nor  did  I  see  that  ugly  doctor  since 

"  The  cure  of  the  illness  :  just  as  I  was  cured, 

"  I  am  married, — neither  scarecrow  will  return." 

Three  weeks,  I  chuckled — "  How  would  Giulia  stare, 

"  And  Tecla  smile  and  Tisbe  laugh  outright,  480 

"  Were  it  not  impudent  for  brides  to  talk  ! " — 

Until  one  morning,  as  I  sat  and  sang 

At  the  broidery-frame  alone  i'  the  chamber, — loud 

Voices,  two,  three  together,  sobbings  too, 

And  my  name,  "  Guido,"  "  Paolo,"  flung  like  stones    485 

From  each  to  the  other  !  In  I  ran  to  see. 

There  stood  the  very  Guido  and  the  priest 

With  sly  face, — formal  but  nowise  afraid, — 

While  Pietro  seemed  all  red  and  angry,  scarce 

Able  to  stutter  out  his  wrath  in  words  ;  490 

And  this  it  was  that  made  my  mother  sob, 

As  he  reproached  her — "  You  have  murdered  us, 

"  Me  and  yourself  and  this  our  child  beside  ! " 

Then  Guido  interposed  "  Murdered  or  not, 

"  Be  it  enough  your  child  is  now  my  wife  !  495 

"  I  claim  and  come  to  take  her."     Paul  put  in, 


POMPILIA.  25 


"  Consider — kinsman,  dare  I  term  you  so  ? — - 

"  What  is  the  good  of  your  sagacity 

"  Except  to  counsel  in  a  strait  like  this  ? 

"  I  guarantee  the  parties  man  and  wife  500 

"  Whether  you  like  or  loathe  it,  bless  or  ban. 

"  May  spilt  milk  be  put  back  within  the  bowl —  , 

"  The  done  thing,  undone  ?    You,  it  is,  we  look 

"  For  counsel  to,  you  ritliest  will  advise  ! 

"  Since  milk,  though  spilt  and  spoilt,  does  marble  good, 

"  Better  we  down  on  knees  and  scrub  the  floor,  506 

"  Than  sigh,  '  the  waste  would  make  a  syllabub  ! ' 

"  Help  us  so  turn  disaster  to  account, 

"  So  predispose  the  groom,  he  needs  shall  grace 

"  The  bride  with  favour  from  the  very  first,  510 

"  Not  begin  marriage  an  embittered  man  ! " 

He  smiled, — the  game  so  wholly  in  his  hands  ! 

While  fast  and  faster  sobbed  Violante — "  Ay, 

"  All  of  us  murdered,  past  averting  now  ! 

"  O  my  sin,  O  my  secret ! "  and  such  like.  515 

Then  I  began  to  half  surmise  the  truth  ; 
Something  had  happened,  low,  mean,  underhand, 


26  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

False,  and  my  mother  was  to  blame,  and  I 

To  pity,  whom  all  spoke  of,  none  addressed : 

I  was  the  chattel  that  had  caused  a  crime.  520 

I  stood  mute, — those  who  tangled  must  untie 

The  embroilment.     Pietro  cried  "  Withdraw,  my  child  ! 

"  She  is  not  helpful  to  the  sacrifice 

"  At  this  stage, — do  you  want  the  victim  by 

"  While  you  discuss  the  value  of  her  blood?  525 

"  Fcr  her  sake,  I  consent  to  hear  you  talk : 

'•'  Go,  child,  and  pray  God  help  the  innocent ! " 

I  did  go  and  was  praying  God,  when  came 

Violante,  with  eyes  swollen  and  red  enough, 

But  movement  on  her  mouth  for  make-believe  530 

Matters  were  somehow  getting  right  again. 

She  bade  me  sit  down  by  her  side  and  hear. 

"  You  are  too  young  and  cannot  understand, 

"  Nor  did  your  father  understand  at  first. 

"  I  wished  to  benefit  all  three  of  us,  535 

"  And  when  he  failed  to  take  my  meaning, — why, 

"  I  tried  to  have  my  way  at  unaware — 

"  Obtained  him  the  advantage  he  refused. 


POMPILIA.  27 


"  As  if  I  put  before  him  wholesome  food 

"  Instead  of  broken  victual, — he  finds  change  540 

"  F  the  viands,  never  cares  to  reason  why, 

"  But  falls  to  blaming  me,  would  fling  the  plate 

u  From  window,  scandalize  the  neighbourhood, 

"  Even  while  he  smacks  his  lips, — men's  way,  my  child  ! 

"  But  either  you  have  prayed  him  unperverse  545 

"  Or  I  have  talked  him  back  into  his  wits : 

"  And  Paolo  was  a  help  in  time  of  need, — 

"  Guido,  not  much — my  child,  the  way  of  men  ! 

"  A  priest  is  more  a  woman  than  a  man, 

11  And  Paul  did  wonders  to  persuade.     In  short,  550 

"  Yes,  he  was  wrong,  your  father  sees  and  says; 

"  My  scheme  was  worth  attempting  :  and  bears  fruit, 

"  Gives  you  a  husband  and  a  noble  name, 

"  A  palace  and  no  end  of  pleasant  things. 

"  What  do  you  care  about  a  handsome  youth  ?  555 

"  They  are  so  volatile,  and  teaze  their  wives  ! 

"  This  is  the  kind  of  man  to  keep  the  house. 

"  We  lose  no  daughter, — gain  a  son,  that's  all : 

"  For  'tis  arranged  we  never  separate, 

"  Nor  miss,  in  our  grey  time  of  life,  the  tints  560 


28  THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

"  Of  you  that  colour  eve  to  match  with  morn. 

"  In  good  or  ill,  we  share  and  share  alike, 

"  And  cast  our  lots  into  a  common  lap, 

"  And  all  three  die  together  as  we  lived  ! 

"  Only,  at  Arezzo, — that 's  a  Tuscan  town,  565 

"  Not  so  large  as  this  noisy  Rome,  no  doubt, 

"  But  older  far  and  finer  much,  say  folks, — 

"  In  a  great  palace  where  you  will  be  queen, 

"  Know  the  Archbishop  and  the  Governor, 

"  And  we  see  homage  done  you  ere  we  die.  570 

"  Therefore,  be  good  and  pardon  !  " — "  Pardon  what  ? 

"  You  know  things,  I  am  very  ignorant : 

"  All  is  right  if  you  only  will  not  cry  !  " 

And  so  an  end  !     Because  a  blank  begins 

From  when,  at  the  word,  she  kissed  me  hard  and  hot, 

And  took  me  back  to  where  my  father  leaned  576 

Opposite  Guido — who  stood  eyeing  him, 

As  eyes  the  butcher  the  cast  panting  ox 

That  feels  his  fate  is  come,  nor  struggles  more, — 

While  Paul  looked  archly  on,  pricked  brow  at  whiles  580 

With  the  pen-point  as  to  punish  triumph  there, — 


POMPILIA.  29 


And  said  "  Count  Guido,  take  your  lawful  wife 
"  Until  death  part  you  !" 

All  since  is  one  blank, 
Over  and  ended ;  a  terrific  dream.  585 

It  is  the  good  of  dreams — so  soon  they  go  ! 
Wake  in  a  horror  of  heart-beats,  you  may — 
Cry,  "  The  dread  thing  will  never  from  my  thoughts  !  " 
Still,  a  few  daylight  doses  of  plain  life, 
Cock-crow  and  sparrow-chirp,  or  bleat  and  bell  590 

Of  goats  that  trot  by,  tinkling,  to  be  milked  \ 
And  when  you  rub  your  eyes  awake  and  wide, 
Where  is  the  harm  o'  the  horror  ?     Gone  !   So  here. 
I  know  I  wake, — but  from  what  ?     Blank,  I  say  ! 
This  is  the  note  of  evil :  for  good  lasts.  595 

Even  when  Don  Celestine  bade  "  Search  and  find  ! 
"  For  your  soul's  sake,  remember  what  is  past, 
"  The  better  to  forgive  it," — all  in  vain  ! 
What  was  fast  getting  indistinct  before, 
Vanished  outright.     By  special  grace  perhaps,  600 

Between  that  first  calm  and  this  last,  four  years 
Vanish, — one  quarter  of  my  life,  you  know. 


30  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

I  am  held  up,  amid  the  nothingness, 

By  one  or  two  truths  only — thence  I  hang, 

And  there  I  live, — the  rest  is  death  or  dream,  605 

All  but  those  points  of  my  support.     I  think 

Of  what  I  saw  at  Rome  once  in  the  Square 

O'  the  Spaniards,  opposite  the  Spanish  House  : 

There  was  a  foreigner  had  trained  a  goat, 

A  shuddering  white  woman  of  a  beast,  6 1  o 

To  climb  up,  stand  straight  on  a  pile  of  sticks 

Put  close,  which  gave  the  creature  room  enough  : 

When  she  was  settled  there  he,  one  by  one, 

Took  away  all  the  sticks,  left  just  the  four 

Whereon  the  little  hoofs  did  really  rest,  615 

There  she  kept  firm,  all  underneath  was  air. 

So,  what  I  hold  by,  are  my  prayer  to  God, 

My  hope,  that  came  in  answer  to  the  prayer, 

Some  hand  would  interpose  and  save  me — hand 

Which  proved  to  be  my  friend's  hand  :  and, — best  bliss, — 

That  fancy  which  began  so  faint  at  first,  ,        621 

That  thrill  of  dawn's  suffusion  through  my  dark, 

Which  I  perceive  was  promise  of  my  child, 

The  light  his  unborn  face  sent  long  before, — 


POMPILIA.  31 


God's  way  of  breaking  the  good  news  to  flesh.  625 

That  is  all  left  now  of  those  four  bad  years. 

Don  Celestine  urged  "But  remember  more  ! 

"  Other  men's  faults  may  help  me  find  your  own. 

"  I  need  the  cruelty  exposed,  explained, 

"  Or  how  can  I  advise  you  to  forgive  ?  "  630 

He  thought  I  could  not  properly  forgive 

Unless  I  ceased  forgetting, — which  is  true  : 

For,  bringing  back  reluctantly  to  mind 

My  husband's  treatment  of  me, — by  a  light 

That 's  later  than  my  life-time,  I  review  635 

And  comprehend  much  and  imagine  more, 

And  have  but  little  to  forgive  at  last. 

For  now, — be  fair  and  say, — is  it  not  true 

He  was  ill-used  and  cheated  of  his  hope 

To  get  enriched  by  marriage  ?     Marriage  gave  640 

Me  and  no  money,  broke  the  compact  so  : 

He  had  a  right  to  ask  me  on  those  terms, 

As  Pietro  and  Violante  to  declare 

They  would  not  give  me  :  so  the  bargain  stood  : 

They  broke  it,  and  he  felt  himself  aggrieved,  645 

Became  unkind  with  me  to  punish  them. 


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 


They  said  't  was  he  began  deception  first, 

Nor,  in  one  point  whereto  he  pledged  himself, 

Kept  promise  :  what  of  that,  suppose  it  were  ? 

Echoes  die  off,  scarcely  reverberate  650 

For  ever, — why  should  ill  keep  echoing  ill, 

And  never  let  our  ears  have  done  with  noise  ? 

Then  my  poor  parents  took  the  violent  way 

To  thwart  him, — he  must  needs  retaliate, — wrong, 

Wrong,  and  all  wrong, — better  say,  all  blind  !  655 

As  I  myself  was,  that  is  sure,  who  else 

Had  understood  the  mystery  :  for  his  wife 

Was  bound  in  some  sort  to  help  somehow  there. 

It  seems  as  if  I  might  have  interposed, 

Blunted  the  edge  of  their  resentment  so,  660 

Since  he  vexed  me  because  they  first  vexed  him  ; 

"  I  will  entreat  them  to  desist,  submit, 

14  Give  him  the  money  and  be  poor  in  peace, — 

"  Certainly  not  go  tell  the  world  :  perhaps 

"  He  will  grow  quiet  with  his  gains."  665 

Yes,  say 
Something  to  this  effect  and  you  do  well ! 


POMPILIA.  33 


But  then  you  have  to  see  first :  I  was  blind. 

That  is  the  fruit  of  all  such  wormy  ways, 

The  indirect,  the  unapproved  of  God  :  670 

You  cannot  find  their  author's  end  and  aim, 

Not  even  to  substitute  your  good  for  bad, 

Your  open  for  the  irregular ;  you  stand 

Stupefied,  profitless,  as  cow  or  sheep 

That  miss  a  man's  mind ;  anger  him  just  twice  675 

By  trial  at  repairing  the  first  fault. 

Thus,  when  he  blamed  me,  "  You  are  a  coquette, 

"  A  lure-owl  posturing  to  attract  birds, 

"  You  look  love-lures  at  theatre  and  church, 

"  In  walk,  at  window  ! " — that,  I  knew,  was  false  :       680 

But  why  he  charged  me  falsely,  whither  sought 

To  drive  me  by  such  charge, — how  could  I  know  ? 

So,  unaware,  I  only  made  things  worse. 

I  tried  to  soothe  him  by  abjuring  walk, 

Window,  church,  theatre,  for  good  and  all,  685 

As  if  he  had  been  in  earnest :  that,  you  know, 

Was  nothing  like  the  object  of  his  charge. 

Yes,  when  I  got  my  maid  to  supplicate 

The  priest,  whose  name  she  read  when  she  would  read 

VOL.  III.  D 


34  THE    RING    AND    THE    BOOK. 

Those  feigned  false  letters  I  was  forced  to  hear 

Though  I  could  read  no  word  of, — he  should  cease 

Writing, — nay,  if  he  minded  prayer  of  mine, 

Cease  from  so  much  as  even  pass  the  street 

Whereon  our  house  looked, — in  my  ignorance 

I  was  just  thwarting  Guido's  true  intent ; 

Which  was,  to  bring  about  a  wicked  change 

Of  sport  to  earnest,  tempt  a  thoughtless  man 

To  write  indeed,  and  pass  the  house,  and  more, 

Till  both  of  us  were  taken  in  a  crime. 

He  ought  not  to  have  wished  me  thus  act  lies, 

Simulate  folly, — but, — wrong  or  right,  the  wish, — 

I  failed  to  apprehend  its  drift.     How  plain 

It  follows, — if  I  fell  into  such  fault, 

He  also  may  have  overreached  the  mark, 

Made  mistake,  by  perversity  of  brain, 

In  the  whole  sad  strange  plot,  this  same  intrigue 

To  make  me  and  my  friend  unself  ourselves, 

Be  other  man  and  woman  than  we  were  ! 

Think  it  out,  you  who  have  the  time  !  for  me, — 

I  cannot  say  less ;  more  I  will  not  say. 

Leave  it  to  God  to  cover  and  undo  ! 


POMPILIA.  35 


Only,  my  dulness  should  not  prove  too  much  ! 

— Not  prove  that  in  a  certain  other  point 

Wherein  my  husband  blamed  me, — and  you  blame, 

If  I  interpret  smiles  and  shakes  of  head, —  715 

I  was  dull  too.     Oh,  if  I  dared  but  speak  ! 

Must  I  speak  ?     I  am  blamed  that  I  forwent 

A  way  to  make  my  husband's  favour  come. 

That  is  true  :  I  was  firm,  withstood,  refused  .  .  . 

— Women  as  you  are,  how  can  I  find  the  words?        720 

I  felt  there  was  just  one  thing  Guido  claimed 

I  had  no  right  to  give  nor  he  to  take  ; 

We  being  in  estrangement,  soul  from  soul : 

Till,  when  I  sought  help,  the  Archbishop  smiled, 

Inquiring  into  privacies  of  life,  725 

— Said  I  was  blameable — (he  stands  for  God) 

Nowise  entitled  to  exemption  there. 

Then  I  obeyed, — as  surely  had  obeyed 

Were  the  injunction  "  Since  your  husband  bids, 

"  Swallow  the  burning  coal  he  proffers  you  ! "  73a 

But  I  did  wrong,  and  he  gave  wrong  advice 

Though  he  were  thrice  Archbishop, — that,  I  know  ! — 


36  THE   RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

Now  I  have  got  to  die  and  see  things  clear. 

Remember  I  was  barely  twelve  years  old — 

A  child  at  marriage  :  I  was  let  alone  735 

For  weeks,  I  told  you,  lived  my  child-life  still 

Even  at  Arezzo,  when  I  woke  and  found 

First  .  .  but  I  need  not  think  of  that  again — 

Over  and  ended  !     Try  and  take  the  sense 

Of  what  I  signify,  if  it  must  be  so.  740 

After  the  first,  my  husband,  for  hate's  sake, 

Said  one  eve,  when  the  simpler  cruelty 

Seemed  somewhat  dull  at  edge  and  fit  to  bear, 

"  We  have  been  man  and  wife  six  months  almost : 

"  How  long  is  this  your  comedy  to  last  ?  745 

"  Go  this  night  to  my  chamber,  not  your  own  ! " 

At  which  word,  I  did  rush — most  true  the  charge — 

And  gain  the  Archbishop's  house — he  stands  for  God — 

And  fall  upon  my  knees  and  clasp  his  feet, 

Praying  him  hinder  what  my  estranged  soul  750 

Refused  to  bear,  though  patient  of  the  rest : 

"  Place  me  within  a  convent,"  I  implored — 

"  Let  me  henceforward  lead  the  virgin  life 

"  You  praise  in  Her  you  bid  me  imitate  ! " 


POMPILIA.  37 


What  did  he  answer  ?     "  Folly  of  ignorance  !  755 

"  Know,  daughter,  circumstances  make  or  mar 

"  Virginity, — 't  is  virtue  or  't  is  vice. 

"  That  which  was  glory  in  the  Mother  of  God 

"  Had  been,  for  instance,  damnable  in  Eve 

"  Created  to  be  mother  of  mankind.  760 

"  Had  Eve,  in  answer  to  her  Maker's  speech 

"  '  Be  fruitful,  multiply,  replenish  earth  ' — 

"  Pouted  '  But  I  choose  rather  to  remain 

"  '  Single ' — why,  she  had  spared  herself  forthwith 

"  Further  probation  by  the  apple  and  snake,  765 

"  Been  pushed  straight  out  of  Paradise  !     For  see — 

"  If  motherhood  be  qualified  impure, 

"  I  catch  you  making  God  command  Eve  sin  ! 

"  — A  blasphemy  so  like  these  Molinists', 

"  I  must  suspect  you  dip  into  their  books."  770 

Then  he  pursued  "  'T  was  in  your  covenant !  " 

No  !     There  my  husband  never  used  deceit. 

He  never  did  by  speech  nor  act  imply 

"  Because  of  our  souls'  yearning  that  we  meet 

"  And  mix  in  soul  through  flesh,  which  yours  and  mine 


38  THE   RING  AND   THE   BOOK. 

"  Wear  and  impress,  and  make  their  visible  selves,     776 

"  — All  which  means,  for  the  love  of  you  and  me, 

"  Let  us  become  one  flesh,  being  one  soul !  " 

He  only  stipulated  for  the  wealth  ; 

Honest  so  far.     But  when  he  spoke  as  plain —  780 

Dreadfully  honest  also — "  Since  our  souls 

"  Stand  each  from  each,  a  whole  world's  width  between, 

"  Give  me  the  fleshy  vesture  I  can  reach 

"  And  rend  and  leave  just  fit  for  hell  to  burn  ! " — 

Why,  in  God's  name,  for  Guido's  soul's  own  sake        785 

Imperilled  by  polluting  mine, — I  say, 

I  did  resist ;  would  I  had  overcome  ! 

My  heart  died  out  at  the  Archbishop's  smile ; 

— It  seemed  so  stale  and  worn  a  way  o'  the  world,      789 

As  though  't  were  nature  frowning — "  Here  is  Spring, 

"  The  sun  shines  as  he  shone  at  Adam's  fall, 

"  The  earth  requires  that  warmth  reach  everywhere  : 

"  What,  must  your  patch  of  snow  be  saved  forsooth 

"  Because  you  rather  fancy  snow  than  flowers  ?  " 

Something  in  this  style  he  began  with  me.  795 

Last  he  said,  savagely  for  a  good  man, 


POMPILIA.  39 

"  This  explains  why  you  call  your  husband  harsh, 

"  Harsh  to  you,  harsh  to  whom  you  love.     God's  Bread  ! 

"  The  poor  Count  has  to  manage  a  mere  child 

"  Whose  parents  leave  untaught  the  simplest  things     800 

"  Their  duty  was  and  privilege  to  teach, — 

"  Goodwives'  instruction,  gossips'  lore  :  they  laugh 

"  And  leave  the  Count  the  task, — or  leave  it  me  ! " 

Then  I  resolved  to  tell  a  frightful  thing. 

"  I  am  not  ignorant, — know  what  I  say,  805 

"  Declaring  this  is  sought  for  hate,  not  love. 

"  Sir,  you  may  hear  things  like  almighty  God. 

"  I  tell  you  that  my  housemate,  yes— the  priest 

"  My  husband's  brother,  Canon  Girolamo — 

"  Has  taught  me  what  depraved  and  misnamed  love  810 

"  Means,  and  what  outward  signs  denote  the  sin, 

"  For  he  solicits  me  and  says  he  loves, 

"  The  idle  young  priest  with  nought  else  to  do. 

"  My  husband  sees  this,  knows  this,  and  lets  be. 

"  Is  it  your  counsel  I  bear  this  beside  ?  "  815 

"  — More  scandal,  and  against  a  priest  this  time  ! 

"  What,  't  is  the  Canon  now  ?  " — less  snappishly — 

"  Rise  up,  my  child,  for  such  a  child  you  are, 


40  THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

'  The  rod  were  too  advanced  a  punishment ! 
'  Let 's  try  the  honeyed  cake.     A  parable  !  820 

'  '  Without  a  parable  spake  He  not  to  them.'  " 
\  There  was  a  ripe  round  long  black  toothsome  fruit, 
'  Even  a  flower-fig,  the  prime  boast  of  May  : 
'  And,  to  the  tree,  said  .  .  either  the  spirit  o'  the  fig, 
1  Or,  if  we  bring  in  men,  the  gardener,  825 

1  Archbishop  of  the  orchard — had  I  time 
'  To  try  o'  the  two  which  fits  in  best :  indeed 
'  It  might  be  the  Creator's  self,  but  then 
1  The  tree  should  bear  an  apple,  I  suppose, — 
1  Well,  anyhow,  one  with  authority  said  830 

'  Ripe  fig,  burst  skin,  regale  the  fig-pecker — 
1  The  bird  whereof  thou  art  a  perquisite  ! ' 
'  Nay,'  with  a  flounce,  replied  the  restif  fig, 
1  '  I  much  prefer  to  keep  my  pulp  myself : 
'  '  He  may  go  breakfastless  and  dinnerless,  835 

Supperless  of  one  crimson  seed,  for  me  !  ' 
'  So,  back  she  flopped  into  her  bunch  of  leaves. 
He  flew  orT,  left  her, — did  the  natural  lord, — 
'  And  lo,  three  hundred  thousand  bees  and  wasps 
*  Found  her  out,  feasted  on  her  to  the  shuck  :  840 


POMPILIA.  41 


"  Such  gain  the  fig's  that  gave  its  bird  no  bite  ! 

"  The  moral, — fools  elude  their  proper  lot, 

"  Tempt  other  fools,  get  ruined  all  alike. 

"  Therefore  go  home,  embrace  your  husband  quick  ! 

"  Which  if  his  Canon  brother  chance  to  see,  845 

"  He  will  the  sooner  back  to  book  again." 

So,  home  I  did  go  ;  so,  the  worst  befell  : 

So,  I  had  proof  the  Archbishop  was  just  man, 

And  hardly  that,  and  certainly  no  more. 

For,  miserable  consequence  to  me,  850 

My  husband's  hatred  waxed  nor  waned  at  all, 

His  brother's  boldness  grew  effrontery  soon, 

And  my  last  stay  and  comfort  in  myself 

Was  forced  from  me  :  henceforth  I  looked  to  God 

Only,  nor  cared  my  desecrated  soul  855 

Should  have  fair  walls,  gay  windows  for  the  world. 

God's  glimmer,  that  came  through  the  ruin-top, 

Was  witness  why  all  lights  were  quenched  inside  : 

Henceforth  I  asked  God  counsel,  not  mankind. 

So,  when  I  made  the  effort,  saved  myself,  860 


42  THE    RING  AND   THE    BOOK. 

They  said — "  No  care  to  save  appearance  here  ! 

"  How  cynic, — when,  how  wanton,  were  enough  !  " 

— Adding,  it  all  came  of  my  mother's  life — 

My  own  real  mother,  whom  I  never  knew, 

Who  did  wrong  (if  she  needs  must  have  done  wrong)  865 

Through  being  all  her  life,  not  my  four  years, 

At  mercy  of  the  hateful, — every  beast 

O'  the  field  was  wont  to  break  that  fountain-fence, 

Trample  the  silver  into  mud  so  murk 

Heaven  could  not  find  itself  reflected  there, —  870 

Now  they  cry  "Out  on  her,  who,  plashy  pool, 

"  Bequeathed  turbidity  and  bitterness 

"  To  the  daughter-stream  where  Guido  dipt  and  drank  !" 

Well,  since  she  had  to  bear  this  brand — let  me  ! 

The  rather  do  I  understand  her  now, —  875 

From  my  experience  of  what  hate  calls  love, — 

Much  love  might  be  in  what  their  love  called  hate. 

If  she  sold  .  .  what  they  call,  sold  .  .  me  her  child — 

I  shall  believe  she  hoped  in  her  poor  heart 

That  I  at  least  might  try  be  good  and  pure,  880 

Begin  to  live  untempted,  not  go  doomed 


POMPILIA.  43 


And  done  with  ere  once  found  in  fault,  as  she. 

Oh  and,  my  mother,  it  all  came  to  this  ? 

Why  should  I  trust  those  that  speak  ill  of  you, 

When  I  mistrust  who  speaks  even  well  of  them  ?         885 

Why,  since  all  bound  to  do  me  good,  did  harm, 

May  not  you,  seeming  as  you  harmed  me  most, 

Have  meant  to  do  most  good — and  feed  your  child 

From  bramble-bush,  whom  not  one  orchard-tree 

But  drew-back  bough  from,  nor  let  one  fruit  fall?        890 

This  it  was  for  you  sacrificed  your  babe  ? 

Gained  just  this,  giving  your  heart's  hope  away 

As  I  might  give  mine,  loving  it  as  you, 

If  .  .  but  that  never  could  be  asked  of  me  ! 

There,  enough  !  I  have  my  support  again,  895 

Again  the  knowledge  that  my  babe  was,  is, 

Will  be  mine  only.     Him,  by  death,  I  give 

Outright  to  God,  without  a  further  care, — 

But  not  to  any  parent  in  the  world, — 

So  to  be  safe  :  why  is  it  we  repine  ?  900 

What  guardianship  were  safer  could  we  choose  ? 

All  human  plans  and  projects  come  to  nought, 


44  THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

My  life,  and  what  I  know  of  other  lives, 

Prove  that :  no  plan  nor  project !  God  shall  care  ! 

And  now  you  are  not  tired  ?     How  patient  then         905 

All  of  you, — Oh  yes,  patient  this  long  while 

Listening,  and  understanding,  I  am  sure  ! 

Four  days  ago,  when  I  was  sound  and  well 

And  like  to  live,  no  one  would  understand. 

People  were  kind,  but  smiled  "  And  what  of  him,        910 

"  Your  friend,  whose  tonsure,  the  rich  dark-brown  hides  ? 

"  There,  there  ! — your  lover,  do  we  dream  he  was  ? 

"  A  priest  too — never  were  such  naughtiness  ! 

"  Still,  he  thinks  many  a  long  think,  never  fear, 

"  After  the  shy  pale  lady, — lay  so  light  915 

"  For  a  moment  in  his  arms,  the  lucky  one  ! " 

And  so  on  :  wherefore  should  I  blame  you  much  ? 

So  we  are  made,  such  difference  in  minds, 

Such  difference  too  in  eyes  that  see  the  minds  ! 

That  man,  you  misinterpret  and  misprise —  920 

The  glory  of  his  nature,  I  had  thought, 

Shot  itself  out  in  white  light,  blazed  the  truth 

Through  every  atom  of  his  act  with  me  : 


POM  PI  LI  A.  45 


Yet  where  I  point  you,  through  the  chrystal  shrine, 

Purity  in  quintessence,  one  dew-drop,  925 

You  all  descry  a  spider  in  the  midst. 

One  says,  "  The  head  of  it  is  plain  to  see," 

And  one,  "  They  are  the  feet  by  which  I  judge," 

All  say,  "  Those  films  were  spun  by  nothing  else." 

Then,  I  must  lay  my  babe  away  with  God,  930 

Nor  think  of  him  again,  for  gratitude. 

Yes,  my  last  breath  shall  wholly  spend  itself 

In  one  attempt  more  to  disperse  the  stain, 

The  mist  from  other  breath  fond  mouths  have  made, 

About  a  lustrous  and  pellucid  soul :  935 

So  that,  when  I  am  gone  but  sorrow  stays, 

And  people  need  assurance  in  their  doubt 

If  God  yet  have  a  servant,  man  a  friend, 

The  weak  a  saviour  and  the  vile  a  foe, — 

Let  him  be  present,  by  the  name  invoked,  940 

Giuseppe-Maria  Caponsacchi! 

There, 
Strength  comes  already  with  the  utterance  ! 


46  THE   RING  AND    THE    BOOK. 

I  will  remember  once  more  for  his  sake 

The  sorrow  :  for  he  lives  and  is  belied.  945 

Could  he  be  here,  how  he  would  speak  for  me  ! 

I  had  been  miserable  three  drear  years 

In  that  dread  palace  and  lay  passive  now, 

When  I  first  learned  there  could  be  such  a  man. 

Thus  it  fell :  I  was  at  a  public  play,  950 

In  the  last  days  of  Carnival  last  March, 

Brought  there  I  knew  not  why,  but  now  know  well. 

My  husband  put  me  where  I  sat,  in  front ; 

Then  crouched   down,  breathed  cold  through  me  from 

behind, 
Stationed  i'  the  shadow, — none  in  front  could  see, —  955 
I,  it  was,  faced  the  stranger-throng  beneath, 
The  crowd  with  upturned  faces,  eyes  one  stare, 
Voices  one  buzz.     I  looked  but  to  the  stage, 
Whereon  two  lovers  sang  and  interchanged 
"  True  life  is  only  love,  love  only  bliss  :  .960 

"  I  love  thee — thee  I  love  !  "  then  they  embraced. 
I  looked  thence  to  the  ceiling  and  the  walls, — 
Over  the  crowd,  those  voices  and  those  eyes, — 


POMPILIA.  47 


My  thoughts  went  through  the  roof  and  out,  to  Rome 

On  wings  of  music,  waft  of  measured  words, —  965 

Set  me  down  there,  a  happy  child  again, 

Sure  that  to-morrow  would  be  festa-day, 

Hearing  my  parents  praise  past  festas  more, 

And  seeing  they  were  old  if  I  was  young, 

Yet  wondering  why  they  still  would  end  discourse       970 

With  "  We  must  soon  go,  you  abide  your  time, 

"  And, — might  we  haply  see  the  proper  friend 

"  Throw  his  arm  over  you  and  make  you  safe  !  n 

Sudden  I  saw  him ;  into  my  lap  there  fell 

A  foolish  twist  of  comfits,  broke  my  dream  975 

And  brought  me  from  the  air  and  laid  me  low, 

As  ruined  as  the  soaring  bee  that 's  reached 

(So  Pietro  told  me  at  the  Villa  once) 

By  the  dust-handful.     There  the  comfits  lay  : 

I  looked  to  see  who  flung  them,  and  I  faced  980 

This  Caponsacchi,  looking  up  in  turn. 

Ere  I  could  reason  out  why,  I  felt  sure, 

Whoever  flung  them,  his  was  not  the  hand, — 

Up  rose  the  round  face  and  good-natured  grin 


4$  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

Of  him  who,  in  effect,  had  played  the  prank,  985 

From  covert  close  beside  the  earnest  face, — 

Fat  waggish  Conti,  friend  of  all  the  world. 

He  was  my  husband's  cousin,  privileged 

To  throw  the  thing  :  the  other,  silent,  grave, 

Solemn  almost,  saw  me,  as  I  saw  him.  990 

There  is  a  psalm  Don  Celestine  recites, 

"  Had  I  a  dove's  wings,  how  I  fain  would  flee  ! " 

The  psalm  runs  not  "  I  hope,  I  pray  for  wings," — 

Not  "  If  wings  fall  from  heaven,  I  fix  them  fast," — 

Simply  "  How  good  it  were  to  fly  and  rest,  995 

"  Have  hope  now,  and  one  day  expect  content ! 

"  How  well  to  do  what  I  shall  never  do  ! " 

So  I  said  "  Had  there  been  a  man  like  that, 

"  To  lift  me  with  his  strength  out  of  all  strife 

"  Into  the  calm,  how  I  could  fly  and  rest !  1000 

"  I  have  a  keeper  in  the  garden  here 

"  Whose  sole  employment  is  to  strike  me  low 

"  If  ever  I,  for  solace,  seek  the  sun. 

"  Life  means  with  me  successful  feigning  death, 

"  Lying  stone-like,  eluding  notice  so,  1005 


POMPILIA.  49 


"  Forgoing  here  the  turf  and  there  the  sky. 

"  Suppose  that  man  had  been  instead  of  this  !  " 

Presently  Conti  laughed  into  my  ear, 

— Had  tripped  up  to  the  raised  place  where  I  sat — 

"  Cousin,  I  flung  them  brutishly  and  hard  !  ioio 

"  Because  you  must  be  hurt,  to  look  austere 

"  As  Caponsacchi  yonder,  my  tall  friend 

"  A-gazing  now.     Ah,  Guido,  you  so  close  ? 

"  Keep  on  your  knees,  do  !     Beg  her  to  forgive  ! 

"  My  cornet  battered  like  a  cannon-ball.  1015 

"  Good  bye,  I  'm  gone  !" — nor  waited  the  reply. 

That  night  at  supper,  out  my  husband  broke, 

"  Why  was  that  throwing,  that  buffoonery  ? 

"  Do  you  think  I  am  your  dupe  ?    What  man  would  dare 

"  Throw  comfits  in  a  stranger  lady's  lap  ?  1020 

"  'Twas  knowledge  of  you  bred  such  insolence 

"  In  Caponsacchi ;  he  dared  shoot  the  bolt, 

"  Using  that  Conti  for  his  stalking-horse. 

"  How  could  you  see  him  this  once  and  no  more, 

"  When  he  is  always  haunting  hereabout  1025 

VOL.  III.  e 


50  THE   RING  AND   THE    BOOK. 

"  At  the  street-corner  or  the  palace-side, 

"  Publishing  my  shame  and  your  impudence  ? 

"  You  are  a  wanton, — I  a  dupe,  you  think  ? 

"  O  Christ,  what  hinders  that  I  kill  her  quick  ?" 

Whereat  he  drew  his  sword  and  feigned  a  thrust.        1030 

All  this,  now, — being  not  so  strange  to  me, 

Used  to  such  misconception  day  by  day 

And  broken-in  to  bear, — I  bore,  this  time, 

More  quietly  than  woman  should  perhaps  ; 

Repeated  the  mere  truth  and  held  my  tongue.  1035 

Then  he  said,  "  Since  you  play  the  ignorant, 

"  I  shall  instruct  you.     This  amour, — commenced 

"  Or  finished  or  midway  in  act,  all  's  one, — 

"  'Tis  the  town-talk ;  so  my  revenge  shall  be. 

"  Does  he  presume  because  he  is  a  priest  ?  1040 

"  I  warn  him  that  the  sword  I  wear  shall  pink 

"  His  lily-scented  cassock  through  and  through, 

"  Next  time  I  catch  him  underneath  your  eaves  !  " 

But  he  had  threatened  with  the  sword  so  oft 


POMPILIA.  51 


And,  after  all,  not  kept  his  promise.     All  1045 

I  said  was,  "  Let  God  save  the  innocent ! 
"  Moreover,  death  is  far  from  a  bad  fate. 

II  I  shall  go  pray  for  you  and  me,  not  him ; 

"  And  then  I  look  to  sleep,  come  death  or,  worse, 

"  Life."     So,  I  slept.  1050 

There  may  have  elapsed  a  week, 
When  Margherita, — called  my  waiting-maid, 
Whom  it  is  said  my  husband  found  too  fair — 
Who  stood  and  heard  the  charge  and  the  reply, 
Who  never  once  would  let  the  matter  rest  1055 

From  that  night  forward,  but  rang  changes  still 
On  this  the  thrust  and  that  the  shame,  and  how 
Good  cause  for  jealousy  cures  jealous  fools, 
And  what  a  paragon  was  this  same  priest 
She  talked  about  until  I  stopped  my  ears, —  1060 

She  said,  "  A  week  is  gone  ;  you  comb  your  hair, 
"  Then  go  mope  in  a  corner,  cheek  on  palm, 
"  Till  night  comes  round  again, — so,  waste  a  week 
"  As  if  your  husband  menaced  you  in  sport. 
"  Have  not  I  some  acquaintance  with  his  tricks  ?      1065 


52  THE   RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

"  Oh  no,  he  did  not  stab  the  serving-man 

"  Who  made  and  sang  the  rhymes  about  me  once  ! 

"  For  why  ?     They  sent  him  to  the  wars  next  day. 

"  Nor  poisoned  he  the  foreigner,  my  friend, 

"  Who  wagered  on  the  whiteness  of  my  breast, —      1070 

"  The  swarth  skins  of  our  city  in  dispute  : 

"  For,  though  he  paid  me  proper  compliment, 

11  The  Count  well  knew  he  was  besotted  with 

"  Somebody  else,  a  skin  as  black  as  ink, 

"  (As  all  the  town  knew  save  my  foreigner)  1075 

"  He  found  and  wedded  presently, — '  Why  need 

"  '  Better  revenge?' — the  Count  asked.  But  what 's  here  ? 

"  A  priest,  that  does  not  fight,  and  cannot  wed, 

"  Yet  must  be  dealt  with  !     If  the  Count  took  fire 

"  For  the  poor  pastime  of  a  minute, — me —  1080 

"  What  were  the  conflagration  for  yourself, 

"  Countess  and  lady- wife  and  all  the  rest  ? 

"  The  priest  will  perish  ;  you  will  grieve  too  late  : 

"  So  shall  the  city-ladies'  handsomest 

"  Frankest  and  liberalest  gentleman  1085 

"  Die  for  you,  to  appease  a  scurvy  dog 

"  Hanging  's  too  good  for.     Is  there  no  escape  ? 


P0MPIL1A.  53 


"  Were  it  not  simple  Christian  charity 

"  To  warn  the  priest  be  on  his  guard, — save  him 

"  Assured  death,  save  yourself  from  causing  it  ?         1090 

"  I  meet  him  in  the  street.     Give  me  a  glove, 

"  A  ring  to  show  for  token  !     Mum's  the  word  ! " 

I  answered,  "  If  you  were,  as  styled,  my  maid, 

"  I  would  command  you  :  as  you  are,  you  say, 

"  My  husband's  intimate, — assist  his  wife  1095 

"  Who  can  do  nothing  but  entreat  '  Be  still ! ' 

"  Even  if  you  speak  truth  and  a  crime  is  planned, 

"  Leave  help  to  God  as  I  am  forced  to  do  ! 

"  There  is  no  other  course,  or  we  should  craze, 

"  Seeing  such  evil  with  no  human  cure.  1100 

"  Reflect  that  God,  who  makes  the  storm  desist, 

"  Can  make  an  angry  violent  heart  subside. 

"  Why  should  we  venture  teach  Him  governance  ? 

"  Never  address  me  on  this  subject  more  ! " 

Next  night  she  said,  "  But  I  went,  all  the  same,         1105 

"  — Ay,  saw  your  Caponsacchi  in  his  house, 

"  And  come  back  stuffed  with  news  I  must  outpour. 


54  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

"  I  told  him,  '  Sir,  my  mistress  is  a  stone : 

"  6  Why  should  you  harm  her  for  no  good  you  get  ? 

"  '  For  you  do  harm  her — prowl  about  our  place       1 1 10 

"  'With  the  Count  never  distant  half  the  street, 

"  '  Lurking  at  every  corner,  would  you  look  ! 

"  '  'Tis  certain  she  has  witched  you  with  a  spell. 

"  '  Are  there  not  other  beauties  at  your  beck  ? 

"  '  We  all  know,  Donna  This  and  Monna  That  1 1 15 

"  \  Die  for  a  glance  of  yours,  yet  here  you  gaze  ! 

"  i  Go  make  them  grateful,  leave  the  stone  its  cold  ! ' 

"  And  he — oh,  he  turned  first  white  and  then  red, 

"  And  then — '  To  her  behest  I  bow  myself, 

«  « Whom  I  love  with  my  body  and  my  soul :  11 20 

"  l  Only,  a  word  i'  the  bowing  !     See,  I  write 

"  '  One  little  word,  no  harm  to  see  or  hear  ! 

"  ' Then,  fear  no  further  ! '     This  is  what  he  wrote. 

"  I  know  you  cannot  read, — therefore,  let  me  ! 

"  <  My  idol 7'"  ....  1 125 

But  I  took  it  from  her  hand 
And  tore  it  into  shreds.     "  Why  join  the  rest 
"  Who  harm  me  ?     Have  I  ever  done  you  wrong  ? 


POMPILIA.  55 


"  People  have  told  me  't  is  you  wrong  myself : 

"  Let  it  suffice  I  either  feel  no  wrong  1 130 

"  Or  else  forgive  it, — yet  you  turn  my  foe  ! 

"  The  others  hunt  me  and  you  throw  a  noose ! " 

She  muttered,  "  Have  your  wilful  way  ! "  I  slept. 

Whereupon  .  .  no,  I  leave  my  husband  out  ! 

It  is  not  to  do  him  more  hurt,  I  speak.  1135 

Let  it  suffice,  when  misery  was  most, 

One  day,  I  swooned  and  got  a  respite  so. 

She  stooped  as  I  was  slowly  coming  to, 

This  Margherita,  ever  on  my  trace, 

And  whispered — "  Caponsacchi  ! "  1 140 

If  I  drowned, 
But  woke  afloat  i'  the  wave  with  upturned  eyes, 
And  found  their  first  sight  was  a  star  !  I  turned — 
For  the  first  time,  I  let  her  have  her  will, 
Heard  passively, — "  The  imposthume  at  such  head,  1145 
"  One  touch,  one  lancet-puncture  would  relieve, — 
"  And  still  no  glance  the  good  physician's  way 


5 6  THE   RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

"  Who  rids  you  of  the  torment  in  a  trice  ! 

"  Still  he  writes  letters  you  refuse  to  hear. 

"  He  may  prevent  your  husband,  kill  himself,  1150 

"  So  desperate  and  all  fordone  is  he  ! 

"  Just  hear  the  pretty  verse  he  made  to-day  ! 

"  A  sonnet  from  Mirtillo.     '  Peei'less  fair  .  .  .' 

"  All  poetry  is  difficult  to  read, 

" — The  sense  of  it  is,  anyhow,  he  seeks  1155 

"  Leave  to  contrive  you  an  escape  from  hell, 

"  And  for  that  purpose  asks  an  interview. 

"  I  can  write,  I  can  grant  it  in  your  name, 

"  Or,  what  is  better,  lead  you  to  his  house. 

"  Your  husband  dashes  you  against  the  stones  ;         1160 

"  This  man  would  place  each  fragment  in  a  shrine  : 

"  You  hate  him,  love  your  husband  !  " 

I  returned, 
"  It  is  not  true  I  love  my  husband, — no, 
"  Nor  hate  this  man.     I  listen  while  you  speak,         1165 
" — Assured  that  what  you  say  is  false,  the  same  : 
"  Much  as  when  once,  to  me  a  little  child, 
"  A  rough  gaunt  man  in  rags,  with  eyes  on  fire, 


POMPILIA.  57 


"  A  crowd  of  boys  and  idlers  at  his  heels, 

"  Rushed  as  I  crossed  die  Square,  and  held  my  head 

"  In  his  two  hands,  '  Here's  she  will  let  me  speak  !    1171 

11  *  You  little  girl,  whose  eyes  do  good  to  mine, 

"  '  I  am  the  Pope,  am  Sextus,  now  the  Sixth ; 

"  '  And  that  Twelfth  Innocent,  proclaimed  to-day, 

"  '  Is  Lucifer  disguised  in  human  flesh  !  11 75 

"  '  The  angels,  met  in  conclave,  crowned  me  ! ' — thus 

"  He  gibbered  and  I  listened ;  but  I  knew 

"  All  was  delusion,  ere  folks  interposed 

"  '  Unfasten  him,  the  maniac  ! '     Thus  I  know 

"  All  your  report  of  Caponsacchi  false,  1 180 

"  Folly  or  dreaming  ;  I  have  seen  so  much 

"  By  that  adventure  at  the  spectacle, 

"  The  face  I  fronted  that  one  first,  last  time  : 

"  He  would  belie  it  by  such  words  and  thoughts. 

"  Therefore  while  you  profess  to  show  him  me,  1185 

"  I  ever  see  his  own  face.     Get  you  gone  !  " 


"  — That  will  I,  nor  once  open  mouth  again,- 
"  No,  by  Saint  Joseph  and  the  Holy  Ghost ! 
"  On  your  head  be  the  damage,  so  adieu  !  " 


5&  THE   RING   AND   THE   BOOK. 

And  so  more  days,  more  deeds  I  must  forget,  1190 

Till  .  .  what  a  strange  thing  now  is  to  declare  ! 

Since  I  say  anything,  say  all  if  true  ! 

And  how  my  life  seems  lengthened  as  to  serve  ! 

It  may  be  idle  or  inopportune, 

But,  true  ? — why,  what  was  all  I  said  but  truth,  1195 

Even  when  I  found  that  such  as  are  untrue 

Could  only  take  the  truth  in  through  a  lie  ? 

Now — I  am  speaking  truth  to  the  Truth's  self : 

God  will  lend  credit  to  my  words  this  time. 

It  had  got  half  through  April.     I  arose  1200 

One  vivid  daybreak, — who  had  gone  to  bed 

In  the  old  way  my  wont  those  last  three  years, 

Careless  until,  the  cup  drained,  I  should  die. 

The  last  sound  in  my  ear,  the  over-night, 

Had  been  a  something  let  drop  on  the  sly  1205 

In  prattle  by  Margherita,  "  Soon  enough 

"  Gaieties  end,  now  Easter 's  past :  a  week, 

"  And  the  Archbishop  gets  him  back  to  Rome, — 

"  Everyone  leaves  the  town  for  Rome,  this  Spring,— 

"  Even  Caponsacchi,  out  of  heart  and  hope,  12 10 


P03MPILIA.  59 


"  Resigns  himself  and  follows  with  the  flock." 

I  heard  this  drop  and  drop  like  rain  outside 

Fast-falling  through  the  darkness  while  she  spoke : 

So  had  I  heard  with  like  indifference, 

"  And  Michael's  pair  of  wings  will  arrive  first  12 15 

"  At  Rome  to  introduce  the  company, 

"  Will  bear  him  from  our  picture  where  he  fights 

"  Satan, — expect  to  have  that  dragon  loose 

"  And  never  a  defender  !  " — my  sole  thought 

Being  still,  as  night  came,  "  Done,  another  day  !        1220 

u  How  good  to  sleep  and  so  get  nearer  death  ! " — 

When,  what,  first  thing  at  daybreak,  pierced  the  sleep 

With  a  summons  to  me  ?     Up  I  sprang  alive, 

Light  in  me,  light  without  me,  everywhere 

Change  !     A  broad  yellow  sun-beam  was  let  fall        1225 

From  heaven  to  earth, — a  sudden  drawbridge  lay, 

Along  which  marched  a  myriad  merry  motes, 

Mocking  the  flies  that  crossed  them  and  recrossed 

In  rival  dance,  companions  new-born  too. 

On  the  house-eaves,  a  dripping  shag  of  weed  1230 

Shook  diamonds  on  each  dull  grey  lattice-square, 

As  first  one,  then  another  bird  leapt  by, 


60  THE   RING  AND   THE    BOOK. 

And  light  was  off,  and  lo  was  back  again, 

Always  with  one  voice, — where  are  two  such  joys  ? — 

The  blessed  building-sparrow  !     I  stepped  forth,        1235 

Stood  on  the  terrace, — o'er  the  roofs,  such  sky  ! 

My  heart  sang,  "  I  too  am  to  go  away, 

"  I  too  have  something  I  must  care  about, 

"  Carry  away  with  me  to  Rome,  to  Rome  ! 

"  The  bird  brings  hither  sticks  and  hairs  and  wool,    1240 

"  And  nowhere  else  i'  the  world  ;  what  fly  breaks  rank, 

"  Falls  out  of  the  procession  that  befits, 

"  From  window  here  to  window  there,  with  all 

"  The  world  to  choose, — so  well  he  knows  his  course  ? 

"  I  have  my  purpose  and  my  motive  too,  i245 

"  My  march  to  Rome,  like  any  bird  or  fly ! 

"  Had  I  been  dead  !     How  right  to  be  alive  ! 

"  Last  night  I  almost  prayed  for  leave  to  die, 

"  Wished  Guido  all  his  pleasure  with  the  sword 

"  Or  the  poison, — poison,  sword,  was  but  a  trick,     1250 

"  Harmless,  may  God  forgive  him  the  poor  jest ! 

"  My  life  is  charmed,  will  last  till  I  reach  Rome  ! 

"  Yesterday,  but  for  the  sin, — ah,  nameless  be 

"  The  deed  I  could  have  dared  against  myself! 


POMPILIA.  6 1 


"  Now — see  if  I  will  touch  an  unripe  fruit,  1255 

"  And  risk  the  health  I  want  to  have  and  use  ! 
"  Not  to  live,  now,  would  be  the  wickedness, — 
li  For  life  means  to  make  haste  and  go  to  Rome 
"And  leave  Arezzo,  leave  all  woes  at  once  ! " 

Now,  understand  here,  by  no  means  mistake  !  1260 

Long  ago  had  I  tried  to  leave  that  house 

When  it  seemed  such  procedure  would  stop  sin ; 

And  still  failed  more  the  more  I  tried — at  first 

The  Archbishop,  as  I  told  you, — next,  our  lord 

The  Governor, — indeed  I  found  my  way,  1265 

I  went  to  the  great  palace  where  he  rules, 

Though  I  knew  well 't  was  he  who, — when  I  gave 

A  jewel  or  two,  themselves  had  given  me, 

Back  to  my  parents, — since  they  wanted  bread, 

They  who  had  never  let  me  want  a  nosegay, — he       1270 

Spoke  of  the  jail  for  felons,  if  they  kept 

What  was  first  theirs,  then  mine,  so  doubly  theirs,     * 

Though  all  the  while  my  husband's  most  of  all ! 

I  knew  well  who  had  spoke  the  word  wrought  this  : 

Yet,  being  in  extremity,  I  fled  1275 


62  THE   RING  AND   THE   BOOK. 

To  the  Governor,  as  I  say, — scarce  opened  lip 
When — the  cold  cruel  snicker  close  behind — 
Guido  was  on  my  trace,  already  there, 
Exchanging  nod  and  wink  for  shrug  and  smile, 
And  I — pushed  back  to  him  and,  for  my  pains,         1280 
Paid  with  .  .  but  why  remember  what  is  past  ? 
I  sought  out  a  poor  friar  the  people  call 
The  Roman,  and  confessed  my  sin  which  came 
Of  their  sin, — that  fact  could  not  be  repressed, — 
The  frightfulness  of  my  despair  in  God  :  1285 

And,  feeling,  through  the  grate,  his  horror  shake, 
Implored  him,  "  Write  for  me  who  cannot  write, 
6  Apprise  my  parents,  make  them  rescue  me  ! 
'  You  bid  me  be  courageous  and  trust  God  : 
'  Do  you  in  turn  dare  somewhat,  trust  and  write       1290 
'  '  Dear  friends,  who  used  to  be  my  parents  once, 
c  c  And  now  declare  you  have  no  part  in  me, 
This  is  some  riddle  I  want  wit  to  solve, 
Since  you  must  love  me  with  no  difference. 
Even  suppose  you  altered, — there  's  your  hate,     1295 
To  ask  for  :  hate  of  you  two  dearest  ones 
I  shall  find  liker  love  than  love  found  here, 


POMPILIA.  6$ 


"  '  If  husbands  love  their  wives.     Take  me  away  * 

"  '  And  hate  me  as  you  do  the  gnats  and  fleas, 

"  '  Even  the  scorpions  !     How  I  shall  rejoice  !'        1300 

"  Write  that  and  save  me  !  "     And  he  promised — wrote 

Or  did  not  write ;  things  never  changed  at  all : 

He  was  not  like  the  Augustinian  here  ! 

Last,  in  a  desperation  I  appealed 

To  friends,  whoever  wished  me  better  days,  1305 

To  Guillichini,  that 's  of  kin,—"  What,  I— 

"  Travel  to  Rome  with  you  ?    A  flying  gout 

"  Bids  me  deny  my  heart  and  mind  my  leg  ! " 

Then  I  tried  Conti,  used  to  brave — laugh  back 

The  louring  thunder  when  his  cousin  scowled  13 10 

At  me  protected  by  his  presence  :  "  You — 

"  Who  well  know  what  you  cannot  save  me  from, — 

"  Carry  me  off !     What  frightens  you,  a  priest  ?  " 

He  shook  his  head,  looked  grave — "  Above  my  strength  ! 

"  Guido  has  claws  that  scratch,  shows  feline  teeth ;  13 15 

"  A  formidabler  foe  than  I  dare  fret : 

"  Give  me  a  dog  to  deal  with,  twice  the  size  ! 

"  Of  course  I  am  a  priest  and  Canon  too, 

"  But  .  .  by  the  bye  .  .  though  both,  not  quite  so  bold, 


64  THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

"  As  he,  my  fellow-Canon,  brother-priest,  1320 

"  The  personage  in  such  ill  odour  here 

"  Because  of  the  reports — pure  birth  o'  the  brain — 

"  Our  Caponsacchi,  he's  your  true  Saint  George 

11  To  slay  the  monster,  set  the  Princess  free, 

"  And  have  the  whole  High- Altar  to  himself:  1325 

"  I  always  think  so  when  I  see  that  piece 

"  I'  the  Pieve,  that  's  his  church  and  mine,  you  know  : 

"  Though  you  drop  eyes  at  mention  of  his  name  ! " 

That  name  had  got  to  take  a  half-grotesque 

Half-ominous,  wholly  enigmatic  sense,  1330 

Like  any  bye-word,  broken  bit  of  song 

Born  with  a  meaning,  changed  by  mouth  and  mouth 

That  mix  it  in  a  sneer  or  smile,  as  chance 

Bids,  till  it  now  means  nought  but  ugliness 

And  perhaps  shame.  1335 

— All  this  intends  to  say, 
That,  over-night,  the  notion  of  escape 
Had  seemed  distemper,  dreaming ;  and  the  name, — 
Not  the  man,  but  the  name  of  him,  thus  made 


POMPILIA.  65 


Into  a  mockery  and  disgrace, — why,  she  1340 

Who  uttered  it  persistently,  had  laughed, 

"  I  name  his  name,  and  there  you  start  and  wince 

"  As  criminal  from  the  red  tongs'  touch  !  " — yet  now, 

Now,  as  I  stood  letting  morn  bathe  me  bright, 

Choosing  which  butterfly  should  bear  my  news, —     1345 

The  white,  the  brown  one,  or  that  tinier  blue, — 

The  Margherita,  I  detested  so, 

In  she  came — "  The  fine  day,  the  good  Spring  time  ! 

"  What,  up  and  out  at  window  ?     That  is  best. 

"  No  thought  of  Gaponsacchi? — who  stood  there      1350 

"  All  night  on  one  leg,  like  the  sentry  crane, 

"  Under  the  pelting  of  your  water-spout — 

"  Looked  last  look  at  your  lattice  ere  he  leave 

"  Our  city,  bury  his  dead  hope  at  Rome  ? 

"  Ay,  go  to  looking-glass  and  make  you  fine,  1355 

"  While  he  may  die  ere  touch  one  least  loose  hair 

"  You  drag  at  with  the  comb  in  such  a  rage  !  " 

I  turned — "  Tell  Caponsacchi  he  may  come  !  " 

"  Tell  him  to  come  ?    Ah,  but,  for  charity, 

VOL.  III.  f 


66  THE   RING  AND   THE   BOOK. 

u  A  truce  to  fooling  !    Come  ?    What, — come  this  eve  ? 
"  Peter  and  Paul !     But  I  see  through  the  trick —     136 1 
"  Yes,  come,  and  take  a  flower-pot  on  his  head 
"  Flung  from  your  terrace  !    No  joke,  sincere  truth  ?  " 

How  plainly  I  perceived  hell  flash  and  fade 

O'  the  face  of  her, — the  doubt  that  first  paled  joy,     1365 

Then,  final  reassurance  I  indeed 

Was  caught  now,  never  to  be  free  again ! 

What  did  I  care  ? — who  felt  myself  of  force 

To  play  with  the  silk,  and  spurn  the  horsehair-springe. 

"  But — do  you  know  that  I  have  bade  him  come,     1370 

"  And  in  your  own  name  ?     I  presumed  so  much, 

"  Knowing  the  thing  you  needed  in  your  heart. 

"  But  somehow — what  had  I  to  show  in  proof? 

"  He  would  not  come  :  half-promised,  that  was  all, 

"  And  wrote  the  letters  you  refused  to  read.  1375 

"  What  is  the  message  that  shall  move  him  now  ? 

"  After  the  Ave  Maria,  at  first  dark, 
•'  I  will  be  standing  on  the  terrace,  say ! 


POMPILIA.  67 


"  I  would  I  had  a  good  long  lock  of  hair 

u  Should  prove  I  was  not  lying  !  Never  mind  I*        1380 

Off  she  went — "  May  he  not  refuse,  that's  all — 
"  Fearing  a  trick  ! " 

I  answered,  "  He  will  come." 
And,  all  day,  I  sent  prayer  like  incense  up 
To  God  the  strong,  God  the  beneficent,  1385 

God  ever  mindful  in  all  strife  and  strait, 
Who,  for  our  own  good,  makes  the  need  extreme, 
Till  at  the  last  He  puts  forth  might  and  saves. 
An  old  rhyme  came  into  my  head  and  rang 
Of  how  a  virgin,  for  the  faith  of  God,  x39° 

Hid  herself,  from  the  Paynims  that  pursued, 
In  a  cave's  heart ;  until  a  thunderstone, 
Wrapped  in  a  flame,  revealed  the  couch  and  prey  : 
And  they  laughed — "  Thanks  to  lightning,  ours  at  last ! n 
And  she  cried  "  Wrath  of  God,  assert  His  love  !         1395 
"  Servant  of  God,  thou  fire,  befriend  His  child  ! " 
And  lo,  the  fire  she  grasped  at,  fixed  its  flash, 
Lay  in  her  hand  a  calm  cold  dreadful  sword 


68  THE   RING  AND   THE   BOOK. 

She  brandished  till  pursuers  strewed  the  ground, 

So  did  the  souls  within  them  die  away,  1400 

As  o'er  the  prostrate  bodies,  sworded,  safe, 

She  walked  forth  to  the  solitudes  and  Christ : 

So  should  I  grasp  the  lightning  and  be  saved  ! 

And  still,  as  the  day  wore,  the  trouble  grew 

Whereby  I  guessed  there  would  be  born  a  star,  1405 

Until  at  an  intense  throe  of  the  dusk, 

I  started  up,  was  pushed,  I  dare  to  say, 

Out  on  the  terrace,  leaned  and  looked  at  last 

Where  the  deliverer  waited  me  :  the  same 

Silent  and  solemn  face,  I  first  descried  1410 

At  the  spectacle,  confronted  mine  once  more. 

So  was  that  minute  twice  vouchsafed  me,  so 

The  manhood,  wasted  then,  was  still  at  watch 

To  save  me  yet  a  second  time  :  no  change 

Here,  though  all  else  changed  in  the  changing  world  ! 

I  spoke  on  the  instant,  as  my  duty  bade,  141 6 

In  some  such  sense  as  this,  whatever  the  phrase. 


POMPILIA.  69 


u  Friend,  foolish  words  were  borne  from  you  to  me  ; 

"  Your  soul  behind  them  is  the  pure  strong  wind, 

"  Not  dust  and  feathers  which  its  breath  may  bear :  1420 

"  These  to  the  witless  seem  the  wind  itself, 

"  Since  proving  thus  the  first  of  it  they  feel. 

"  If  by  mischance  you  blew  offence  my  way, 

"  The  straws  are  dropt,  the  wind  desists  no  whit, 

"  And  how  such  strays  were  caught  up  in  the  street  1425 

"  And  took  a  motion  from  you,  why  inquire  ? 

"  I  speak  to  the  strong  soul,  no  weak  disguise. 

"  If  it  be  truth,— why  should  I  doubt  it  truth  ? — 

"  You  serve  God  specially,  as  priests  are  bound, 

"  And  care  about  me,  stranger  as  I  am,  1430 

"  So  far  as  wish  my  good, — that  miracle 

"  I  take  to  intimate  He  wills  you  serve 

"  By  saving  me, — what  else  can  He  direct? 

"  Here  is  the  service.     Since  a  long  while  now, 

"  I  am  in  course  of  being  put  to  death  :  1435 

"  While  death  concerned  nothing  but  me,  I  bowed 

"  The  head  and  bade,  in  heart,  my  husband  strike. 

"  Now  I  imperil  something  more,  it  seems, 

"  Something  that  's  trulier  me  than  this  myself, 


70  THE    RING   AND  THE   BOOK. 

"  Something  I  trust  in  God  and  you  to  save.  1440 

"  You  go  to  Rome,  they  tell  me  :  take  me  there, 
"  Put  me  back  with  my  people  !  " 

He  replied — 
The  first  word  I  heard  ever  from  his  lips, 
All  himself  in  it, — an  eternity  1445 

Of  speech,  to  match  the  immeasurable  depths 
O'  the  soul  that  then  broke  silence — "  I  am  yours." 

So  did  the  star  rise,  soon  to  lead  my  step, 

Lead  on,  nor  pause  before  it  should  stand  still' 

Above  the  House  o'  the  Babe, — my  babe  to  be,         1450 

That  knew  me  first  and  thus  made  me  know  him, 

That  had  his  right  of  life  and  claim  on  mine, 

And  would  not  let  me  die  till  he  was  born, 

But  pricked  me  at  the  heart  to  save  us  both,  1454 

Saying  "  Have  you  the  will  ?     Leave  God  the  way !  " 

And  the  way  was  Caponsacchi — "mine,"  thank  God  ! 

He  was  mine,  he  is  mine,  he  will  be  mine. 

No  pause  i'  the  leading  and  the  light !  I  know, 


POMPILIA.  71 


Next  night  there  was  a  cloud  came,  and  not  he  : 

But  I  prayed  through  the  darkness  till  it  broke  1460 

And  let  him  shine.     The  second  night,  he  came. 

"  The  plan  is  rash ;  the  project  desperate  : 

"  In  such  a  flight  needs  must  I  risk  your  life, 

"  Give  food  for  falsehood,  folly  or  mistake, 

"  Ground  for  your  husband's  rancour  and  revenge" — 

So  he  began  again,  with  the  same  face.  1466 

I  felt  that,  the  same  loyalty — one  star 

Turning  now  red  that  was  so  white  before — 

One  service  apprehended  newly :  just 

A  word  of  mine  and  there  the  white  was  back  !  1470 

"  No,  friend,  for  you  will  take  me  !     'Tis  yourself 
rt  Risk  all,  not  I, — who  let  you,  for  I  trust 
"  In  the  compensating  great  God :  enough  ! 
"  I  know  you  :  when  is  it  that  you  will  come  ?  " 

"  To-morrow  at  the  day's  dawn."     Then  I  heard       1475 
What  I  should  do  :  how  to  prepare  for  flight 
And  where  to  fly. 


72  THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

That  night  my  husband  bade 
"  — You,  whom  I  loathe,  beware  you  break  my  sleep 
"  This  whole  night !    Couch  beside  me  like  the  corpse 
"  I  would  you  were  !  "     The  rest  you  know,  I  think — 
How  I  found  Caponsacchi  and  escaped.  1482 

And  this  man,  men  call  sinner  ?  Jesus  Christ ! 

Of  whom  men  said,  with  mouths  Thyself  mad'st  once, 

"  He  hath  a  devil  " — say  he  was  Thy  saint,  1485 

My  Caponsacchi !     Shield  and  show — unshroud 

In  Thine  own  time  the  glory  of  the  soul 

If  aught  obscure, — if  ink-spot,  from  vile  pens 

Scribbling  a  charge  against  him — (I  was  glad 

Then,  for  the  first  time,  that  I  could  not  write) —      1490 

Flirted  his  way,  have  flecked  the  blaze  ! 

For  me, 
'Tis  otherwise :  let  men  take,  sift  my  thoughts 
— Thoughts  I  throw  like  the  flax  for  sun  to  bleach  ! 
I  did  think,  do  think,  in  the  thought  shall  die,  1495 

That  to  have  Caponsacchi  for  my  guide, 
Ever  the  face  upturned  to  mine,  the  hand 


POMPILIA.  73 


Holding  my  hand  across  the  world, — a  sense 

That  reads,  as  only  such  can  read,  the  mark 

God  sets  on  woman,  signifying  so  1500 

She  should — shall  peradventure — be  divine  ; 

Yet  'ware,  the  while,  how  weakness  mars  the  print 

And  makes  confusion,  leaves  the  thing  men  see, 

— Not  this  man, — who  from  his  own  soul,  re-writes 

The  obliterated  charter, — love  and  strength  1505 

Mending  what's  marred  :  "  So  kneels  a  votarist, 

"  Weeds  some  poor  waste  traditionary  plot 

"  Where  shrine  once  was,  where  temple  yet  may  be, 

"  Purging  the  place  but  worshipping  the  while, 

"  By  faith  and  not  by  sight,  sight  clearest  so, —  15 10 

"  Such  way  the  saints  work," — says  Don  Celestine. 

But  I,  not  privileged  to  see  a  saint 

Of  old  when  such  walked  earth  with  crown  and  palm, 

If  I  call  "  saint "  what  saints  call  something  else — 

The  saints  must  bear  with  me,  impute  the  fault         15 15 

To  a  soul  i'  the  bud,  so  starved  by  ignorance, 

Stinted  of  warmth,  it  will  not  blow  this  year 

Nor  recognize  the  orb  which  Spring-flowers  know. 

But  if  meanwhile  some  insect  with  a  heart 


74  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

Worth  floods  of  lazy  music,  spendthrift  joy —  1520 

Some  fire-fly  renounced  Spring  for  my  dwarfed  cup, 

Crept  close  to  me  with  lustre  for  the  dark, 

Comfort  against  the  cold, — what  though  excess 

Of  comfort  should  miscall  the  creature — sun  ? 

What  did  the  sun  to  hinder  while  harsh  hands  1525 

Petal  by  petal,  crude  and  colourless, 

Tore  me  ?    This  one  heart  brought  me  all  the  Spring  ! 

Is  all  told  ?     There's  the  journey  :  and  where's  time 

To  tell  you  how  that  heart  burst  out  in  shine  ? 

Yet  certain  points  do  press  on  me  too  hard.  I53° 

Each  place  must  have  a  name,  though  I  forget : 

How  strange  it  was — there  where  the  plain  begins 

And  the  small  river  mitigates  its  flow — 

When  eve  was  fading  fast,  and  my  soul  sank, 

And  he  divined  what  surge  of  bitterness,  1535 

In  overtaking  me,  would  float  me  back 

Whence  I  was  carried  by  the  striding  day — 

So, — "  This  grey  place  was  famous  once,"  said  he — 

And  he  began  that  legend  of  the  place 

As  if  in  answer  to  the  unspoken  fear,  1540 


POMPILIA.  75 


And  told  me  all  about  a  brave  man  dead, 

Which  lifted  me  and  let  my  soul  go  on  ! 

How  did  he  know  too, — at  that  town's  approach 

By  the  rock-side, — that  in  coming  near  the  signs, 

Of  life,  the  house-roofs  and  the  church  and  tower,      1545 

I  saw  the  old  boundary  and  wall  o'  the  world 

Rise  plain  as  ever  round  me,  hard  and  cold, 

As  if  the  broken  circlet  joined  again, 

Tightened  itself  about  me  with  no  break, — 

As  if  the  town  would  turn  Arezzo's  self, —  I55° 

The  husband  there, — the  friends  my  enemies, 

All  ranged  against  me,  not  an  avenue 

I  try,  but  would  be  blocked  and  drive  me  back 

On  him, — this  other,  .  .  oh  the  heart  in  that ! 

Did  not  he  find,  bring,  put  into  my  arms  1555 

A  new-born  babe  ? — and  I  saw  faces  beam 

Of  the  young  mother  proud  to  teach  me  joy, 

And  gossips  round  expecting  my  surprise 

At  the  sudden  hole  through  earth  that  lets  in  heaven. 

I  could  believe  himself  by  his  strong  will  1560 

Had  woven  around  me  what  I  thought  the  world 

We  went  along  in,  every  circumstance, 


7  6  THE   RING  AND   THE   BOOK. 

Towns,  flowers  and  faces,  all  things  helped  so  well ! 

For,  through  the  journey,  was  it  natural 

Such  comfort  should  arise  from  first  to  last  ?  1565 

As  I  look  back,  all  is  one  milky  way ; 

Still  bettered  more,  the  more  remembered,  so 

Do  new  stars  bud  while  I  but  search  for  old, 

And  fill  all  gaps  i'  the  glory,  and  grow  him — 

Him  I  now  see  make  the  shine  everywhere.  1570 

Even  at  the  last  when  the  bewildered  flesh, 

The  cloud  of  weariness  about  my  soul 

Clogging  too  heavily,  sucked  down  all  sense, — 

Still  its  last  voice  was,  "He  will  watch  and  care  ; 

"  Let  the  strength  go,  I  am  content :  he  stays  !  "       1575 

I  doubt  not  he  did  stay  and  care  for  all — 

From  that  sick  minute  when  the  head  swam  round, 

And  the  eyes  looked  their  last  and  died  on  him, 

As  in  his  arms  he  caught  me  and,  you  say, 

Carried  me  in,  that  tragical  red  eve,  1580 

And  laid  me  where  I  next  returned  to  life 

In  the  other  red  of  morning,  two  red  plates 

That  crushed  together,  crushed  the  time  between. 

And  are  since  then  a  solid  fire  to  me, — 


POMPILIA.  77 


When  in,  my  dreadful  husband  and  the  world  1585 

Broke, — and  I  saw  him,  master,  by  hell's  right, 
And  saw  my  angel  helplessly  held  back 
By  guards  that  helped  the  malice — the  lamb  prone, 
The  serpent  towering  and  triumphant — then 
Came  all  the  strength  back  in  a  sudden  swell,  1590 

I  did  for  once  see  right,  do  right,  give  tongue 
The  adequate  protest :  for  a  worm  must  turn 
If  it  would  have  its  wrong  observed  by  God. 
I  did  spring  up,  attempt  to  thrust  aside 
That  ice-block  'twixt  the  sun  and  me,  lay  low  1595 

The  neutralizer  of  all  good  and  truth. 
If  I  sinned  so, — never  obey  voice  more 
O'  the  Just  and  Terrible,  who  bids  us — "  Bear !  " 
Not — "  Stand  by,  bear  to  see  my  angels  bear  ! " 
.  I  am  clear  it  was  on  impulse  to  serve  God  1600 

Not  save  myself, — no — nor  my  child  unborn  ! 
Had  I  else  waited  patiently  till  now  ? — 
Who  saw  my  old  kind  parents,  silly-sooth 
And  too  much  trustful,  for  their  worst  of  faults,  1604 

Cheated,  brow-beaten,  stripped  and  starved,  cast  out 
Into  the  kennel :  I  remonstrated, 


jS  THE   RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

Then  sank  to  silence,  for, — their  woes  at  end, 

Themselves  gone, — only  I  was  left  to  plague. 

If  only  I  was  threatened  and  belied, 

What  matter?     I  could  bear  it  and  did  bear;  16 10 

It  was  a  comfort,  still  one  lot  for  all : 

They  were  not  persecuted  for  my  sake 

And  I,  estranged,  the  single  happy  one. 

But  when  at  last,  all  by  myself  I  stood 

Obeying  the  clear  voice  which  bade  me  rise,  161 5 

Not  for  my  own  sake  but  my  babe  unborn, 

And  take  the  angel's  hand  was  sent  to  help — 

And  found  the  old  adversary  athwart  the  path — 

Not  my  hand  simply  struck  from  the  angel's,  but 

The  very  angel's  self  made  foul  i'  the  face  1620 

By  the  fiend  who  struck  there, — that  I  would  not  bear, 

That  only  I  resisted  !     So,  my  first 

And  last  resistance  was  invincible. 

Prayers  move   God;  threats,   and  nothing   else,  move 

men ! 
I  must  have  prayed  a  man  as  he  were  God  1625 

When  I  implored  the  Governor  to  right 
My  parents'  wrongs  :  the  answer  was  a  smile. 


POMPILIA.  79 


The  Archbishop, — did  I  clasp  his  feet  enough, 

Hide  my  face  hotly  on  them,  while  I  told 

More  than  I  dared  make  my  own  mother  know  ?       1630 

The  profit  was — compassion  and  a  jest. 

This  time,  the  foolish  prayers  were  done  with,  right 

Used  might,  and  solemnized  the  sport  at  once. 

All  was  against  the  combat :  vantage,  mine  ? 

The  runaway  avowed,  the  accomplice-wife,  1635 

In  company  with  the  plan-contriving  priest  ? 

Yet,  shame  thus  rank  and  patent,  I  struck,  bare, 

At  foe  from  head  to  foot  in  magic  mail, 

And  off  it  withered,  cobweb-armoury 

Against  the  lightning  !  'T  was  truth  singed  the  lies    1640 

And  saved  me,  not  the  vain  sword  nor  weak  speech  ! 

You  see,  I  will  not  have  the  service  fail ! 

I  say,  the  angel  saved  me  :  I  am  safe  ! 

Others  may  want  and  wish,  I  wish  nor  want 

One  point  o'  the  circle  plainer,  where  I  stand  1645 

Traced  round  about  with  white  to  front  the  world. 

What  of  the  calumny  I  came  across, 

What  o'  the  way  to  the  end  ? — the  end  crowns  all. 


So  THE   RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

The  judges  judged  aright  i'  the  main,  gave  me 

The  uttermost  of  my  heart's  desire,  a  truce  1650 

From  torture  and  Arezzo,  balm  for  hurt 

With  the  quiet  nuns, — God  recompense  the  good  ! 

Who  said  and  sang  away  the  ugly  past. 

And,  when  my  final  fortune  was  revealed, 

What  safety  while,  amid  my  parents'  arms,  1655 

My  babe  was  given  me  !     Yes,  he  saved  my  babe  : 

It  would  not  have  peeped  forth,  the  bird-like  thing, 

Through  that  Arezzo  noise  and  trouble  :  back 

Had  it  returned  nor  ever  let  me  see  ! 

But  the  sweet  peace  cured  all,  and  let  me  live  1660 

And  give  my  bird  the  life  among  the  leaves 

God  meant  him  !     Weeks  and  months  of  quietude, 

I  could  lie  in  such  peace  and  learn  so  much — 

Begin  the  task,  I  see  how  needful  now, 

Of  understanding  somewhat  of  my  past, —  -1665 

Know  life  a  little,  I  should  leave  so  soon. 

Therefore,  because  this  man  restored  my  soul, 

All  has  been  right;  I  have  gained  my  gain,  enjoyed 

As  well  as  suffered, — nay,  got  foretaste  too 

Of  better  life  beginning  where  this  ends —  1670 


POMPILIA.  8 1 


All  through  the  breathing-while  allowed  me  thus, 
Which  let  good  premonitions  reach  my  soul 
Unthwarted,  and  benignant  influence  flow 
And  interpenetrate  and  change  my  heart, 
Uncrossed  by  what  was  wicked, — nay,  unkind.  1675 

For,  as  the  weakness  of  my  time  drew  nigh, 
Nobody  did  me  one  disservice  more, 
Spoke  coldly  or  looked  strangely,  broke  the  love 
I  lay  in  the  arms  of,  till  my  boy  was  born, 
-  Born  all  in  love,  with  nought  to  spoil  the  bliss  1680 

A  whole  long  fortnight :  in  a  life  like  mine 
A  fortnight  filled  with  bliss  is  long  and  much. 
All  women  are  not  mothers  of  a  boy, 
Though  they  live  twice  the  length  of  my  whole  life, 
And,  as  they  fancy,  happily  all  the  same.  1685 

There  I  lay,  then,  all  my  great  fortnight  long, 
As  if  it  would  continue,  broaden  out 
Happily  more  and  more,  and  lead  to  heaven  : 
Christmas  before  me, — was  not  that  a  chance  ? 
I  never  realized  God's  birth  before —  1690 

How  he  grew  likest  God  in  being  born. 
This  time  I  felt  like  Alary,  had  my  babe 

vol.  in.  G 


82  THE    RING  AND   THE    BOOK. 


Lying  a  little  on  my  breast  like  hers. 

So  all  went  on  till,  just  four  days  ago — 

The  night  and  the  tap.  1695 

O  it  shall  be  success 
To  the  whole  of  our  poor  family  !     My  friends 
.  .  Nay,  father  and  mother, — give  me  back  my  word  ! 
They  have  been  rudely  stripped  of  life,  disgraced 
Like  children  who  must  needs  go  clothed  too  fine,    1700 
Carry  the  garb  of  Carnival  in  Lent : 
If  they  too  much  affected  frippery, 
They  have  been  punished  and  submit  themselves, 
Say  no  word  :  all  is  over,  they  see  God 
Who  will  not  be  extreme  to  mark  their  fault  1705 

Or  He  had  granted  respite  :  they  are  safe. 

For  that  most  woeful  man  my  husband  once, 

Who,  needing  respite,  still  draws  vital  breath, 

I — pardon  him  ?     So  far  as  lies  in  me, 

I  give  him  for  his  good  the  life  he  takes,  17 10 

Praying  the  world  will  therefore  acquiesce. 

Let  him  make  God  amends,— none,  none  to  me 


POMPILIA.  83 


Who  thank  him  rather  that,  whereas  strange  fate 

Mockingly  styled  him  husband  and  me  wife, 

Himself  this  way  at  least  pronounced  divorce,  1 7 1 5 

Blotted  the  marriage-bond  :  this  blood  of  mine 

Flies  forth  exultingly  at  any  door, 

Washes  the  parchment  white,  and  thanks  the  blow. 

We  shall  not  meet  in  this  world  nor  the  next, 

But  where  will  God  be  absent  ?     In  His  face  1720 

Is  light,  but  in  His  shadow  healing  too  : 

Let  Guido  touch  the  shadow  and  be  healed  ! 

And  as  my  presence  was  importunate, — 

My  earthly  good,  temptation  and  a  snare, — 

Nothing  about  me  but  drew  somehow  down  1725 

His  hate  upon  me, — somewhat  so  excused 

Therefore,  since  hate  was  thus  the  truth  of  him, — 

May  my  evanishment  for  evermore 

Help  further  to  relieve  the  heart  that  cast 

Such  object  of  its  natural  loathing  forth !  1730 

So  he  was  made  ;  he  nowise  made  himself : 

I  could  not  love  him,  but  his  mother  did. 

His  soul  has  never  lain  beside  my  soul ; 

But  for  the  unresisting  body, — thanks  ! 


84  THE   RING  AND   THE   BOOK. 

He  burned  that  garment  spotted  by  the  flesh  !  1735 

Whatever  he  touched  is  rightly  ruined  :  plague 
It  caught,  and  disinfection  it  had  craved 
Still  but  for  Guido  ;  I  am  saved  through  him 
So  as  by  fire  ;  to  him — thanks  and  farewell ! 

Even  for  my  babe,  my  boy,  there's  safety  thence —  1740 

From  the  sudden  death  of  me,  I  mean  :  we  poor 

Weak  souls,  how  we  endeavour  to  be  strong  ! 

I  was  already  using  up  my  life, — 

This  portion,  now,  should  do  him  such  a  good, 

This  other  go  to  keep  off  such  an  ill !  1745 

The  great  life ;  see,  a  breath  and  it  is  gone  ! 

So  is  detached,  so  left  all  by  itself 

The  little  life,  the  fact  which  means  so  much. 

Shall  not  God  stoop  the  kindlier  to  His  work, 

His  marvel  of  creation,  foot  would  crush,  1750 

Now  that  the  hand  He  trusted  to  receive 

And  hold  it,  lets  the  treasure  fall  perforce  ? 

The  better ;  He  shall  have  in  orphanage 

His  own  way  all  the  clearlier :  if  my  babe 

Outlive  the  hour — and  he  has  lived  two  weeks —       1755 


POMPILIA.  85 


It  is  through  God  who  knows  I  am  not  by. 

Who  is  it  makes  the  soft  gold  hair  turn  black, 

And  sets  the  tongue,  might  lie  so  long  at  rest, 

Trying  to  talk  ?     Let  us  leave  God  alone  ! 

Why  should  I  doubt  He  will  explain  in  time  1760 

What  I  feel  now,  but  fail  to  find  the  words  ? 

My  babe  nor  was,  nor  is,  nor  yet  shall  be 

Count  Guido  Franceschini's  child  at  all — 

Only  his  mother's,  born  of  love  not  hate  ! 

So  shall  I  have  my  rights  in  after-time.  1765 

It  seems  absurd,  impossible  to-day  ; 

So  seems  so  much  else  not  explained  but  known. 

Ah  !     Friends,  I  thank  and  bless  you  every  one  ! 

No  more  now  :  I  withdraw  from  earth  and  man 

To  my  own  soul,  compose  myself  for  God.  1770 

Well,  and  there  is  more  !     Yes,  my  end  of  breath 

Shall  bear  away  my  soul  in  being  true  ! 

He  is  still  here,  not  outside  with  the  world, 

Here,  here,  I  have  him  in  his  rightful  place  ! 

'T  is  now,  when  I  am  most  upon  the  move,  1775 


S6  THE   RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

I  feel  for  what  I  verily  find — again 

The  face,  again  the  eyes,  again,  through  all, 

The  heart  and  its  immeasurable  love 

Of  my  one  friend,  my  only,  all  my  own, 

Who  put  his  breast  between  the  spears  and  me.         1780 

Ever  with  Caponsacchi !     Otherwise 

Here  alone  would  be  failure,  loss  to  me — 

How  much  more  loss  to  him,  with  life  debarred 

From  giving  life,  love  locked  from  love's  display,       1784 

The  day-star  stopped  its  task  that  makes  night  morn  ! 

O  lover  of  my  life,  O  soldier-saint, 

No  work  begun  shall  ever  pause  for  death  ! 

Love  will  be  helpful  to  me  more  and  more 

I'  the  coming  course,  the  new  path  I  must  tread, 

My  weak  hand  in  thy  strong  hand,  strong  for  that !    1790 

Tell  him  that  if  I  seem  without  him  now, 

That's  the  world's  insight !     Oh,  he  understands  ! 

He  is  at  Civita — do  I  once  doubt 

The  world  again  is  holding  us  apart  ? 

He  had  been  here,  displayed  in  my  behalf  1795 

The  broad  brow  that  reverberates  the  truth, 

And  flashed  the  word  God  gave  him,  back  to  man  ! 


POMPILIA.  87 


I  know  where  the  free  soul  is  flown  !     My  fate 

Will  have  been  hard  for  even  him  to  bear  : 

Let  it  confirm  him  in  the  trust  of  God,  1800 

Showing  how  holily  he  dared  the  deed  ! 

And,  for  the  rest, — say,  from  the  deed,  no  touch 

Of  harm  came,  but  all  good,  all  happiness, 

Not  one  faint  fleck  of  failure  !     Why  explain  ? 

What  I  see,  oh,  he  sees  and  how  much  more  !  1805 

Tell  him, — I  know  not  wherefore  the  true  word 

Should  fade  and  fall  unuttered  at  the  last — 

It  was  the  name  of  him  I  sprang  to  meet 

When  came  the  knock,  the  summons  and  the  end.     1809 

"  My  great  heart,  my  strong  hand  are  back  again  ! " 

I  would  have  sprung  to  these,  beckoning  across 

Murder  and  hell  gigantic  and  distinct 

O'  the  threshold,  posted  to  exclude  me  heaven  : 

He  is  ordained  to  call  and  I  to  come  !  18 14 

Do  not  the  dead  wear  flowers  when  dressed  for  God  ? 

Say, — I  am  all  in  flowers  from  head  to  foot ! 

Say, — not  one  flower  of  all  he  said  and  did, 

Might  seem  to  flit  unnoticed,  fade  unknown, 

But  dropped  a  seed  has  grown  a  balsam-tree 


88  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

Whereof  the  blossoming  perfumes  the  place  1820 

At  this  supreme  of  moments  !     He  is  a  priest ; 

He  cannot  marry  therefore,  which  is  right : 

I  think  he  would  not  marry  if  he  could. 

Marriage  on  earth  seems  such  a  counterfeit, 

Mere  imitation  of  the  inimitable  :  1825 

In  heaven  we  have  the  real  and  true  and  sure. 

'T  is  there  they  neither  marry  nor  are  given 

In  marriage  but  are  as  the  angels  :  right, 

Oh  how  right  that  is,  how  like  Jesus  Christ 

To  say  that !     Marriage-making  for  the  earth,  1830 

With  gold  so  much, — birth,  power,  repute  so  much, 

Or  beauty,  youth  so  much,  in  lack  of  these  ! 

Ee  as  the  angels  rather,  who,  apart, 

Know  themselves  into  one,  are  found  at  length 

Married,  but  marry  never,  no,  nor  give  1835 

In  marriage ;  they  are  man  and  wife  at  once 

When  the  true  time  is  :  here  we  have  to  wait 

Not  so  long  neither  !     Could  we  by  a  wish 

Have  what  we  will  and  get  the  future  now, 

Would  we  wish  aught  done  undone  in  the  past  ?        1840 

So,  let  him  wait  God's  instant  men  call  years ; 


POMPILIA.  89 


Meantime  hold  hard  by  truth  and  his  great  soul, 

Do  out  the  duty  !     Through  such  souls  alone 

God  stooping  shows  sufficient  of  His  light 

For  us  i'  the  dark  to  rise  by.     And  I  rise.  1845 


(     9o     ) 


VIII. 

DOMINUS    HYACINTHUS    DE 
ARCHANGELIS, 

PAUPERUM    PROCURATOR. 

Ah,  my  Giacinto,  he 's  no  ruddy  rogue, 

Is  not  Cinone  ?    What,  to-day  we  're  eight  ? 

Seven  and  one  's  eight,  I  hope,  old  curly-pate  ! 

— Branches  me  out  his  verb-tree  on  the  slate, 

Amo  -as  -avi  -atum  -are  -ans,  5 

Up  to  -aturus,  person,  tense,  and  mood, 

Quies  me  cum  subjunctivo  (I  could  cry) 

And  chews  Corderius  with  his  morning  crust ! 

Look  eight  years  onward,  and  he  's  perched,  he 's  perched, 

Dapper  and  deft  on  stool  beside  this  chair,  10 


DOMINUS    HYACINTHUS   DE   ARCHANGELIS.  9 1 

Cinozzo,  Cinoncello,  who  but  he  ? 
— Trying  his  milk-teeth  on  some  crusty  case 
Like  this,  papa  shall  triturate  full  soon 
To  smooth  Papinianian  pulp  ! 

It  trots  15 

Already  through  my  head,  though  noon  be  now, 
Does  supper-time  and  what  belongs  to  eve. 
Dispose,  O  Don,  o'  the  day,  first  work  then  play ! 
— The  proverb  bids.      And   u  then "   means,  won't  we 

hold 
Our  little  yearly  lovesome  frolic  feast,  20 

Cinuolo's  birth-night,  Cinicello's  own, 
That  makes  gruff  January  grin  perforce  ! 
For  too  contagious  grows  the  mirth,  the  warmth 
Escaping  from  so  many  hearts  at  once — 
When  the  good  wife,  buxom  and  bonny  yet,  25 

Jokes  the  hale  grandsire, — such  are  just  the  sort 
To  go  off  suddenly, — he  who  hides  the  key 
O'  the  box  beneath  his  pillow  every  night, — 
Which  box  may  hold  a  parchment  (some  one  thinks) 
Will  show  a  scribbled  something  like  a  name  30 

"  Cinino,  Ciniccino,"  near  the  end, 


92  THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

"  To  whom  I  give  and  I  bequeath  my  lands, 

"  Estates,  tenements,  hereditaments, 

"  When  I  decease  as  honest  grandsire  ought : " 

Wherefore — yet  this  one  time  again  perhaps — -  35 

Sha'n't  my  Orvieto  fuddle  his  old  nose  ! 

Then,  uncles,  one  or  the  other,  well  i'  the  world, 

May — drop  in,  merely  ? — trudge  through  rain  and  wind, 

Rather  !     The  smell-feasts  rouse  them  at  the  hint 

There  's  cookery  in  a  certain  dwelling-place  !  40 

Gossips,  too,  each  with  keepsake  in  his  poke, 

Will  pick  the  way,  thrid  lane  by  lantern-light, 

And  so  find  door,  put  galligaskin  off 

At  entry  of  a  decent  domicile 

Cornered  in  snug  Condotti, — all  for  love,  45 

All  to  crush  cup  with  Cinucciatolo  ! 

Well, 
Let  others  climb  the  heights  o'  the  court,  the  camp  ! 
How  vain  are  chambering  and  wantonness, 
Revel  and  rout  and  pleasures  that  make  mad  !  50 

Commend  me  to  home-joy,  the  family  board, 
Altar  and  hearth  !     These,  with  a  brisk  career, 
A  source  of  honest  profit  and  good  fame, 


DOMINUS    HYACINTHUS    DE    ARCHANGELIS.  93 

Just  so  much  work  as  keeps  the  brain  from  rust, 

Just  so  much  play  as  lets  the  heart  expand,  55 

Honouring  God  and  serving  man, — I  say, 

These  are  reality,  and  all  else, — fluff, 

Nutshell  and  naught, — thank  Flaccus  for  the  phrase  ! 

Suppose  I  had  been  Fisc,  yet  bachelor  ! 

Why,  work  with  a  will,  then  !     Wherefore  lazy  now?    60 

Turn  up  the  hour-glass,  whence  no  sand-grain  slips 

But  should  have  done  its  duty  to  the  saint 

O'  the  day,  the  son  and  heir  that 's  eight  years  old  ! 

Let  law  come  dimple  Cinoncino's  cheek, 

And  Latin  dumple  Cinarello's  chin,  65 

The  while  we  spread  him  fine  and  toss  him  flat 

This  pulp  that  makes  the  pancake,  trim  our  mass 

Of  matter  into  Argument  the  First, 

Prime  Pleading  in  defence  of  our  accused, 

Which,  once  a- waft  on  paper  wing,  shall  soar,  70 

Shall  signalise  before  applausive  Rome 

What  study,  and  mayhap  some  mother-wit, 

Can  do  toward  making  Master  fop  and  Fisc 

Old  bachelor  Bottinius  bite  his  thumb. 


94  THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

Now,  how  good  God  is  !     How  falls  plumb  to  point     7  5 

This  murder,  gives  me  Guido  to  defend 

Now,  of  all  days  i'  the  year,  just  when  the  boy 

Verges  on  Virgil,  reaches  the  right  age 

For  some  such  illustration  from  his  sire, 

Stimulus  to  himself !     One  might  wait  years  80 

And  never  find  the  chance  which  now  finds  me  ! 

The  fact  is,  there  's  a  blessing  on  the  hearth, 

A  special  providence  for  fatherhood  ! 

Here 's  a  man,  and  what 's  more,  a  noble,  kills 

— Not  sneakingly  but  almost  with  parade —  85 

Wife's  father  and  wife's  mother  and  wife's  self 

That 's  mother's  self  of  son  and  heir  (like  mine  !) 

— And  here  stand  I,  the  favoured  advocate, 

Who  pluck  this  flower  o'  the  field,  no  Solomon 

Was  ever  clothed  in  glorious  gold  to  match,  90 

And  set  the  same  in  Cinoncino's  cap  ! 

I  defend  Guido  and  his  comrades — I ! 

Pray  God,  I  keep  me  humble  :  not  to  me — ■ 

Non  nobis,  Domine,  sed  tibi  laics  ! 

How  the  fop  chuckled  when  they  made  him  Fisc  !        95 

We  '11  beat  you,  my  Bottinius,  all  for  love, 


DOMINUS   HYACINTHUS   DE   ARCHANGELIS.  95 

All  for  our  tribute  to  Cinotto's  day  ! 

Why,  'sbuddikins,  old  Innocent  himself 

May  rub  his  eyes  at  the  bustle, — ask  "  What's  this 

"  Rolling  from  out  the  rostrum,  as  a  gust  ioo 

"  O'  the  Pro  Milone  had  been  prisoned  there, 

"  And  rattled  Rome  awake  ?  "     Awaken  Rome, 

How  can  the  Pope  doze  on  in  decency  ? 

He  needs  must  wake  up  also,  speak  his  word, 

Have  his  opinion  like  the  rest  of  Rome,  105 

About  this  huge,  this  hurly-burly  case  : 

He  wants  who  can  excogitate  the  truth, 

Give  the  result  in  speech,  plain  black  and  white, 

To  mumble  in  the  mouth  and  make  his  own 

— A  little  changed,  good  man,  a  little  changed  !  no 

No  matter,  so  his  gratitude  be  moved, 

By  when  my  Giacintino  gets  of  age, 

Mindful  of  who  thus  helped  him  at  a  pinch, 

Archangelus  Procurator  Pauperum — 

And  proved  Hortensius  Redivivas  !  1Ir> 

Whew ! 
To  earn  the  Est-est,  merit  the  minced  herb 
That  mollifies  the  liver's  leathery  slice, 


g6  THE   RING  AND   THE   BOOK. 

With  here  a  goose-foot,  there  a  cock's-comb  stuck, 

Cemented  in  an  element  of  cheese  !  120 

I  doubt  if  dainties  do  the  grandsire  good  : 

Last  June  he  had  a  sort  of  strangling  .  .  .  bah  ! 

He  's  his  own  master,  and  his  will  is  made. 

So,  liver  fizz,  law  flit  and  Latin  fly 

As  we  rub  hands  o'er  dish  by  way  of  grace  !  125 

May  I  lose  cause  if  I  vent  one  word  more 

Except, — with  fresh-cut  quill  we  ink  the  white, — 

P-r-o-pro  Giddone  et  Sociis.     There  ! 

Count  Guido  married — or,  in  Latin  due, 

What  ?  Duxit  in  uxor  em  ? — commonplace  !  130 

Tcedas  jugales  iniit,  subiit, — ha  ! 

He  underwent  the  matrimonial  torch  ? 

Connubio  stabili  sibijunxit, — hum  ! 

In  stable  bond  of  marriage  bound  his  own  ? 

That 's  clear  of  any  modern  taint:  and  yet  ...  135 

Virgil  is  little  help  to  who  writes  prose. 
He  shall  attack  me  Terence  with  the  dawn, 
Shall  Cinuccino  !     Mum,  mind  business,  Sir  ! 


DOMINUS    HYACINTHUS    DE   ARCHANGELIS.  97 

Thus  circumstantially  evolve  we  facts, 

It  a  se  habet  ideo  series  facti :  140 

He  wedded, — ah,  with  owls  for  augury  ! 

JViipserat,  hen  sinistris  avibus, 

One  of  the  blood  Arezzo  boasts  her  best, 

Domimis  Guido,  nobili  genere  ortus, 

Pompilice  .  .  . 

But  the  version  afterward  !  145 

Curb  we  this  ardour !     Notes  alone,  to-day, 
The  speech  to-morrow  and  the  Latin  last : 
Such  was  the  rule  in  Farinacci's  time. 
Indeed  I  hitched  it  into  verse  and  good. 
Unluckily,  law  quite  absorbs  a  man,  150 

Or  else  I  think  I  too  had  poetized. 
"  Law  is  the  pork  substratum  of  the  fry, 
"  Goose-foot  and  cocks-comb  are  Latinity," — 
And  in  this  case,  if  circumstance  assist, 
We  '11  garnish  law  with  idiom,  never  fear  !  155 

Out-of-the-way  events  extend  our  scope  : 
For  instance,  when  Bottini  brings  his  charge, 
"  That  letter  which  you  say  Pompilia  wrote, 

VOL.  III.  h 


9$  THE   RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

"  To  criminate  her  parents  and  herself 

"  And  disengage  her  husband  from  the  coil, —  160 

"  That,  Guido  Franceschini  wrote,  say  we  : 

"  Because  Pompilia  could  nor  read  nor  write, 

"  Therefore  he  pencilled  her  such  letter  first, 

"  Then  made  her  trace  in  ink  the  same  again." 

— Ha,  my  Bottini,  have  I  thee  on  hip  ?  165 

How  will  he  turn  this  nor  break  Tully's  pate  ? 

"  Existimandum  "  (do  n't  I  hear  the  dog  !) 

"  Quod  Guido  designaverit  elementa 

"  Dictce  epistolcz,  qucz  fuerint 

"  {Superinducto  ab  ea  calamd)  170 

"  Notata  atramento  " — there  's  a  style  ! — 

"  Quia  ipsa  s crib  ere  nesciebat"     Boh  ! 

Now,  my  turn  !     Either,  Insulse  ! — I  outburst, 

Stupidly  put !     Inane  is  the  response, 

Ina?iis  est  responsio,  or  the  like —  175 

To-wit,  that  each  of  all  those  characters, 

Quod  singula  elementa  epistolce. 

Had  first  of  all  been  traced  for  her  by  him, 

Fuer ant  per  eum  prius  designata, 

And  then,  the  ink  applied  a-top  of  that,  180 


D0M1NUS    HYACINTHUS    DE    ARCHANGELIS.  99 

Et  delude,  superinducto  calamo, 

The  piece,  she  says,  became  her  handiwork, 

Per  earn,  efformata,  ut  ipsa  asserit 

Inane  were  such  response  !  (a  second  time  : ) 

Her  husband  outlined  her  the  whole,  forsooth  ?  185 

Vir  ejus  lineabat  epislolam  ? 
What,  she  confesses  that  she  wrote  the  thing, 
Fatetur  earn  scripsisse,  (scorn  that  scathes  !) 
That  she  might  pay  obedience  to  her  lord  ? 

Ut  viro  obtemperaret,  apices  190 

(Here  repeat  charge  with  proper  varied  phrase) 
Eo  designante,  ipsaque  calamum 

Super  inducente  ?     By  such  argument, 

Ita  par  iter,  she  seeks  to  show  the  same, 

(Ay,  by  Saint  Joseph  and  what  saints  you  please)        195 

Epistolam  ostendit,  medius  fidius, 

No  voluntary  deed  but  fruit  of  force  ! 

N071  voluntarie  sed  coacte  scriptam  ! 

That 's  the  way  to  write  Latin,  friend  my  Fisc  ! 

Bottini  is  a  beast,  one  barbarous  :  200 

Look  out  for  him  when  he  attempts  to  say 

"  Armed  with  a  pistol,  Guido  followed  her !  " 


THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 


Will  not  I  be  beforehand  with  my  Fisc, 

Cut  away  phrase  by  phrase  from  underfoot  ! 

Guido  Pompiliam — Guido  thus  his  wife  205 

Following  with  igneous  engine,  shall  I  have  ? 

Armis  munitus  igneis  persequens — 

Arma  sulphured  gestans,  sulphury  arms, 

Or,  might  one  style  a  pistol — popping-piece  ? 

Armatus  breviori  sclopulo  ?  2  jo 

We  '11  let  him  have  been  armed  so,  though  it  make 

Somewhat  against  us  :  I  had  thought  to  own — 

Provided  with  a  simple  travelling-sword, 

Ense  solummodo  viator io 

Instruclus :  but  we  '11  grant  the  pistol  here  :  2  t  5 

Better  we  lost  the  cause  than  lacked  the  gird 

At  the  Fisc's  Latin,  lost  the  Judge's  laugh ! 

It  's  Venturini  that  decides  for  style. 

Tommati  rather  goes  upon  the  law. 

So,  as  to  law, —  220 

Ah,  but  with  law  ne'er  hope 
To  level  the  fellow, — do  'nt  I  know  his  trick  ! 
How  he  draws  up,  ducks  under,  twists  aside  ! 


DOMINUS    HYACINTHUS    DE    ARCHANGELIS.  IOI 

He  's  a  lean-gutted  hectic  rascal,  fine 

As  pale-haired  red-eyed  ferret  which  pretends  225 

'T  is  ermine,  pure  soft  snow  from  tail  to  snout. 

He  eludes  law  by  piteous  looks  aloft, 

Lets  Latin  glance  off  as  he  makes  appeal 

To  the  saint  that  's  somewhere  in  the  ceiling-top, — 

Do  you  suppose  that  I  do  n't  see  the  beast  ?  230 

Plague  of  the  ermine-vermin  !     For  it  takes, 

It  takes,  and  here  's  the  fellow  Fisc,  you  see, 

And  Judge,  you  '11  not  be  long  in  seeing  next  ! 

Confound  the  fop — he  's  now  at  work  like  me  : 

Enter  his  study,  as  I  seem  to  do,  235 

Hear  him  read  out  his  writing  to  himself ! 

I  know  he  writes  as  if  he  spoke  :  I  hear 

The  hoarse  shrill  throat,  see  shut  eyes,  neck  shot-forth, 

— I  see  him  strain  on  tiptoe,  soar  and  pour 

Eloquence  out,  nor  stay  nor  stint  at  all —  240 

Perorate  in  the  air,  and  so,  to  press 

With  the  product !     What  abuse  of  type  is  here  ! 

He  '11  keep  clear  of  my  cast,  my  logic-throw, 

Let  argument  slide,  and  then  deliver  swift 

Some  bowl  from  quite  an  unguessed  point  of  stand  — 


THE   RING  AND   THE    BOOK. 


Having  the  luck  o'  the  last  word,  the  reply  !  246 

A  plaguy  cast,  a  mortifying  stroke : 

You  face  a  fellow — cries  "  So,  there  you  stand  ? 

"  But  I  discourteous  jump  clean  o'er  your  head  ! 

"  You  play  ship-carpenter,  not  pilot  so, —  250 

"  Stop  rat-holes,  while  a  sea  sweeps  through  the  breach, — 

"  Hammer  and  fortify  at  puny  points  ! 

"  Do,  clamp  and  tenon,  make  all  tight  and  safe  ! 

"  Tis  here  and  here  and  here  you  ship  a  sea, 

"  No  good  of  your  stopped  leaks  and  littleness  !  "       255 

Yet  what  do  I  name  " little  and  a  leak?  " 

The  main  defence  o'  the  murder  's  used  to  death, 

By  this  time,  dry  bare  bones,  no  scrap  to  pick  : 

Safer  I  worked  at  the  new,  the  unforeseen, 

The  nice  bye-stroke,  the  fine  and  improvised,  260 

Point  that  can  titillate  the  brain  o'  the  Bench 

Torpid  with  over-teaching,  by  this  time  ! 

As  if  Tommati,  that  has  heard,  reheard 

And  heard  again,  first  this  side  and  then  that, — 

Guido  and  Pietro,  Pietro  and  Guido  din  265 

And  deafen,  full  three  years,  at  each  long  ear, — 


DOMINUS    HYACINTHUS    DE   ARCHANGELIS.  103 

Do  n't  want  amusement  for  instruction  now, 

Won't  rather  feel  a  flea  run  o'er  his  ribs, 

Than  a  daw  settle  heavily  on  his  head ! 

Oh,  I  was  young  and  had  the  trick  of  fence,  270 

Knew  subtle  pass  and  push  with  careless  right — 

The  left  arm  ever  quietly  behind  back 

With  the  dagger  in  't :  not  both  hands  to  blade  ! 

Puff  and  blow,  put  the  strength  out,  Blunderbore  ! 

That 's  my  subordinate,  young  Spreti,  now,  275 

Pedant  and  prig, — he  '11  pant  away  at  proof, 

That 's  his  way  ! 

Now  for  mine — to  rub  some  life 
Into  one's  choppy  fingers  this  cold  day ! 
I  trust  Cinuzzo  ties  on  tippet,  guards  280 

The  precious  throat  on  which  so  much  depends  ! 
Guido  must  be  all  goose-flesh  in  his  hole, 
Despite  the  prison-straw :  bad  Carnival 
For  captives  !  no  sliced  fry  for  him,  poor  Count ! 

Carnival-time, — another  providence  !  285 

The  town  a-swarm  with  strangers  to  amuse, 


104  THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

To  edify,  to  give  one's  name  and  fame 

In  charge  of,  till  they  find,  some  future  day, 

Cintino  come  and  claim  it,  his  name  too, 

Pledge  of  the  pleasantness  they  owe  papa —  290 

Who  else  was  it,  cured  Rome  of  her  great  qualms, 

When  she  must  needs  have  her  own  judgment  ? — ay 

Since  all  her  topping  wits  had  set  to  work, 

Pronounced  already  on  the  case  :  mere  boys, 

Twice  Cineruggiolo's  age  and  half  his  sense,  295 

As  good  as  tell  me,  when  I  cross  the  court, 

"  Master  Arcangeli !  "  (plucking  at  my  gown) 

"  We  can  predict,  we  comprehend  your  play, 

"  We  '11  help  you  save  your  client."     Tra-la-la  ! 

I  Ve  travelled  ground,  from  childhood  till  this  hour,   300 

To  have  the  town  anticipate  my  track ! 

The  old  fox  takes  the  plain  and  velvet  path, 

The  young  hound's  predilection, — prints  the  dew, 

Do  n't  he,  to  suit  their  pulpy  pads  of  paw  ? 

No  !     Burying  nose  deep  down  i'  the  briery  bush,        305 

Thus  I  defend  Count  Guido. 

Where  are  we  weak  ? 
First,  which  is  foremost  in  advantage  too, 


D0M1NUS    HYACINTHUS    DE   ARCHANGELIS. 


Our  murder, — we  call,  killing, — is  a  fact 

Confessed,  defended,  made  a  boast  of:  good  !  310 

To  think  the  Fisc  claimed  use  of  torture  here, 

And  got  thereby  avowal  plump  and  plain 

That  gives  me  just  the  chance  I  wanted, — scope 

Not  for  brute-force  but  ingenuity, 

Explaining  matters,  not  denying  them  !  315 

One  may  dispute, — as  I  am  bound  to  do, 

And  shall, — validity  of  process  here  : 

Inasmuch  as  a  noble  is  exempt 

From  torture  which  plebeians  undergo 

In  such  a  case  :  for  law  is  lenient,  lax,  320 

Remits  the  torture  to  a  nobleman 

Unless  suspicion  be  of  twice  the  strength 

Attaches  to  a  man  born  vulgarly  : 

We  do  n't  card  silk  with  comb  that  dresses  wool. 

Moreover,  'twas  severity  undue  325 

In  this  case,  even  had  the  lord  been  lout. 

What  utters,  on  this  head,  our  oracle, 

Our  Farinacci,  my  Gamaliel  erst, 

In  those  immortal  "  Questions  ?  "     What  I  quote  : 

"  Of  all  the  tools  at  Law's  disposal,  sure  330 


106  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

"  That  named  Vigiliarum  is  the  best — 

"  That  is,  the  worst — to  whoso  has  to  bear  : 

"  Lasting,  as  it  may  do,  from  some  seven  hours 

"  To  ten,  (beyond  ten,  we  Ve  no  precedent ; 

"  Certain  have  touched  their  ten  but,  bah,  they  died ! ) 

"  It^does  so  efficaciously  convince  336 

"  That, — speaking  by  much  observation  here, — 

"  Out  of  each  hundred  cases,  by  my  count, 

"  Never  I  knew  of  patients  beyond  four 

"  Withstand  its  taste,  or  less  than  ninety-six  340 

"  End  by  succumbing :  only  martyrs  four, 

"  Of  obstinate  silence,  guilty  or  no, — against 

"  Ninety-six  full  confessors,  innocent 

"  Or  otherwise,— so  shrewd  a  tool  have  we  !  " 

No  marvel  either  :  in  unwary  hands,  345 

Death  on  the  spot  is  no  rare  consequence  : 

As  indeed  all  but  happened  in  this  case 

To  one  of  ourselves,  our  young  tough  peasant-friend 

The  accomplice  called  Baldeschi :  they  were  rough, 

Dosed  him  with  torture  as  you  drench  a  horse,  350 

Not  modify  your  treatment  to  a  man : 

So,  two  successive  days  he  fainted  dead, 


DOMINUS    HYACINTHUS   DE   ARCHANGELIS.  107 

And  only  on  the  third  essay,  gave  up, 

Confessed  like  flesh  and  blood.     We  could  reclaim, — 

Blockhead  Bottini  giving  cause  enough  !  355 

But  no, — we  '11  take  it  as  spontaneously 

Confessed  :  we  '11  have  the  murder  beyond  doubt. 

Ah,  fortunate  (the  poet's  word  reversed) 

Inasmuch  as  we  know  our  happiness  ! 

Had  the  antagonist  left  dubiety,  360 

Here  were  we  proving  murder  a  mere  myth, 

And  Guido  innocent,  ignorant,  absent, — ay, 

Absent !     He  was — why,  where  should  Christian  be  ? — 

Engaged  in  visiting  his  proper  church, 

The  duty  of  us  all  at  Christmas-time  \  365 

When  Caponsacchi,  the  seducer,  stung 

To  madness  by  his  relegation,  cast 

About  him  and  contrived  a  remedy  : 

To  stave  off  what  opprobrium  broke  afresh, 

By  the  birth  o'  the  babe,  on  him  the  imputed  sire,      370 

He  came  and  quietly  sought  to  smother  up 

His  shame  and  theirs  together, — killed  the  three, 

And  fled — (go  seek  him  where  you  please  to  search) — 

Just  at  the  moment,  Guido,  touched  by  grace, 


108  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

Devotions  ended,  hastened  to  the  spot,  375 

Meaning  to  pardon  his  convicted  wife, 

"  Neither  do  I  condemn  thee,  go  in  peace  !  " — 

Who  thus  arrived  i'  the  nick  of  time  to  catch 

The  charge  o'  the  killing,  though  great-heartedly 

He  came  but  to  forgive  and  bring  to  life.  380 

Doubt  ye  the  force  of  Christmas  on  the  soul  ? 

"  Is  thine  eye  evil  because  mine  is  good  ?  " 

So,  doubtless,  had  I  needed  argue  here 

But  for  the  full  confession  round  and  sound  ! 

Thus  would  you  have  some  kingly  alchemist, —  385 

Whose  concern  should  not  be  with  proving  brass 

Transmutable  to  gold,  but  triumphing, 

Rather,  above  his  gold  changed  out  of  brass, 

Not  vulgarly  to  the  mere  sight  and  touch, 

But  in  the  idea,  the  spiritual  display,  390 

Proud  apparition  buoyed  by  winged  words 

Hovering  above  its  birth-place  in  the  brain, — 

Here  would  you  have  this  excellent  personage 

Forced,  by  the  gross  need,  to  gird  apron  round, 

Plant  forge,  light  fire,  ply  bellows, — in  a  word,  395 


DOMINUS    HYACINTHUS   DE   ARCHANGELIS.  109 

Demonstrate — when  a  faulty  pipkin's  crack 

May  disconcert  you  his  presumptive  truth  ! 

Here  were  I  hanging  to  the  testimony 

Of  one  of  these  poor  rustics — four,  ye  Gods  ! 

Whom  the  first  taste  of  friend  the  Fiscal's  cord  400 

Might  drive  into  undoing  my  whole  speech, 

Shaming  truth  so ! 

I  wonder,  all  the  same, 
Not  so  much  at  those  peasants'  lack  of  heart ; 
But — Guido  Franceschini,  nobleman,  405 

Bear  pain  no  better  !     Everybody  knows 
It  used  once,  when  my  father  was  a  boy, 
To  form  a  proper,  nay,  important  point 
I'  the  education  of  our  well-born  youth, 
To  take  the  torture  handsomely  at  need,  4T0 

Without  confessing  in  this  clownish  guise. 
Each  noble  had  his  rack  for  private  use, 
And  would,  for  the  diversion  of  a  guest, 
Bid  it  be  set  up  in  the  yard  of  arms, 
To  take  thereon  his  hour  of  exercise, —  415 

Command  the  varletry  stretch,  strain  their  best, 
While  friends  looked  on,  admired  my  lord  could  smile 


THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 


'Mid  tugging  which  had  caused  an  ox  to  roar. 
Men  are  no  longer  men  ! 

— And  advocates  420 

No  longer  Farinacci,  let  men  add, 
If  I  one  more  time  fly  from  point  proposed  ! 
So,  Vindication — here  begins  the  same  ! — 
Honoris  causa;  so  we  make  our  stand  : 
Honour  in  us  had  injury,  we  shall  prove.  425 

Or  if  we  fail  to  prove  such  injury 
More  than  misprision  of  the  fact, — what  then  ? 
It  is  enough,  authorities  declare, 
If  the  result,  the  deed  in  question  now, 
Be  caused  by  confidence  that  injury      .  430 

Is  veritable  and  no  figment :  since, 
What,  though  proved  fancy  afterward,  seemed  fact 
At  the  time,  they  argue  shall  excuse  result. 
That  which  we  do,  persuaded  of  good  cause 
For  what  we  do,  hold  justifiable  ! —  435 

The  casuists  bid :  man,  bound  to  do  his  best, 
They  would  not  have  him  leave  that  best  undone 
And  mean  to  do  the  worst, — though  fuller  light 


DOMINUS    HYACINTHUS    DE   ARCHANGELIS.  Ill 

Show  best  was  worst  and  worst  would  have  been  best. 

Act  by  the  present  light,  they  ask  of  man.  440 

Ultra  quod  hie  non  agitur,  besides 

It  is  not  anyway  our  business  here, 

De  probations  adulterii, 

To  prove  what  we  thought  crime  was  crime  indeed, 

Ad  irrogandam  pcenam,  and  require  445 

Its  punishment :  such  nowise  do  we  seek  : 

Sed  ad  effectum,  but  't  is  our  concern, 

Excusandi,  here  to  simply  find  excuse, 

Oecisorem,  for  who  did  the  killing-work, 

Et  ad  illius  defensio?tem,  (mark  450 

The  difference  !)  and  defend  the  man,  just  that. 

Quo  caste  levior  probatio 

Exuberaret,  to  which  end  far  lighter  proof 

Suffices  than  the  prior  case  would  claim  : 

It  should  be  always  harder  to  convict,  455 

In  short,  than  to  establish  innocence. 

Therefore  we  shall  demonstrate  first  of  all 

That  Honour  is  a  gift  of  God  to  man 

Precious  beyond  compare, — which  natural  sense 

Of  human  rectitude  and  purity, —  460 


112  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

Which  white,  man's  soul  is  born  with,  brooks  no  touch  : 

Therefore,  the  sensitivest  spot  of  all, 

Woundable  by  a  wafture  breathed  from  black, 

Is, — honour  within  honour,  like  the  eye 

Centred  i'  the  ball, — the  honour  of  our  wife.  465 

Touch  us  o'  the  pupil  of  our  honour,  then, 

Not  actually, — since  so  you  slay  outright, — 

But  by  a  gesture  simulating  touch, 

Presumable  mere  menace  of  such  taint, — 

This  were  our  warrant  for  eruptive  ire  470 

"  To  whose  dominion  I  impose  no  end." 

(Virgil,  now,  should  not  be  too  difficult 
To  Cinoncino, — say  the  early  books  .... 
Pen,  truce  to  further  gambols  !  Poscimur  I) 

Nor  can  revenge  of  injury  done  here  475 

To  the  honour  proved  the  life  and  soul  of  us, 

Be  too  excessive,  too  extravagant : 

Such  wrong  seeks  and  must  have  complete  revenge. 

Show  we  this,  first,  on  the  mere  natural  ground  : 

Begin  at  the  beginning,  and  proceed  480 


DOMINUS    HYACINTHUS    DE   ARCHANGELIS.  IT3 

Incontrovertibly.     Theodoric, 

In  an  apt  sentence  Cassiodorus  cites, 

Propounds  for  basis  of  all  household  law — 

I  hardly  recollect  it,  but  it  ends, 

"  Bird  mates  with  bird,  beast  genders  with  his  like,     485 

"  And  brooks  no  interference  : "  bird  and  beast  ? 

The  very  insects  ...  if  they  wive  or  no, 

How  dare  I  say  when  Aristotle  doubts  ? 

But  the  presumption  is  they  likewise  wive, 

At  least  the  nobler  sorts  ;  for  take  the  bee  490 

-As  instance, — copying  King  Solomon, — 

Why  that  displeasure  of  the  bee  to  aught 

That  savours  of  incontinency,  makes 

The  unchaste  a  very  horror  to  the  hive  ? 

Whence  comes  it  bees  obtain  the  epithet  495 

Of  castce  apes  ?  notably  "  the  chaste  ?  " 

Because,  ingeniously  saith  Scaliger, 

(The  young  one — see  his  book  of  Table-talk) 

"  Such  is  their  hatred  of  immodest  act, 

"  They  fall  upon  the  offender,  sting  to  death."  500 

I  mind  a  passage  much  confirmative 

F  the  Idyllist  (though  I  read  him  Latinized) 

VOL.   III.  I 


114  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

"  Why  "  asks  a  shepherd,  "  is  this  bank  unfit 

"  For  celebration  of  our  vernal  loves  ?  " 

"  Oh  swain,"  returns  the  wiser  shepherdess,  505 

"  Bees  swarm  here,  and  would  quick  resent  our  warmth  !  " 

Only  cold-blooded  fish  lack  instinct  here, 

Nor  gain  nor  guard  connubiality : 

But  beasts,  quadrupedal,  mammiferous, 

Do  credit  to  their  beasthood  :  witness  him,  510 

That  ^Elian  cites,  the  noble  elephant, 

(Or  if  not  ^Elian,  somebody  as  sage) 

Who  seeing  much  offence  beneath  his  nose, 

His  master's  friend  exceed  in  courtesy 

The  due  allowance  to  that  master's  wife,  515 

Taught  them  good  manners  and  killed  both  at  once, 

Making  his  master  and  all  men  admire. 

Indubitably,  then,  that  master's  self 

Favoured  by  circumstance,  had  done  the  same 

Or  else  stood  clear  rebuked  by  his  own  beast.  520 

Adeo,  ut  qui  honorem  sfiemit,  thus, 

Who  values  his  own  honour  not  a  straw, — 

Et  non  recuperare  curat,  nor 

Labours  by  might  and  main  to  salve  its  wound, 


DOMINUS    HYACINTHUS    DE   ARCHANGELIS.  115 

Se  ulciscendo,  by  revenging  him,  525 

Nil  differat  a  belluis,  is  a  brute, 

Quinimo  irrationabilior 

Ipsismet  belluis,  nay,  contrariwise, 

Much  more  irrational  than  brutes  themselves, 

Should  be  considered,  refiutetur  !    How?  530 

If  a  poor  animal  feel  honour  smart, 

Taught  by  blind  instinct  nature  plants  in  him, 

Shall  man, — confessed  creation's  master-stroke, 

Nay,  intellectual  glory,  nay,  a  god, 

Nay,  of  the  nature  of  my  Judges  here, —  535 

Shall  man  prove  the  insensible,  the  block, 

The  blot  o'  the  earth  he  crawls  on  to  disgrace  ? 

(Come,  that 's  both  solid  and  poetic) — man 

Derogate,  live  for  the  low  tastes  alone, 

Mean  creeping  cares  about  the  animal  life  ?  540 

May  Gigia  have  remembered,  nothing  stings 

Fried  liver  out  of  its  monotony 

Of  richness  like  a  root  of  fennel,  chopped 

Fine  with  the  parsley :  parsley-sprigs,  I  said — 

Was  there  need  I  should  say  "  and  fennel  too  ?"        545 


Il6  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

But  no,  she  cannot  have  been  so  obtuse  ! 

To  our  argument !     The  fennel  will  be  chopped. 

From  beast  to  man  next  mount  we — ay,  but,  mind, 

Still  mere  man,  not  yet  Christian, — that,  in  time  ! 

Not  too  fast,  mark  you  !  'Tis  on  Heathen  grounds      550 

We  next  defend  our  act :  then,  fairly  urge — 

If  this  were  done  of  old,  in  a  green  tree, 

Allowed  in  the  Spring  rawness  of  our  kind, 

What  may  be  licenced  in  the  Autumn  dry, 

And  ripe,  the  latter  harvest-tide  of  man  ?  555 

If,  with  his  poor  and  primitive  half-lights, 

The  Pagan,  whom  our  devils  served  for  gods, 

Could  stigmatise  the  breach  of  marriage-vow 

As  that  which  blood,  blood  only  might  efface, — 

Absolve  the  husband,  outraged,  whose  revenge  560 

Anticipated  law,  plied  sword  himself, — 

How  with  the  Christian  in  full  blaze  of  day  ? 

Shall  not  he  rather  double  penalty, 

Multiply  vengeance,  than,  degenerate, 

Let  privilege  be  minished,  droop,  decay?  565 

Therefore  set  forth  at  large  the  ancient  law ! 


DOMINUS    HYACINTHUS    DE   ARCHANGELIS.  117 

Superabundant  the  examples  be 

To  pick  and  choose  from.     The  Athenian  Code, 

Solon's,  the  name  is  serviceable, — then, 

The  Laws  of  the  Twelve  Tables,  that  fifteenth, —        570 

"  Romulus  "  likewise  rolls  out  round  and  large. 

The  Julian ;  the  Cornelian  ;  Gracchus'  Law  : 

So  old  a  chime,  the  bells  ring  of  themselves  ! 

Spreti  can  set  that  going  if  he  please, 

I  point  you,  for  my  part,  the  belfry  out,  575 

Intent  to  rise  from  dusk,  diluculum, 

Into  the  Christian  day  shall  broaden  next. 

First,  the  fit  compliment  to  His  Holiness 

Happily  reigning  :  then  sustain  the  point — 

All  that  was  long  ago  declared  as  law  580 

By  the  early  Revelation,  stands  confirmed 

By  Apostle  and  Evangelist  and  Saint, — 

To-wit — that  Honour  is  the  supreme  good. 

AVhy  should  I  baulk  Saint  Jerome  of  his  phrase  ? 

Ubi  honor  11011  est,  where  no  honour  is,  585 

Ibi  contemptus  est;  and  where  contempt, 

lb  I  injuria  frequens  ;  and  where  that, 


Il8  THE   RING  AND   THE    BOOK. 

The  frequent  injury,  ibi  et  indignatio ; 

And  where  the  indignation,  ibi  quies 

Nulla;  and  where  there  is  no  quietude,  590 

Why,  ibi,  there,  the  mind  is  often  cast 

Down  from  the  heights  where  it  proposed  to  dwell, 

Mens  a  propositi  scepe  dejicitur. 

And  naturally  the  mind  is  so  cast  down, 

Since  harder  't  is,  quum  difficilius  sit,  595 

Irani  cohibere,  to  coerce  one's  wrath, 

Quam  miracula  facer e,  than  work  miracles, — 

Saint  Gregory  smiles  in  his  First  Dialogue : 

Whence  we  infer,  the  ingenuous  soul,  the  man 

Who  makes  esteem  of  honour  and  repute,  600 

Whenever  honour  and  repute  are  touched, 

Arrives  at  term  of  fury  and  despair, 

Loses  all  guidance  from  the  reason-check  : 

As  in  delirium,  or  a  frenzy-fit, 

Nor  fury  nor  despair  he  satiates, — no,  605 

Not  even  if  he  attain  the  impossible, 

O'ertum  the  hinges  of  the  universe 

To  annihilate — not  whoso  caused  the  smart 

Solely,  the  author  simply  of  his  pain, 


DOMINUS    HYACINTHUS    DE   ARCHANGEL1S.  119 

But  the  place,  the  memory,  vituperii,  610 

O'  the  shame  and  scorn :  quia, — says  Solomon, 

(The  Holy  Spirit  speaking  by  his  mouth 

In  Proverbs,  the  sixth  chapter  near  the  end) 

— Because,  the  zeal  and  fury  of  a  man, 

Zelus  et  furor  viri,  will  not  spare,  615 

Non  pareet,  in  the  day  of  his  revenge, 

In  die  vindictce,  nor  will  acquiesce, 

Nee  aequieseet,  through  a  person's  prayers, 

Cujusdam  precibus, — nee  suscipiet, 

Nor  yet  take,  pro  redemptione,  for  620 

Redemption,  dona  plurium,  gifts  of  friends, 

Nor  money-payment  to  compound  for  ache. 

Who  recognises  not  my  client's  case  ? 

Whereto,  as  strangely  consentaneous  here, 

Adduce  Saint  Bernard  in  the  Epistle  writ  625 

To  Robertulus,  his  nephew :  Too  much  grief, 

Dolor  quippe  niinius  11011  deliberate 

Does  not  excogitate  propriety, 

Non  vereeundatur,  nor  knows  shame  at  all, 

N011  eonsnlit  rationem,  nor  consults  630 

Reason,  non  dignitatis  metait 


THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 


Damnum,  nor  dreads  the  loss  of  dignity  ; 

Modum  et  ordinem,  order  and  the  mode, 

Ignorat,  it  ignores  :  why,  trait  for  trait, 

Was  ever  portrait  limned  so  like  the  life?  635 

(By  Cavalier  Maratta,  shall  I  say  ? 

I  hear  he'  s  first  in  reputation  now.) 

Yes,  that  of  Samson  in  the  Sacred  Text : 

That 's  not  so  much  the  portrait  as  the  man  ! 

Samson  in  Gaza  was  the  antetype  640 

Of  Guido  at  Rome  :  for  note  the  Nazarite  ! 

Blinded  he  was, — an  easy  thing  to  bear, 

Intrepidly  he  took  imprisonment, 

Gyves,  stripes  and  daily  labour  at  the  mill : 

But  when  he  found  himself,  i'  the  public  place,  645 

Destined  to  make  the  common  people  sport, 

Disdain  burned  up  with  such  an  impetus 

I'  the  breast  of  him  that,  all  of  him  on  fire, 

Moriatur,  roared  he,  let  my  soul's  self  die, 

Anima  mea,  with  the  Philistines  !  650 

So,  pulled  down  pillar,  roof,  and  death  and  all, 

Multosque  plures  interfecit,  ay, 

And  many  more  he  killed  thus,  moriens, 


DOMINUS    HYACINTHUS   DE   ARCHANGELIS.  121 

Dying,  quam  vitnts,  than  in  his  whole  life, 

Occiderat,  he  ever  killed  before.  655 

Are  these  things  writ  for  no  example,  Sirs  ? 

One  instance  more,  and  let  me  see  who  doubts  ! 

Our  Lord  Himself,  made  up  of  mansuetude, 

Sealing  the  sum  of  sufferance  up,  received 

Opprobrium,  contumely  and  buffeting  660 

Without  complaint :  but  when  He  found  Himself 

Touched  in  His  honour  never  so  little  for  once, 

Then  outbroke  indignation  pent  before — 

"  Hoiiorem  meum  nemini  dabo  !  "     "  No, 

"  My  honour  I  to  nobody  will  give  !  "  665 

And  certainly  the  example  so  hath  wrought, 

That  whosoever,  at  the  proper  worth, 

Apprises  worldly  honour  and  repute, 

Esteems  it  nobler  to  die  honoured  man 

Beneath  Mannaia,  than  live  centuries  670 

Disgraced  in  the  eye  o'  the  world.     We  find  Saint  Paul 

No  recreant  to  this  faith  delivered  once  : 

"  Far  worthier  were  it  that  I  died,"  cries  he, 

Expedit  mihi  magis  mori,  "  than 

"  That  anyone  should  make  my  glory  void,"  675 


THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 


Quam  ut  gloriam  meant  quis  evacuet  / 

See,  ad  Corinthienses  :  whereupon 

Saint  Ambrose  makes  a  comment  with  much  fruit, 

Doubtless  my  Judges  long  since  laid  to  heart, 

So  I  desist  from  bringing  forward  here —  680 

(I  can't  quite  recollect  it.) 

Have  I  proved 
Satis  sitperque,  both  enough  and  to  spare, 
That  Revelation  old  and  new  admits 
The  natural  man  may  effervesce  in  ire,  685 

O'ernood  earth,  o'erfroth  heaven  with  foamy  rage, 
At  the  first  puncture  to  his  self-respect  ? 
Then,  Sirs,  this  Christian  dogma,  this  law-bud 
Full-blown  now,  soon  to  bask  the  absolute  flower 
Of  Papal  doctrine  in  our  blaze  of  day, —  690 

Bethink  you,  shall  we  miss  one  promise-streak, 
One  doubtful  birth  of  dawn  crepuscular, 
One  dew-drop  comfort  to  humanity, 
Now  that  the  chalice  teems  with  noonday  wine  ? 
Yea,  argue  Molinists  who  bar  revenge —  695 

Referring  just  to  what  makes  out  our  case  ! 


DOMINUS    HYACINTHUS    DE   ARCHANGELIS.  1 23 

Under  old  dispensation,  argue  they, 

The  doom  of  the  adulterous  wife  was  death, 

Stoning  by  Moses'  law.     "  Nay,  stone  her  not, 

"  Put  her  away  !  "  next  legislates  our  Lord ;  700 

And  last  of  all,  "  Nor  yet  divorce  a  wife  !  " 

Ordains  the  Church,  "  she  typifies  ourself, 

The  Bride  no  fault  shall  cause  to  fall  from  Christ." 

Then,  as  no  jot  nor  tittle  of  the  Law 

Has  passed  away — which  who  presumes  to  doubt?     705 

As  not  one  word  of  Christ  is  rendered  vain — 

Which,  could  it  be  though  heaven  and  earth  should  pass  ? 

— Where  do  I  find  my  proper  punishment 

For  my  adulterous  wife,  I  humbly  ask 

Of  my  infallible  Pope, — who  now  remits  710 

Even  the  divorce  allowed  by  Christ  in  lieu 

Of  lapidation  Moses  licensed  me  ? 

The  Gospel  checks  the  Law  which  throws  the  stone, 

The  Church  tears  the  divorce-bill  Gospel  grants, 

The  wife  sins  and  enjoys  impunity  !  715 

What  profits  me  the  fulness  of  the  days, 

The  final  dispensation,  I  demand, 

Unless  Law,  Gospel  and  the  Church  subjoin 


124  THE   RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

"  But  who  hath  barred  thee  primitive  revenge, 
"  Which,  like  fire  damped  and  dammed  up,  burns  more 
fierce?  720 

"  Use  thou  thy  natural  privilege  of  man, 
"  Else  wert  thou  found  like  those  old  ingrate  Jews, 
"  Despite  the  manna-banquet  on  the  board, 
"  A-longing  after  melons,  cucumbers 
"  And  such  like  trash  of  Egypt  left  behind  1"  725 

(There  was  one  melon,  had  improved  our  soup, 
But  did  not  Cinoncino  need  the  rind 
To  make  a  boat  with?     So  I  seem  to  think.) 

Law,  Gospel  and  the  Church — from  these  we  leap 

To  the  very  last  revealment,  easy  rule  730 

Befitting  the  well-born  and  thorough-bred 

O'  the  happy  day  we  live  in, — not  the  dark 

O'  the  early  rude  and  acorn-eating  race. 

"  Behold,"  quoth  James,  "  we  bridle  in  a  horse 

"  And  turn  his  body  as  we  would  thereby  ! "  735 

Yea,  but  we  change  the  bit  to  suit  the  growth, 

And  rasp  our  colt's  jaw  with  a  rugged  spike 

We  hasten  to  remit  our  managed  steed 


DOMINUS    HYACINTHUS    DE    ARCHANGELIS.  1 25 

Who  wheels  round  at  persuasion  of  a  touch. 

Civilization  bows  to  decency,  740 

The  acknowledged  use  and  wont,  the  manners, — mild 

But  yet  imperative  law, — which  make  the  man. 

Thus  do  we  pay  the  proper  compliment 

To  rank,  and  that  society  of  Rome, 

Hath  so  obliged  us  by  its  interest,  745 

Taken  our  client's  part  instinctively, 

As  unaware  defending  its  own  cause. 

What  dictum  doth  Society  lay  down 

r  the  case  of  one  who  hath  a  faithless  wife  ? 

Wherewithal  should  the  husband  cleanse  his  way?      750 

Be  patient  and  forgive  ?     Oh,  language  fails — 

Shrinks  from  depicturing  his  punishment ! 

For  if  wronged  husband  raise  not  hue  and  cry, 

Quod  si  maritus  de  adulterio  non 

Conquer eretur,  he  's  presumed  a — foh  !  755 

Presumitur  leno:  so,  complain  he  must. 

But  how  complain  ?     At  your  tribunal,  lords  ? 

Far  weightier  challenge  suits  your  sense,  I  wot ! 

You  sit  not  to  have  gentlemen  propose 

Questions  gentility  can  itself  discuss.  760 


126  THE   RING  AND   THE    BOOK. 

Did  not  you  prove  that  to  our  brother  Paul  ? 

The  Abate,  qutim  judicial  iter 

Prosequeretur,  when  he  tried  the  law, 

Guidonis  causam,  in  Count  Guido's  case, 

Accidit  ipsi,  this  befell  himself,  765 

Quod  risum  movent  et  cachinnos,  that 

He  moved  to  mirth  and  cachinnation,  all 

Or  nearly  %S\.,fere  in  omnibus 

Etiam  sensatis  et  cordatis,  men 

Strong-sensed,  sound-hearted,  nay,  the  very  Court,      770 

Ipsismet in  judicibus,  I  might  add, 

Non  tamen  dicam.     In  a  cause  like  this, 

So  multiplied  were  reasons  pro  and  am, 

Delicate,  intertwisted  and  obscure, 

That  law  were  shamed  to  lend  a  finger-tip  775 

To  unravel,  readjust  the  hopeless  twine, 

While,  half-a-dozen  steps  outside  the  court, 

There  stood  a  foolish  trifler  with  a  tool 

A-dangle  to  no  purpose  by  his  side, 

Had  clearly  cut  the  tangle  in  a  trice.  780 

Asserunt  enim  imanimiter 

Doctor es,  for  the  Doctors  all  assert, 


DOMINUS    HYACINTHUS    DE   ARCHANGELIS.  1 27 

That  husbands,  quod  mariti,  must  be  held 

Viles,  coniuti  reputantur,  vile 

And  branching  forth  a  florid  infamy,  785 

Si  propriis  manibus,  if  with  their  own  hands, 

Non  sumunt,  they  take  not  straightway  revenge, 

Vindictam,  but  expect  the  deed  be  done 

By  the  Court — expectant  illath  fieri 

Per  judices,  qui  summopere  rident,  which  790 

Gives  an  enormous  guffaw  for  reply, 

Et  cachinnantur.     For  he  ran  away, 

Deliquit  enim,  just  that  he  might  'scape 

The  censure  of  both  counsellors  and  crowd, 

Ut  vulgi  et  Doctor -urn  evitaret  795 

Censuram,  and  lest  so  he  superadd 

To  loss  of  honour  ignominy  too, 

Et  sic  ne  istam  quoque  ignominiam 

Amisso  ho7iori  super adderet. 

My  lords,  my  lords,  the  inconsiderate  step  800 

Was — we  referred  ourselves  to  law  at  all ! 

Twit  me  not  with,  "  Law  else  had  punished  you  !  " 

Each  punishment  of  the  extra-legal  step, 

To  which  the  high-born  preferably  revert, 


128  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

Is  ever  for  some  oversight,  some  slip  805 

I'  the  taking  vengeance,  not  for  vengeance'  self. 

A  good  thing  done  unhandsomely  turns  ill ; 

And  never  yet  lacked  ill  the  law's  rebuke. 

For  pregnant  instance,  let  us  contemplate 

The  luck  of  Leonardus, — see  at  large  810 

Of  Sicily's  Decisions  sixty-first. 

This  Leonard  finds  his  wife  is  false  :  what  then  ? 

He  makes  her  own  son  snare  her,  and  entice 

Out  of  the  town-walls  to  a  private  walk, 

Wherein  he  slays  her  with  commodity.  815 

They  find  her  body  half-devoured  by  dogs  : 

Leonard  is  tried,  convicted,  punished,  sent 

To  labour  in  the  galleys  seven  years  long : 

Why  ?     For  the  murder  ?     Nay,  but  for  the  mode  ! 

Mains  modus  occidendi,  ruled  the  Court,  820 

An  ugly  mode  of  killing,  nothing  more  ! 

Another  fructuous  sample, — see  "  De  Re 

"  Criminally  in  Matthaeus'  divine  piece. 

Another  husband,  in  no  better  plight, 

Simulates  absence,  thereby  tempts  the  wife  ;  825 

On  whom  he  falls,  out  of  sly  ambuscade, 


DOMINUS    HYACINTHUS   DE   ARCHANGELIS.  1 29 


Backed  by  a  brother  of  his,  and  both  of  them 

Armed  to  the  teeth  with  arms  that  law  had  blamed. 

Nimis  dolose ,  overwilily, 

Fuisse  operatum,  was  it  worked,  830 

Pronounced  the  law  :  had  all  been  fairly  done 

Law  had  not  found  him  worthy,  as  she  did, 

Of  four  years'  exile.     Why  cite  more  ?     Enough 

Is  good  as  a  feast — (unless  a  birthday-feast 

For  one's  Cinuccio  :  so,  we'll  finish  here)  835 

My  lords,  we  rather  need  defend  ourselves 

Inasmuch  as  for  a  twinkling  of  an  eye 

We  hesitatingly  appealed  to  law, — 

Rather  than  deny  that,  on  mature  advice, 

Wre  blushingly  bethought  us,  bade  revenge  840 

Back  to  the  simple  proper  private  way 

Of  decent  self-dealt  gentlemanly  death. 

Judges,  there  is  the  law,  and  this  beside, 

The  testimony  !     Look  to  it  ! 

Pause  and  breathe  !  845 

So  far  is  only  too  plain ;  we  must  watch, 
Bottini  will  scarce  hazard  an  attack 

;   Here  :  let  's  anticipate  the  fellow's  play, 

■ 

VOL.    III.  K 


130  THE   RING  AND   THE   BOOK. 

And  guard  the  weaker  places — warily  ask, 

What  if  considerations  of  a  sort,  850 

Reasons  of  a  kind,  arise  from  out  the  strange 

Peculiar  unforseen  new  circumstance 

Of  this  our  (candour  owns)  abnormal  act, 

To  bar  the  right  of  us  revenging  so  ? 

"  Impunity  were  otherwise  your  meed  :  855 

"  Go  slay  your  wife  and  welcome," — may  be  urged, — 

"  But  why  the  innocent  old  couple  slay, 

"  Pietro,  Violante  ?    You  may  do  enough, 

"  Not  too  much,  not  exceed  the  golden  mean : 

"  Neither  brute-beast  nor  Pagan,  Gentile,  Jew,  860 

"  Nor  Christian,  no  nor  votarist  of  the  mode, 

"  Were  free  at  all  to  push  revenge  so  far ! " 

No,  indeed  ?    Why,  thou  very  sciolist ! 

The  actual  wrong,  Pompilia  seemed  to  do, 

Was  virtual  wrong  done  by  the  parents  here —  865 

Imposing  her  upon  us  as  their  child — 

Themselves  allow  :  then,  her  fault  was  their  fault, 

Her  punishment  be  theirs  accordingly  ! 

But  wait  a  little,  sneak  not  off  so  soon  ! 


DOMINUS    HYACINTHUS    DE   ARCHANGELIS.  131 

Was  this  cheat  solely  harm  to  Guido,  pray  ?  870 

The  precious  couple  you  call  innocent, — 

Why,  they  were  felons  that  law  failed  to  clutch, 

Qui  ut  fraudarent,  who  that  they  might  rob, 

Legitime  vocatos,  folks  law  called, 

Adfidei  comniissum,  true  heirs  to  the  Trust,  875 

Partum  stpposuerunt,  feigned  this  birth, 

Immemores  reos  factos  esse,  blind 

To  the  fact  that,  guilty,  they  incurred  thereby, 

Ultimi  supplicii,  hanging  or  aught  worse. 

Do  you  blame  us  that  we  turn  law's  instruments  880 

Not  mere  self-seekers, — mind  the  public  weal, 

Nor  make  the  private  good  our  sole  concern  ? 

That  having — shall  I  say— secured  a  thief, 

Not  simply  we  recover  from  his  pouch 

The  stolen  article  our  property,  885 

But  also  pounce  upon  our  neighbour's  purse 

We  opportunely  find  reposing  there, 

And  do  him  justice  while  we  right  ourselves  ? 

He  owes  us,  for  our  part,  a  drubbing  say, 

But  owes  our  neighbour  just  a  dance  i'  the  air  890 

Under  the  gallows  :  so  we  throttle  him. 


132  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

The  neighbour  's  Law,  the  couple  are  the  Thief, 
We  are  the  over-ready  to  help  Law — 
Zeal  of  her  house  hath  eaten  us  up  :  for  which, 
Can  it  be,  Law  intends  to  eat  up  us, 
Crudum  Priamum,  devour  poor  Priam  raw, 
('T  was  Jupiter's  own  joke)  with  babes  to  boot, 
Prianiique  pisinnos,  in  Homeric  phrase  ? 
Shame  ! and  so  ends  the  period  prettily. 

But  even, — prove  the  pair  not  culpable, 
Free  as  unborn  babe  from  connivance  at, 
Participation  in,  their  daughter's  fault : 
Ours  the  mistake.     Is  that  a  rare  event  ? 
Non  semel,  it  is  anything  but  rare, 
In  contingentia  facti,  that  by  chance, 
Impimes  evaserunt,  go  scot-free, 
Qui,  such  well-meaning  people  as  ourselves, 
Justo  dolore  moiiy  who  aggrieved 
With  cause,  apposuerunt  manus,  lay 
Rough  hands,  in  innocentes,  on  wrong  heads. 
Cite  we  an  illustrative  case  in  point : 
Midier  Smirnea  quczdani,  good  my  lords, 


DOMINUS    HYACINTHUS    DE   ARCHANGELIS.  133 

A  gentlewoman  lived  in  Smyrna  once, 
Virum  etfilium  ex  eo  conceptum,  who 
Both  husband  and  her  son  begot  by  him,  915 

Killed,  interfecerat,  ex  quo,  because, 
Vir  filium  suuni  perdiderat,  her  spouse 
Had  been  beforehand  with  her,  killed  her  son, 
Matrimonii  primi,  of  a  previous  bed. 
Deinde  accusata,  then  accused,  920 

Apud  Dolabellam,  before  him  that  sat 
Proconsul,  nee  duabus  ccedibus 
Comtaminatam  liberare,  nor 
To  liberate  a  woman  doubly-dyed 

With  murder,  voluit,  made  he  up  his  mind,  925 

Nee  eondeninare,  nor  to  doom  to  death, 
Justo  dolore  impulsam,  one  impelled 
By  just  grief,  sed  remisif,  but  sent  her  up 
Ad  Areopagiwi,  to  the  Hill  of  Mars, 
Sapientissimorum  judicum  930 

Ccetum,  to  that  assembly  of  the  sage 
Paralleled  only  by  my  judges  here ; 
Ubi,  cognito  de  causa,  where,  the  cause 
Well  weighed,  responsum  est,  they  gave  reply, 


134  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

Ut  ipsa  et  accusator,  that  both  sides 
O'  the  suit,  redirent,  should  come  back  again, 
Post  centum  annos,  after  a  hundred  years, 
For  judgment ;  et  sic,  by  which  sage  decree, 
Duplici  parricidio  rea,  one 
Convicted  of  a  double  parricide, 
Quamvis  etiam  innocentem,  though  in  truth 
Out  of  the  pair,  one  innocent  at  least 
She,  occidisset,  plainly  had  put  to  death, 
Undequaque,  yet  she  altogether  'scaped, 
Evasit  impunis.     See  the  case  at  length 
In  Valerius,  fittingly  styled  Maximus, 
That  eighth  book  of  his  Memorable  Facts. 
Nor  Cyriacus  cites  beside  the  mark  : 
Similiter  uxor  quce  mandaverat, 
Just  so,  a  lady  who  had  taken  care, 
Homicidium  viri,  that  her  lord  be  killed, 
Ex  denegatione  debiti, 
For  denegation  of  a  certain  debt, 
Matrimonialis,  he  was  loth  to  pay, 
Fuit  pecuniaria  mulct  a,  was 
Amerced  in  a  pecuniary  mulct, 


DOMINUS   HYACINTHUS   DE  ARCHANGELIS.  1 35 

Punita,  et  ad  ficenam,  and  to  pains, 
Temfioralem,  for  a  certain  space  of  time, 
In  monasterio,  in  a  convent. 

Ay,  960 

In  monasterio  I    How  he  manages 
In  with  the  ablative,  the  accusative  ! 
I  had  hoped  to  have  hitched  the  villain  into  verse 
For  a  gift,  this  very  day,  a  complete  list 
O'  the  prepositions  each  with  proper  case,  965 

Telling  a  story,  long  was  in  my  head. 
What  prepositions  take  the  accusative  ? 
Ad  to  or  at — who  saw  the  cat  % — down  to 
Ob,  for,  because  of,  keep  her  claws  off !    Ah, 
Law  in  a  man  takes  the  whole  liberty !  970 

The  muse  is  fettered, — just  as  Ovid  found  ! 

And  now,  sea  widens  and  the  coast  is  clear. 

What  of  the  dubious  act  you  bade  excuse  ? 

Surely  things  brighten,  brighten,  till  at  length 

Remains — so  far  from  act  that  needs  defence —  975 

Apology  to  make  for  act  delayed 


136  THE   RING  AND   THE   BOOK. 

One  minute,  let  alone  eight  mortal  months 

Of  hesitation  !     "  Why  procrastinate  ?  " 

(Out  with  it  my  Bottinius,  ease  thyself !) 

a  Right,  promptly  done,  is  twice  right :  right  delayed  980 

"  Turns  wrong.     We  grant  you  should  have  killed  your 

wife, 
"  But  on  the  moment,  at  the  meeting  her 
"  In  company  with  the  priest :  then  did  the  tongue 
"  O'  the  Brazen  Head  give  licence,  '  Time  is  now  ! ' 
"  You  make  your  mind  up  :  '  Time  is  past '  it  peals.  985 
"  Friend,  you  are  competent  to  mastery 
"  O'  the  passions  that  confessedly  explain 
"  An  outbreak, — yet  allow  an  interval, 
"  And  then  break  out  as  if  time's  clock  still  clanged. 
"  You  have  forfeited  your  chance,  and  flat  you  fall     990 
"  Into  the  commonplace  category 
"  Of  men  bound  to  go  softly  all  their  days, 
"  Obeying  law." 

Now,  which  way  make  response  ? 
What  was  the  answer  Guido  gave,  himself?  995 

— That  so  to  argue  came  of  ignorance 


DOMINUS    HYACINTHUS   DE   ARCHANGELIS.  137 

How  honour  bears  a  wound  :  "  For,  wound,"  said  he, 

"  My  body,  and  the  smart  is  worst  at  first : 

"  While,  wound  my  soul  where  honour  sits  and  rules, 

"  Longer  the  sufferance,  stronger  grows  the  pain,      iooo 

"  'T  is  ex  i?ico?itinenti,  fresh  as  first." 

But  try  another  tack,  calm  common  sense 

By  way  of  contrast :  as — Too  true,  my  lords  ! 

We  did  demur,  awhile  did  hesitate  : 

Yet  husband  sure  should  let  a  scruple  speak  1005 

Ere  he  slay  wife, — for  his  own  safety,  lords  ! 

Carpers  abound  in  this  misjudging  world. 

Moreover,  there  's  a  nicety  in  law 

That  seems  to  justify  them  should  they  carp  : 

Suppose  the  source  of  injury  a  son, —  1010 

Father  may  slay  such  son  yet  run  no  risk  : 

Why  graced  with  such  a  privilege  ?    Because 

A  father  so  incensed  with  his  own  child, 

Or  must  have  reason,  or  believe  he  has  : 

Quia  semper,  seeing  that  in  such  event,  1015 

Presumitur,  the  law  is  bound  suppose, 

Quod  capiat  pater,  that  the  sire  must  take, 

JBonum  consilium  pro  filio, 


138  THE   RING  AND   THE   BOOK. 

The  best  course  as  to  what  befits  his  boy, 

Through  instinct,  ex  instinctu,  of  mere  love,  1020 

Amoris,  and,  flaterni,  fatherhood  ; 

Quam  confidentiality  which  confidence, 

Non  habet,  law  declines  to  entertain, 

De  virOy  of  the  husband  :  where  has  he 

An  instinct  that  compels  him  love  his  wife  ?  j  1025 

Rather  is  he  presumably  her  foe  : 

So,  let  him  ponder  long  in  this  bad  world 

Ere  do  the  simplest  act  of  justice. 

But 
Again — and  here  we  brush  Bottini's  breast —  1030 

Object  you,  "  See  the  danger  of  delay  ! 
"  Suppose  a  man  murdered  my  friend  last  month  : 
"  Had  I  come  up  and  killed  him  for  his  pains 
"  In  rage,  I  had  done  right,  allows  the  law  : 
"  I  meet  him  now  and  kill  him  in  cold  blood,  1035 

"  I  do  wrong,  equally  allows  the  law  : 
"  Wherein  do  actions  differ,  yours  and  mine  ?" 
In  plenitudine  intellectus  es  ? 
Hast  thy  wits,  Fisc  ?    To  take  such  slayer's  life, 


DOMINUS   HYACINTHUS   DE   ARCHANGELIS.  1 39 

Returns  it  life  to  thy  slain  friend  at  all  ?  1040 

Had  he  stolen  ring  instead  of  stabbing  friend, — 

To-day,  to-morrow  or  next  century, 

Meeting  the  thief,  thy  ring  upon  his  thumb, 

Thou  justifiably  hadst  wrung  it  thence  : 

So,  couldst  thou  wrench  thy  friend's  life  back  again, 

Though  prisoned  in  the  bosom  of  his  foe,  1046 

Why,  law  would  look  complacent  on  thy  rush. 

Our  case  is,  that  the  thing  we  lost,  we  found  : 

The  honour,  we  were  robbed  of  eight  months  since, 

Being  recoverable  at  any  day  1050 

By  death  of  the  delinquent.     Go  thy  ways  ! 

Ere  thou  hast  learned  law,  will  be  much  to  do, 

As  said  the  rustic  while  he  shod  the  goose. 

Nay,  if  you  urge  me,  interval  was  none  ! 

From  the  inn  to  the  villa — blank  or  else  a  bar  1055 

Of  adverse  and  contrarious  incident 

Solid  between  us  and  our  just  revenge  ! 

What  with  the  priest  who  flourishes  his  blade, 

The  wife  who  like  a  fury  flings  at  us, 

The  crowd — and  then  the  capture,  the  appeal  1060 


140  THE   RING   AND   THE   BOOK. 

To  Rome,  the  journey  there,  the  journey  thence, 

The  shelter  at  the  House  of  Convertites, 

The  visits  to  the  Villa,  and  so  forth, 

Where  was  one  minute  left  us  all  this  while 

To  put  in  execution  that  revenge  1065 

We  planned  o'  the  instant  ? — as  it  were,  plumped  down  * 

A  round  sound  egg,  o'  the  spot,  some  eight  months  since, 

Rome,  more  propitious  than  our  nest,  should  hatch  ! 

Object  not,  "  You  reached  Rome  on  Christmas-eve, 

"  And,  despite  liberty  to  act  at  once,  1070 

"  Waited  a  week — indecorous  delay  !  " 

Hath  so  the  Molinism-canker,  lords, 

Eaten  to  the  bone  ?     Is  no  religion  left  ? 

No  care  for  aught  held  holy  by  the  Church  ? 

What,  would  you  have  us  skip  and  miss  those  Feasts 

O'  the  Natal  Time,  must  we  go  prosecute  1076 

Secular  business  on  a  sacred  day  ? 

Should  not  the  merest  charity  expect, 

Setting  our  poor  concerns  aside  for  once, 

We  hurried  to  the  song  matutinal  1080 

I'  the  Sistine,  and  pressed  forward  for  the  Mass 

The  Cardinal  that 's  Camerlengo  chaunts, 


DOMINUS    HYACINTHUS    DE   ARCHANGELIS.  141 

Then  rushed  on  to  the  blessing  of  the  Hat 

And  Rapier,  which  the  Pope  sends  to  what  prince 

Has  done  most  detriment  to  the  Infidel —  1085 

And  thereby  whet  our  courage  if 't  were  blunt  ? 

Meantime,  allow  we  kept  the  house  a  week, 

Suppose  not  we  were  idle  in  our  mew : 

Picture  Count  Guido  raging  here  and  there — 

"  '  Money  ? '  I  need  none — '  Friends  ? '   The  word  is  null. 

"  Match  me  the  white  was  on  that  shield  of  mine     1091 

"  Borne  at "  .  .  wherever  might  be  shield  to  bear ; 

"  I  see  my  grandsire,  he  who  fought  so  well 

"  At "  .  .  here  find  out  and  put  in  time  and  place 

Of  what  might  be  a  fight  his  grandsire  fought :  1095 

u  I  see  this — I  see  that — " 

See  to  it  ail, 
Or  I  shall  scarce  see  lamb's  fry  in  an  hour  ! 
— Nod  to  the  uncle,  as  I  bid  advance 
The  smoking  dish,  "  This,  for  your  tender  teeth  !      1100 
"  Behoves  us  care  a  little  for  our  kin — 
"  You,  Sir, — who  care  so  much  for  cousinship 
"  As  come  to  your  poor  loving  nephew's  feast !  " 


I42  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

He  has  the  reversion  of  a  long  lease  yet — 

Land  to  bequeath  !     He  loves  lamb's  fry,  I  know !    1105 

Here  fall  to  be  considered  those  same  six 
Qualities  ;  what  Bottini  needs  must  call 
So  many  aggravations  of  our  crime, 
Parasite-growth  upon  mere  murder's  back. 
We  summarily  might  dispose  of  such  11 10 

By  some  off-hand  and  jaunty  fling,  some  skit — 
"  So,  since  there 's  proved  no  crime  to  aggravate, 
"  A  fico  for  your  aggravations,  Fisc  ! " 
No, — handle  mischief  rather, — play  with  spells 
Were  meant  to  raise  a  spirit,  and  laugh  the  while      11 15 
We  show  that  did  he  rise  we  are  his  match  ! 
Therefore,  first  aggravation  :  we  made  up — 
Over  and  above  our  simple  murdering  selves — 
A  regular  assemblage  of  armed  men, 
Coadunatio  armatorumy — ay,  1 1 2  o 

Unluckily  it  was  the  very  judge 
Who  sits  in  judgment  on  our  cause  to-day 
That  passed  the  law  as  Governor  of  Rome : 
Four  men  armed," — though  for  lawful  purpose,  mark  ! 


DOMINUS    HYACINTHUS    DE   ARCHANGELIS.  143 

Much  more  for  an  acknowledged  crime, — "  shall  die." 

We  five  were  armed  to  the  teeth,  meant  murder  too  ? 

Why,  that 's  the  very  point  that  saves  us,  Fisc  !  1127 

Let  me  instruct  you.    Crime  nor  done  nor  meant, — 

You  punish  still  who  arm  and  congregate  : 

For  why  have  used  bad  means  to  a  good  end?  1130 

Crime  being  meant  not  done, — you  punish  still 

The  means  to  crime,  you  haply  pounce  up~on, 

Though  circumstance  have  baulked  you  of  their  end  : 

But  crime  not  only  compassed  but  complete, 

Meant  and  done  too  ?    Why,  since  you  have  the  end, 

Be  that  your  sole  concern,  nor  mind  those  means      1136 

No  longer  to  the  purpose  !     Murdered  we  ? 

( — Which,  that  our  luck  was  in  the  present  case, 

Quod  contigisse  in  prcesenti  casu, 

Is  palpable,  manibus  fialpatum  est — )  1140 

Make  murder  out  against  us,  nothing  less  ! 

Of  many  crimes  committed  with  a  view 

To  one  main  crime,  you  overlook  the  less, 

Intent  upon  the  large.     Suppose  a  man 

Having  in  view  commission  of  a  theft,  1145 

Climb  the  town-wall :  \  is  for  the  theft  he  hangs, 


144  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

Suppose  you  can  convict  him  of  such  theft, 

Remitted  whipping  due  to  who  climbs  wall 

For  bravery  or  wantonness  alone, 

Just  to  dislodge  a  daw's  nest  and  no  more.  1150 

So  I  interpret  you  the  manly  mind 

Of  him  the  Judge  shall  judge  both  you  and  me, — 

O'  the  Governor,  who,  being  no  babe,  my  Fisc, 

Cannot  have  blundered  on  ineptitude  ! 

Next  aggravation, — that  the  arms  themselves  1155 

Were  specially  of  such  forbidden  sort 

Through  shape  or  length  or  breadth,  as,  prompt,  law 

plucks 
From  single  hand  of  solitary  man, 
And  makes  him  pay  the  carriage  with  his  life  : 
Delatio  armorum,  arms  against  the  rule,  11 60 

Contra  formam  constitutionis,  of 
Pope  Alexander's  blessed  memory. 
Such  are  the  poignard  with  the  double  prong, 
Horn-like,  when  tines  make  bold  the  an  tiered  buck, 
And  all  of  brittle  glass — for  man  to  stab  1165 

And  break  off  short  and  so  let  fragment  stick 


DOMINUS    HYACINTHUS    DE   ARCHANGELIS.  1 45 


Fast  in  the  flesh  to  baffle  surgery : 

And  such  the  Genoese  blade  with  hooks  at  edge 

That  did  us  service  at  the  Villa  here. 

Sed parcat  mihi  tam  eximius  vir,  1 1 70 

But,  let  so  rare  a  personage  forgive, 

Fisc,  thy  objection  is  a  foppery  ! 

Thy  charge  runs,  that  we  killed  three  innocents  : 

Killed,  dost  see  ?    Then,  if  killed,  what  matter  how  ? — 

By  stick  or  stone,  by  sword  or  dagger,  tool  1175 

Long  or  tool  short,  round  or  triangular — 

Poor  folks,  they  find  small  comfort  in  a  choice  ! 

Means  to  an  end,  means  to  an  end,  my  Fisc  ! 

Nature  cries  out  "  Take  the  first  arms  you  find  ! " 

Furor  ministrat  arma :  where  's  a  stone  ?  1 180 

Unde  mi  lafiidem,  where  darts  for  me  ? 

Unde  sagittas  ?    But  subdue  the  bard 

And  rationalize  a  little  :  eight  months  since, 

Had  we,  or  had  we  not,  incurred  your  blame 

For  letting  'scape  unpunished  this  bad  pair  ?  1 185 

I  think  I  proved  that  in  last  paragraph  ! 

Why  did  we  so  ?    Because  our  courage  failed. 

Wherefore  ?    Through  lack  of  arms  to  fight  the  foe  : 

VOL.    III.  L 


146  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

We  had  no  arms  or  merely  lawful  ones, 

An  unimportant  sword  and  blunderbuss,  11 90 

Against  a  foe,  pollent  in  potency, 

The  amasius,  and  our  vixen  of  a  wife. 

Well  then,  how  culpably  do  we  gird  loin 

And  once  more  undertake  the  high  emprise, 

Unless  we  load  ourselves  this  second  time  1195 

With  handsome  superfluity  of  arms, 

Since  better  say  "  too  much  "  than  "  not  enough," 

And  "phis  11011  vitiat?  too  much  does  no  harm, 

Except  in  mathematics,  sages  say. 

Gather  instruction  from  the  parable  !  1200 

At  first  we  are  advised — "  A  lad  hath  here 

"  Seven  barley  loaves  and  two  small  fishes  :  what 

" Is  that  among  so  many?"    Aptly  asked  : 

But  put  that  question  twice  and,  quite  as  apt 

The  answer  is  "  Fragments,  twelve  baskets  full !  "      1205 

And,  while  we  speak  of  superabundance,  fling 
A  word  by  the  way  to  fools  that  cast  their  flout 
On  Guido — "  Punishment  exceeds  offence  : 
"  You  might  be  just  but  you  were  cruel  too  ! " 


DOMINUS    HYACINTHUS   DE   ARCHANGELIS.  1 47 

If  so  you  stigmatise  the  stern  and  strict,  1210 

Still,  he  is  not  without  excuse — may  plead 

Transgression  of  his  mandate,  over-zeal 

O'  the  part  of  his  companions  :  all  he  craved 

Was,  they  should  fray  the  faces  of  the  three  : 

Soluminodo  fassus  est,  he  owns,  no  more,  1 2 1 5 

Dedisse  mandatwn,  than  that  he  desired, 

Ad  sfrisiandum,  dicam,  that  they  hack 

And  hew,  i'  the  customary  phrase,  his  wife, 

Uxor  em  tantum,  and  no  harm  beside. 

If  his  instructions  then  be  misconceived,  1220 

Nay,  disobeyed,  impute  you  blame  to  him  ? 

Cite  me  no  Panicollus  to  the  point, 

As  adverse  !  Oh,  I  quite  expect  his  case — 

How  certain  noble  youths  of  Sicily 

Having  good  reason  to  mistrust  their  wives,  1225 

Killed  them  and  were  absolved  in  consequence  : 

While  others  who  had  gone  beyond  the  need 

By  mutilation  of  the  paramour 

(So  Galba  in  the  Horatian  satire  grieved) 

— These  were  condemned  to  the  galleys,  as  for  guilt 

Exceeding  simple  murder  of  a  wife.  1231 


148  THE   RING  AND   THE   BOOK. 

But  why  ?    Because  of  ugliness,  and  not 

Cruelty,  in  the  said  revenge,  I  trow  ! 

Ex  causa  abscissionis  partium  ; 

Quia  netnpe  idfacientes  reputantur  1235 

Natures  inimici,  man  revolts 

Against  such  as  the  natural  enemy. 

Pray,  grant  to  one  who  meant  to  slit  the  nose 

And  slash  the  cheek  and  slur  the  mouth,  at  most, 

A  somewhat  more  humane  award  than  these  !  1240 

Objectum  funditus  corruit,  flat  you  fall, 

My  Fisc  !     I  waste  no  kick  on  you  but  pass. 

Third  aggravation  :  that  our  act  was  done — 

Not  in  the  public  street,  where  safety  lies, 

Not  in  the  bye-place,  caution  may  avoid,  1245 

Wood,  cavern,  desert,  spots  contrived  for  crime, — 

Eut  in  the  very  house,  home,  nook  and  nest, 

O'  the  victims,  murdered  in  their  dwelling-place, 

In  domo  ac  habitatione  propria, 

Where  all  presumably  is  peace  and  joy.  1250 

The  spider,  crime,  pronounce  we  twice  a  pest 

When,  creeping  from  congenial  cottage,  she 


DOMINUS    HYACINTHUS    DE   ARCHANGELIS.  1 49 

Taketh  hold  with  her  hands,  to  horrify 

His  household  more,  i'  the  palace  of  the  king. 

All  three  were  housed  and  safe  and  confident.  1255 

Moreover,  the  permission  that  our  wife 

Should  have  at  length  domiim  pro  carcere. 

Her  own  abode  in  place  of  prison— why, 

We  ourselves  granted,  by  our  other  self 

And  proxy  Paolo  :  did  we  make  such  grant,  1260 

Meaning  a  lure  ? — elude  the  vigilance 

0*  the  jailor,  lead  her  to  commodious  death, 

While  we  ostensibly  relented  ? 

Ay, 

Just  so  did  we,  nor  otherwise,  my  Fisc  !  1265 

Is  vengeance  lawful  ?    We  demand  our  right, 

But  find  it  will  be  questioned  or  refused 

By  jailor,  turnkey,  hangdog, — what  know  we  ? 

Pray,  how  is  it  we  should  conduct  ourselves  ? 

To  gain  our  private  right — break  public  peace,         1270 

Do  you  bid  us  ? — trouble  order  with  our  broils  ? 

Endanger  .  .  shall  I  shrink  to  own  .  .  ourselves  ? — 

Who  want  no  broken  head  nor  bloody  nose 

(While  busied  slitting  noses,  breaking  heads) 


150  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

From  the  first  tipstaff  shall  please  interfere  !  1275 

Nam  quicqiiid  sit,  for  howsoever  it  be, 

An  de  consensu  nostro,  if  with  leave 

Or  not,  a  monasterio,  from  the  nuns, 

Educta  esset,  she  had  been  led  forth, 

Potuimus  id  dissimulare,  we  1280 

May  well  have  granted  leave  in  pure  pretence, 

Ut  aditum  habere,  that  thereby 

An  entry  we  might  compass,  a  free  move 

Potuissemus,  to  her  easy  death, 

Ad  earn  occidendam.     Privacy  1285 

O'  the  hearth,  and  sanctitude  of  home,  say  you  ? 

Would  you  give  man's  abode  more  privilege 

Than  God's  ? — for  in  the  churches  where  He  dwells, 

In  quibus  assistit  Regum  Rex,  by  means 

Of  His  essence,  per  essentiam,  all  the  same,  1290 

Et  nihilominus,  therein,  in  eis, 

Ex  just  a  via  delinquens,  whoso  dares 

To  take  a  liberty  on  ground  enough, 

Is  pardoned,  excusatur :  that 's  our  case — 

Delinquent  through  befitting  cause.     You  hold,         1295 

To  punish  a  false  wife  in  her  own  house 


DOMINUS    HYACINTHUS   DE   ARCHANGELIS.  I51 

Is  graver  than,  what  happens  every  day, 

To  hale  a  debtor  from  his  hiding-place 

In  church  protected  by  the  Sacrament  ? 

To  this  conclusion  have  I  brought  my  Fisc?  1300 

Foxes  have  holes,  and  fowls  o'  the  air  their  nests  ; 

Praise  you  the  impiety  that  follows,  Fisc  ? 

Shall  false  wife  yet  have  where  to  lay  her  head  ? 

"  Contra  Fiscum  definitum  est  /"  He's  done, 

"  Surge  et  scribe"  make  a  note  of  it !  1305 

— If  I  may  dally  with  Aquinas7  word. 

Or  in  the  death-throe  does  he  mutter  still  ? 

Fourth  aggravation,  that  we  changed  our  garb, 

And  rusticized  ourselves  with  uncouth  hat, 

Rough  vest  and  goatskin  wrappage ;  murdered  thus 

Mutatio?ie  vestium,  in  disguise,  131 1 

Whereby  mere  murder  got  complexed  with  wile, 

Turned  homicidium  ex  insidiis.     Fisc, 

How  often  must  I  round  thee  in  the  ears — 

All  means  are  lawful  to  a  lawful  end  ?  13 15 

Concede  he  had  the  right  to  kill  his  wife : 

The  Count  indulged  in  a  travesty  ;  why  ? 


152  -        THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

De  ilia  lit  vindictam  sumeret, 

That  on  her  he  might  lawful  vengeance  take, 

Commodius,  with  more  ease,  et  tutius,  1320 

And  safelier :  wants  he  warrant  for  the  step  ? 

Read  to  thy  profit  how  the  Apostle  once 

For  ease  and  safety,  when  Damascus  raged, 

Was  let  down  in  a  basket  by  the  wall, 

To  'scape  the  malice  of  the  governor  1325 

(Another  sort  of  Governor  boasts  Rome  !) 

— Many  are  of  opinion, — covered  close, 

Concealed  with — what  except  that  very  cloak 

He  left  behind  at  Troas  afterward  ? 

I  shall  not  add  a  syllable  :  Molinists  may  !  1330 

Well,  have  we  more  to  manage  ?    Ay,  indeed  ! 

Fifth  aggravation,  that  our  wife  reposed 

Sub  potestatejudicis,  beneath 

Protection  of  the  judge, — her  house  was  styled 

A  prison,  and  his  power  became  its  guard  1335 

In  lieu  of  wall  and  gate  and  bolt  and  bar. 

This  a  tough  point,  shrewd,  redoubtable : 

Because  we  have  to  supplicate  the  judge] 


DOMINUS   HYACINTHUS    DE   ARCHANGELIS.  1 53 

Shall  overlook  wrong  done  the  judgment-seat. 

Now,  I  might  suffer  my  own  nose  be  pulled,  1340 

As  man — but  then  as  father  .  .  if  the  Fisc 

Touched  one  hair  of  my  boy  who  held  my  hand 

In  confidence  he  could  not  come  to  harm 

Crossing  the  Corso,  at  my  own  desire, 

Going  to  see  those  bodies  in  the  church —  1345 

What  would  you  say  to  that,.  Don  Hyacinth  ? 

This  is  the  sole  and  single  knotty  point : 

For,  bid  Tommati  blink  his  interest, 

You  laud  his  magnanimity  the  while  : 

But  baulk  Tommati's  office, — he  talks  big  !  1350 

"  My  predecessors  in  the  place, — those  sons 

"  O'  the  prophets  that  may  hope  succeed  me  here, — 

"  Shall  I  diminish  their  prerogative  ? 

"  Count  Guido  Franceschini's  honour  ! — well, 

"  Has  the  Governor  of  Rome  none  ?"  1355 

You  perceive, 
The  cards  are  all  against  us.     Make  a  push, 
Kick  over  table,  as  our  gamesters  do  ! 
We,  do  you  say,  encroach  upon  the  rights, 


154  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

Deny  the  omnipotence  o'  the  Judge  forsooth?  1360 

We,  who  have  only  been  from  first  to  last 
Intent  on  that  his  purpose  should  prevail, 
Nay,  more,  at  times,  anticipating  both 
At  risk  of  a  rebuke  ? 

But  wait  awhile  !  1365 

Cannot  we  lump  this  with  the  sixth  and  last 
Of  the  aggravations — that  the  Majesty 
O'  the  Sovereign  here  received  a  wound,  to-wit, 
Lcesa  Majestas,  since  our  violence 
Was  out  of  envy  to  the  course  of  law,  x370 

In  odium  litis  ?    We  cut  short  thereby 
Three  pending  suits,  promoted  by  ourselves 
I*  the  main, — which  worsens  crime,  accedit  ad 
Exasperationem  criminis  ! 

Yes,  here  the  eruptive  wrath  with  full  effect !  1375 

How — did  not  indignation  chain  my  tongue — 
Could  I  repel  this  last,  worst  charge  of  all  ! 
(There  is  a  porcupine  to  barbacue  ; 
Gigia  can  jug  a  rabbit  well  enough, 


DOMINUS    HYACINTHUS   DE   ARCHANGELIS.  155 

With    sour -sweet    sauce    and    pine -pips  ;    but,    good 
Lord,  1380 

Suppose  the  devil  instigate  the  wench 
To  stew,  not  roast  him  ?    Stew  my  porcupine  ? 
If  she  does,  I  know  where  his  quills  shall  stick  ! 
Come,  I  must  go  myself  and  see  to  things  : 
I  cannot  stay  much  longer  stewing  here)  1385 

Our  stomach  .  .  I  mean,  our  soul — is  stirred  within, 
And  we  want  words.     We  wounded  Majesty  ? 
Fall  under  such  a  censure,  we, — who  yearned 
So  much  that  Majesty  dispel  the  cloud 
And  shine  on  us  with  healing  on  its  wings,  I39° 

We  prayed  the  Pope,  Majestas*  very  self, 
To  anticipate  a  little  the  tardy  pack, 
Bell  us  forth  deep  the  authoritative  bay 
Should  start  the  beagles  into  sudden  yelp 
Unisonous, — and,  Gospel  leading  Law,  1395 

Grant  there  assemble  in  our  own  behoof 
A  Congregation,  a  particular  Court, 
A  few  picked  friends  of  quality  and  place, 
To  hear  the  several  matters  in  dispute, 
Causes  big,  little  and  indifferent,  1400 


156  THE   RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

Bred  of  our  marriage  like  a  mushroom-growth, 

All  at  once  (can  one  brush  off  such  too  soon  ? ) 

And  so  with  laudable  dispatch  decide 

Whether  we,  in  the  main  (to  sink  detail) 

Were  one  the  Church  should  hold  fast  or  let  go.        1405 

"  What,  take  the  credit  from  the  Law  ?  "  you  ask  ? 

Indeed,  we  did  !  Law  ducks  to  Gospel  here  : 

Why  should  Law  gain  the  glory  and  pronounce 

A  judgment  shall  immortalize  the  Pope  ? 

Yes  :  our  self-abnegating  policy  141  o 

Was  Joab's< — we  would  rouse  our  David's  sloth, 

Bid  him  encamp  against  a  city,  sack 

A  place  whereto  ourselves  had  long  laid  siege, 

Lest,  taking  it  at  last,  it  take  our  name 

And  be  not  Imiocentinopolis.  141 5 

But  no  !     The  modesty  was  in  alarm, 

The  temperance  refused  to  interfere, 

Returned  us  our  petition  with  the  word 

"  Adjudices  siws"  "  Leave  him  to  his  Judge  ! " 

As  who  should  say — "  Why  trouble  my  repose  ?        1420 

"  Why  consult  Peter  in  a  simple  case, 

"  Peter's  wife's  sister  in  her  fever-fit 


DOMINUS    HYACINTHUS    DE   ARCHANGELIS.  1 57 

"  Might  solve  as  readily  as  the  Apostle's  self? 

"  Are  my  Tribunals  posed  by  aught  so  plain  ? 

"  Hath  not  my  Court  a  conscience  ?    It  is  of  age,    1425 

"  Ask  it !  " 

We  do  ask, — but,  inspire  reply 
To  the  Court  thou  bidst  me  ask,  as  I  have  asked — 
Oh  thou,  who  vigilantly  dost  attend 
To  even  the  few,  the  ineffectual  words  1430 

Which  rise  from  this  our  low  and  mundane  sphere 
Up  to  thy  region  out  of  smoke  and  noise,  n 

Seeking  corroboration  from  thy  nod 
Who  art  all  justice — which  means  mercy  too, 
In  a  low  noisy  smoky  world  like  ours  1435 

Where  Adam's  sin  made  peccable  his  seed  ! 
We  venerate  the  father  of  the  flock, 
Whose  last  faint  sands  of  life,  the  frittered  gold, 
Fall  noiselessly,  yet  all  too  fast,  o'  the  cone 
And  tapering  heap  of  those  collected  years, —  1440 

Never  have  these  been  hurried  in  their  flow, 
Though  justice  fain  would  jog  reluctant  arm, 
In  eagerness  to  take  the  forfeiture 


158  THE   RING  AND   THE   BOOK. 

Of  guilty  life  :  much  less  shall  mercy  sue 

In  vain  that  thou  let  innocence  survive,  1445 

Precipitate  no  minim  of  the  mass 

O'  the  all-so  precious  moments  of  thy  life, 

By  pushing  Guido  into  death  and  doom  ! 

(Our  Cardinal  engages  read  my  speech : 

They  say,  the  Pope  has  one  half-hour,  in  twelve,       1450 

Of  something  like  a  moderate  return 

Of  the  intellectuals, — never  much  to  lose  ! — 

If  I  adroitly  plant  this  passage  there, 

The  Fisc  will  find  himself  forestalled,  I  think, 

Though  he  stand,  beat  till  the  old  ear-drum  break  !  1455 

— Ah,  boy  of  my  own  bowels,  Hyacinth, 

Wilt  ever  catch  the  knack, — requite  the  pains 

Of  poor  papa,  become  proficient  too 

I*  the  how  and  why  and  when — the  time  to  laugh, 

The  time  to  weep,  the  time,  again,  to  pray,  1460 

And  all  the  times  prescribed  by  Holy  Writ  ? 

Well,  well,  we  fathers  can  but  care,  but  cast 

Our  bread  upon  the  waters  !) 

In  a  word, 


DOMINUS    HYACINTHUS   DE   ARCHANGELIS.  1 59 

These  secondary  charges  go  to  ground,  1465 

Since  secondary,  so  superfluous, — motes 

Quite  from  the  main  point :  we  did  all  and  some, 

Little  and  much,  adjunct  and  principal, 

Causa  honoris.     Is  there  such  a  cause 

As  the  sake  of  honour  ?     By  that  sole  test  try  1470 

Our  action,  nor  demand  if  more  or  less, 

Because  of  the  action's  mode,  we  merit  blame 

Or  may-be  deserve  praise.     The  Court  decides. 

Is  the  end  lawful  ?     It  allows  the  means  : 

What  we  may  do  we  may  with  safety  do,  1475 

And  what  means  "  safety  "  we  ourselves  must  judge. 

Put  case  a  person  wrongs  me  past  dispute  : 

If  my  legitimate  vengeance  be  a  blow, 

Mistrusting  my  bare  arm  can  deal  the  same, 

I  claim  co-operation  of  a  stick  ;  1480 

Doubtful  if  stick  be  tough,  I  crave  a  sword ; 

Diffident  of  ability  in  fence, 

I  fee  a  friend,  a  swordsman  to  assist : 

Take  one — who  may  be  coward,  fool  or  knave — 

Why  not  take  fifty  ? — and  if  these  exceed  1485 

r  the  due  degree  of  drubbing,  whom  accuse 


l6o  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

But  the  first  author  of  the  aforesaid  wrong 

Who  put  poor  me  to  such  a  world  of  pains  ? 

Surgery  would  have  just  excised  a  wart ; 

The  patient  made  such  pother,  struggled  so  1490 

That  the  sharp  instrument  sliced  nose  and  all. 

Taunt  us  not  that  our  friends  performed  for  pay ! 

For  us,  enough  were  simple  honour's  sake : 

Give  country  clowns  the  dirt  they  comprehend, 

The  piece  of  gold  !     Our  reasons,  which  suffice         1495 

Ourselves,  be  ours  alone  ;  our  piece  of  gold 

Be,  to  the  rustic,  reason  and  to  spare  ! 

We  must  translate  our  motives  like  our  speech 

Into  the  lower  phrase  that  suits  the  sense 

O'  the  limitedly  apprehensive.     Let  1500 

Each  level  have  its  language  !     Heaven  speaks  first 

To  the  angel,  then  the  angel  tames  the  word 

Down  to  the  ear  of  Tobit :  he,  in  turn, 

Diminishes  the  message  to  his  dog, 

And  finally  that  dog  finds  how  the  flea  1505 

(Which  else,  importunate,  might  check  his  speed) 

Shall  learn  its  hunger  must  have  holiday, — 

How  many  varied  sorts  of  language  here, 


DOMINUS    HYACINTHUS    DE   ARCHANGELIS.  l6l 

Each  following  each  with  pace  to  match  the  step, 
Hand  passibus  cequis  !  1 5 1  o 

Talking  of  which  flea 
Reminds  me  I  must  put  in  special  word 
For  the  poor  humble  following, — the  four  friends, 
Sicarii,  our  assassins  in  your  charge. 
Ourselves  are  safe  in  your  approval  now  :  15 15 

Yet  must  we  care  for  our  companions,  plead 
The  cause  o'  the  poor,  the  friends  (of  old-world  faith) 
Who  are  in  tribulation  for  our  sake. 
Pauperum  Procurator  is  my  style  : 

I  stand  forth  as  the  poor  man's  advocate  :  1520 

And  when  we  treat  of  what  concerns  the  poor, 
Et  cum  agatur  de  pauperibus, 
In  bondage,  carceratis,  for  their  sake, 
In  eorum  causis,  natural  piety, 

Pietas,  ever  ought  to  win  the  day,  *525 

Triumphare  debet,  quia  ipsi  sunt, 
Because  those  very  paupers  constitute, 
Thesaurus  Christi,  all  the  wealth  of  Christ. 
Nevertheless  I  shall  not  hold  you  long 

VOL.    III.  M 


1 62  THE   RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

With  multiplicity  of  proofs,  nor  burn  1530 

Candle  at  noon-tide,  clarify  the  clear. 

There  beams  a  case  refulgent  from  our  books — 

Castrensis,  Butringarius,  everywhere 

I  find  it  burn  to  dissipate  the  dark. 

'T  is  this  :  a  husband  had  a  friend,  which  friend        1535 

Seemed  to  him  over-friendly  with  his  wife 

In  thought  and  purpose, — I  pretend  no  more. 

To  justify  suspicion  or  dispel, 

He  bids  his  wife  make  show  of  giving  heed, 

Semblance  of  sympathy — propose,  in  fine,  1540 

A  secret  meeting  in  a  private  place. 

The  friend,  enticed  thus,  finds  an  ambuscade, 

To-wit,  the  husband  posted  with  a  pack 

Of  other  friends,  who  fall  upon  the  first 

And  beat  his  love  and  life  out  both  at  once.  1545 

These  friends  were  brought  to  question  for  their  help. 

Law  ruled  "  The  husband  being  in  the  right, 

"  Who  helped  him  in  the  right  can  scarce  be  wrong  " — 

Opinio,  an  opinion  every  way, 

Midtum  tenenda  cordi,  heart  should  hold  !  1550 

When  the  inferiors  follow  as  befits 


DOMINUS    HYACINTHUS    DE   ARCHANGELIS.  1 63 

The  lead  o'  the  principal,  they  change  their  name, 

And,  non  dicuntur,  are  no  longer  called 

His  mandatories,  mandatorily 

But  helpmates,  sed auxiliatores ;  since  1555 

To  that  degree  does  honour'  sake  lend  aid, 

Adeo  honoris  causa  est  efficax, 

That  not  alone,  non  solum,  does  it  pour 

Itself  out,  se  diffundat,  on  mere  friends, 

We  bring  to  do  our  bidding  of  this  sort,  1560 

In  mandatorios  simp/ices,  but  sucks 

Along  with  it  in  wide  and  generous  whirl, 

Sed  etiam  assassinii  qualitate 

Qualificatos,  people  qualified 

By  the  quality  of  assassination's  self,  1565 

Dare  I  make  use  of  such  neologism, 

Ut  utar  verbo. 

Haste  we  to  conclude  : 
Of  the  other  points  that  favour,  leave  some  few 
For  Spreti;  such  as  the  delinquents'  youth  :  1570 

One  of  them  falls  short,  by  some  months,  of  age 
Fit  to  be  managed  by  the  gallows ;  two 


164  THE    RING   AND   THE   BOOK. 

May  plead  exemption  from  our  law's  award, 

Being  foreigners,  subjects  of  the  Granduke — 

I  spare  that  bone  to  Spreti  and  reserve  1575 

Myself  the  juicier  breast  of  argument — 

Flinging  the  breast-blade  i'  the  face  o'  the  Fisc, 

Who  furnished  me  the  tid-bit :  he  must  needs 

Play  off  his  armoury  and  rack  the  clowns, — 

And  they,  at  instance  of  the  rack,  confessed  1580 

All  four  unanimously  did  resolve, — 

That  night  o'  the  murder,  in  brief  minutes  snatched 

Behind  the  back  of  Guido  as  he  fled, — 

That,  since  he  had  not  kept  his  promise,  paid 

The  money  for  the  murder  on  the  spot,  1585 

And,  reaching  home  again,  might  even  ignore 

The  past  or  pay  it  in  improper  coin, 

They  one  and  all  resolved,  these  hopeful  friends, 

They  would  inaugurate  the  morrow's  light, 

Having  recruited  strength  with  needful  rest,  1590 

By  killing  Guido  as  he  lay  asleep 

Pillowed  by  wallet  which  contained  their  fee. 

I  thank  the  Fisc  for  knowledge  of  this  fact : 


DOMINUS    HYACINTHUS   DE   ARCHANGELIS.  1 65 

What  fact  could  hope  to  make  more  manifest 

Their  rectitude,  Guido's  integrity  ?  3595 

For  who  fails  recognise  apparent  here, 

That  these  poor  rustics  bore  no  envy,  hate, 

Malice  nor  yet  uncharitableness 

Against  the  people  they  had  put  to  death  ? 

In  them,  did  such  an  act  reward  itself?  1600 

All  done  was  to  deserve  their  simple  pay, 

Obtain  the  bread  they  earned  by  sweat  of  brow  : 

Missing  this  pay,  they  missed  of  everything — 

Hence  claimed  it,  even  at  expense  of  life 

To  their  own  lord,  so  little  warped  were  they  1605 

By  prepossession,  such  the  absolute 

Instinct  of  equity  in  rustic  souls  ! 

While  he  the  Count,  the  cultivated  mind, 

He,  wholly  rapt  in  his  serene  regard 

Of  honour,  as  who  contemplates  the  sun  '  16 to 

And  hardly  minds  what  tapers  blink  below, 

He,  dreaming  of  no  argument  for  death 

Except  the  vengeance  worthy  noble  hearts, 

Would  he  so  desecrate  the  deed  forsooth, 

Vulgarise  vengeance,  as  defray  its  cost  16 15 


1 66  THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

By  money  dug  out  of  the  dirty  earth, 

Mere  irritant  in  Maro's  phrase,  to  ill  ? 

What  though  he  lured  base  hinds  by  lucre's  hope, — 

The  only  motive  they  could  masticate,  1619 

Milk  for  babes,  not  strong  meat  which  men  require  ? 

The  deed  done,  those  coarse  hands  were  soiled  enough, 

He  spared  them  the  pollution  of  the  pay. 

So  much  for  the  allegement,  thine,  my  Fisc, 

Quo  nil  absurdius,  than  which  nought  more  mad, 

Excogitari potest,  may  be  squeezed  1625 

From  out  the  cogitative  brain  of  thee  ! 

And  now,  thou  excellent  the  Governor ! 

(Push  to  the  peroration)  cceterum 

Enixe  sipplico,  I  strive  in  prayer, 

Ut  dominis  meis,  that  unto  the  Court,  1^30 

Benignafronte,  with  a  gracious  brow, 

Et  ocidis  serenis,  and  mild  eyes, 

Perpendere placeat,  it  may  please  them  weigh, 

Quod  dominus  Guido,  that  our  noble  Count, 

Occidit,  did  the  killing  in  dispute,  1635 

Ut  ejus  honor  tumulatus,  that 


DOMINUS    HYACINTHUS    DE    ARCHANGELIS.  167 

The  honour  of  him  buried  fathom-deep 

In  infamy,  in  infamia,  might  arise, 

Resurgeret,  as  ghosts  break  sepulchre  ! 

Occidit,  for  he  killed,  uxor  em,  wife,  1640 

Quia  illi  fuit,  since  she  was  to  him, 

Opprobrio,  a  disgrace  and  nothing  more  ! 

Et  genitores,  killed  her  parents  too, 

Qui,  who,  postposita  verecimdia, 

Having  thrown  off  all  sort  of  decency,  1645 

Filiam  repudiarunt,  had  renounced 

Their  daughter,  atque  dedarare  nou 

Erubuerunt,  nor  felt  blush  tinge  cheek, 

Declaring,  meretricis  geuitam 

Esse,  she  was  the  offspring  of  a  drab,  1650 

Ut  ipse  dehouestai'etur,  just 

That  so  himself  might  lose  his  social  rank  ! 

Cujus  mentem,  and  which  daughter's  heart  and  soul, 

They,  perverterunt,  turned  from  the  right  course, 

Et  ad  illicitos  a??iores  nou  1655 

Dumtaxat  pellexerunt,  and  to  love 

Not  simply  did  alluringly  incite, 

Sed  vi  obedientice,  but  by  force 


1 68  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

O'  the  d\ity,Jilialis,  daughters  owe, 
Coegenmt,  forced  and  drove  her  to  the  deed  :  1660 

Occidit,  I  repeat  he  killed  the  clan, 
Ne  scilicet  amplius  i?i  dedecore, 
Lest  peradventure  longer  life  might  trail, 
Viveret,  link  by  link  his  turpitude, 

Invisus  consanguineis,  hateful  so  1665 

To  kith  and  kindred,  a  nobilibus 
JSJotatus,  shunned  by  men  of  quality, 
Relictus  ab  amicis,  left  i'  the  lurch 
By  friends,  ab  omnibus  derisus,  turned 
A  common  hack-block  to  try  edge  of  jokes.  1670 

Occidit,  and  he  killed  them  here  in  Rome, 
In  Urbe,  the  Eternal  City,  Sirs, 
Nempe  qua  alias  spectata  esl7 
The  appropriate  theatre  which  witnessed  once, 
Matronam  nobilem,  Lucretia's  self,  1675 

A  bluer e  pudicitice  maculas, 
Wash  off  the  spots  of  her  pudicity, 
Sanguine proprio,  with  her  own  pure  blood  ; 
Qiice  7'idit,  and  which  city  also  saw, 
Pair  em,  Virginius,  tmdequaque,  quite,  1680 


DOMINUS    HYACINTHUS    DE   ARCHANGELIS.  1 69 

fmpunem,  with  no  sort  of  punishment, 

Nor,  et  11011  illaudatum,  lacking  praise, 

Sed  pollueiitem  parricidio, 

Imbrue  his  hands  with  butchery,  filice, 

Of  chaste  Virginia,  to  avoid  a  rape,  1685 

Ne  raperetur  ad  sticpra  ;  so  to  heart, 

Tanti  Mi  cordi  fuit,  did  he  take, 

Suspicio,  the  mere  fancy  men  might  have, 

Honoris  amittendi,  of  fame's  loss, 

Ut  poiius  v ohicr it  filia  .  1690 

Orbari,  that  he  chose  to  lose  his  child, 

Qiiam  ilia  incederet,  rather  than  she  walk 

The  ways  an,  inhonesta,  child  disgraced, 

Licet  11011  spout e,  though  against  her  will. 

Occidit — killed  them,  I  reiterate —  1695 

/>/  propria  domo,  in  their  own  abode, 

Ut  adultera  et parentes,  that  each  wretch, 

Conscii  agnoscerent,  might  both  see  and  say, 

Nullum  locum,  there's  no  place,  iiullumque  esse 

Asylum,  nor  yet  refuge  of  escape,  1700 

Imptnetrabilem,  shall  serve  as  bar, 

Honori  Iceso,  to  the  wounded  one 


I70  THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

In  honour ;  neve  ibi  opprobria 
Conlinuarentur,  killed  them  on  the  spot 
Moreover,  dreading  lest  within  those  walls  1705 

The  opprobrium  peradventure  be  prolonged, 
Et  domus  quce  testis  fuit  turpium, 
And  that  the  domicile  which  witnessed  crime, 
Esset  et  poziice,  might  watch  punishment : 
Occidit,  killed,  I  round  you  in  the  ears,  17 10 

Quia  alio  modo,  since  by  other  mode, 
Non  poierat  ejus  existimatio, 
There  was  no  possibility  his  fame, 
Lcesa,  gashed  griesly,  tarn  enormiter, 
Ducere  cicatrices ',  might  be  healed  :  1 7 1 5 

Occidit  ut  exemplum  pi'ceberet 
Uxoribus,  killed  her  so  to  lesson  wives 
Jiu-a  conjugii,  that  the  marriage-oath, 
Esse  servanda,  must  be  kept  henceforth  : 
Occidit  denique,  killed  her,  in  a  word,  1720 

Ut  pro  posse  honestus  viveret, 
That  he,  please  God,  might  creditably  live, 
Sin  minus,  but  if  fate  willed  otherwise, 
Proprii  Zionoris,  of  his  outraged  fame, 


DOMINUS    HYACINTHUS    DE   ARCHANGELIS.  171 

Offbisi,  by  Mannaja,  if  you  please,  1725 

Commiseranda  victima  caderet, 
The  pitiable  victim  he  should  fall ! 

Done  !  I'  the  rough,  i'  the  rough  !     Eut  done  !     And,  lo, 

Landed  and  stranded  lies  my  very  own, 

My  miracle,  my  monster  of  defence —  173° 

Leviathan  into  the  nose  whereof 

I  have  put  fish-hook,  pierced  his  jaw  with  thorn, 

And  given  him  to  my  maidens  for  a  play  ! 

I'  the  rough, — to-morrow  I  review  my  piece, 

Tame  here  and  there  undue  floridity, —  1735 

It  's  hard  :  you  have  to  plead  before  these  priests 

And  poke  at  them  with  Scripture,  or  you  pass 

For  heathen  and,  what's  worse,  for  ignorant 

O'  the  quality  o'  the  Court  and  what  it  likes 

By  way  of  illustration  of  the  law  :  1740 

To-morrow  stick  in  this,  and  throw  out  that, 

And,  having  first  ecclesiasticized, 

Regularize  the  whole,  next  emphasize, 

Then  latinize  and  lastly  Cicero-ize, 

Giving  my  Fisc  his  finish.     There 's  my  speech —     1745 


T72  THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

And  where 's  my  fry,  and  family  and  friends  ? 

Where 's  that  old  Hyacinth  I  mean  to  hug 

Till  he  cries  out,  "Jam  satis  I  Let  me  breathe  !  " 

Oh,  what  an  evening  have  I  earned  to-day ! 

Hail,  ye  true  pleasures,  all  the  rest  are  false  !  1750 

Oh,  the  old  mother,  oh,  the  fattish  wife  ! 

Rogue  Hyacinth  shall  put  on  paper  toque, 

And  wrap  himself  around  with  mamma's  veil 

Done  up  to  imitate  papa's  black  robe, 

(I  'm  in  the  secret  of  the  comedy, —  1755 

Part  of  the  program  leaked  out  long  ago  !) 

And  call  himself  the  Advocate  o'  the  Poor, 

Mimic  Don  father  that  defends  the  Count, 

And  for  reward  shall  have  a  small  full  glass 

Of  manly  red  rosolio  to  himself,  1760 

— Always  provided  that  he  conjugate 

Bibo,  I  drink,  correctly — nor  be  found 

Make  the  perfection^  bipsi,  as  last  year  ! 

How  the  ambitious  do  so  harden  heart 

As  lightly  hold  by  these  home-sanctitudes,  1765 

To  me  is  matter  of  bewilderment — 

Bewilderment !     Because  ambition's  range 


DOMINUS    HYACINTHUS    DE    ARCHANGELIS.  1 73 

Is  nowise  tethered  by  domestic  tie  : 

Am  I  refused  an  outlet  from  my  home 

To  the  world's  stage  ? — whereon  a  man  should  play 

The  man  in  public,  vigilant  for  law,  177 1 

Zealous  for  truth,  a  credit  to  his  kind, 

Nay, — through  the  talent  so  employed  as  yield 

The  Lord  his  own  again  with  usury, — 

A  satisfaction,  yea,  to  God  Himself!  1775 

Well,  I  have  modelled  me  by  Agur's  wish, 

"  Remove  far  from  me  vanity  and  lies, 

"  Feed  me  with  food  convenient  for  me  ! "     What 

I'  the  world  should  a  wise  man  require  beyond  ? 

Can  I  but  coax  the  good  fat  little  wife  1780 

To  tell  her  fool  of  a  father  of  the  prank 

His  scapegrace  nephew  played  this  time  last  year 

At  Carnival, — he  could  not  choose,  I  think, 

But  modify  that  inconsiderate  gift 

O'  the  cup  and  cover  (somewhere  in  the  will  1785 

Under  the  pillow,  someone  seems  to  guess) 

— Correct  that  clause  in  favour  of  a  boy 

The  trifle  ought  to  grace  with  name  engraved 

(Would  look  so  well  produced  in  years  to  come 


174       •  THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

To  pledge  a  memory  when  poor  papa  J79° 

Latin  and  law  are  long  since  laid  at  rest) 

Hyacintho  dono  dedit  avus, — why, 

The  wife  should  get  a  necklace  for  her  pains, 

The  very  pearls  that  made  Violante  proud, 

And  Pietro  pawned  for  half  their  value  once, —         1795 

Redeemable  by  somebody — 11c  sit 

Marita  quce  rotundioribiis 

Omista  mammis.  .  .  baccis  ambulet, 

Her  bosom  shall  display  the  big  round  balls, 

No  braver  should  be  borne  by  wedded  wife  !  1800 

With  which  Horatian  promise  I  conclude. 

Into  the  pigeon-hole  with  thee,  my  speech  ! 

Off  and  away,  first  work  then  play,  play,  play  ! 

Bottini,  burn  your  books,  you  blazing  ass  ! 

Sing  "  Tra-la-la,  for,  lambkins,  we  must  live  !  "        1805 


(     i75     ) 


IX. 

JURIS   DOCTOR  JOHANNES- 
BAPTISTA    BOTTINIUS, 

FISCI  ET   REV.  CAM.  APOSTOL.  ADVOCATUS. 

Had  I  God's  leave,  how  I  would  alter  things  ! 

If  I  might  read  instead  of  print  my  speech, — 

Ay,  and  enliven  speech  with  many  a  flower 

Refuses  obstinately  blow  in  print 

As  wildings  planted  in  a  prim  parterre, —  5 

This  scurvy  room  were  turned  an  immense  hall  ; 

Opposite,  fifty  judges  in  a  row  \ 

This  side  and  that  of  me,  for  audience — Rome  : 

And,  where  yon  window  is,  the  Pope  should  be — 

Watch,  curtained,  but  yet  visibly  enough.  10 


176  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

A  buzz  of  expectation  !    Through  the  crowd, 

Jingling  his  chain  and  stumping  with  his  staff, 

Up  comes  an  usher,  louts  him  low,  "  The  Court 

"  Requires  the  allocution  of  the  Fisc  ! " 

I  rise,  I  bend,  I  look  about  me,  pause  15 

O'er  the  hushed  multitude  :     I  count — One,  two — 


Have  ye  seen,  Judges,  have  ye,  lights  of  law, — 

When  it  may  hap  some  painter,  much  in  vogue 

Throughout  our  city  nutritive  of  arts, 

Ye  summon  to  a  task  shall  test  his  worth,  20 

And  manufacture,  as  he  knows  and  can, 

A  work  may  decorate  a  palace-wall, 

Afford  my  lords  their  Holy  Family, — 

Hath  it  escaped  the  acumen  of  the  Court 

How  such  a  painter  sets  himself  to  paint?  25 

Suppose  that  Joseph,  Mary  and  her  Babe 

A-journ eying  to  Egypt  prove  the  piece  : 

Why,  first  he  sedulously  practiseth, 

This  painter, — girding  loin  and  lighting  lamp, — 


JURIS   DOCTOR   JOHANNES-BAPTISTA    BOTTINIUS.        1 77 

On  what  may  nourish  eye,  make  facile  hand ;  30 

Getteth  him  studies  (styled  by  draughtsmen  so) 

From  some  assistant  corpse  of  Jew  or  Turk 

Or,  haply,  Molinist,  he  cuts  and  carves, — 

This  Luca  or  this  Carlo  or  the  like  : 

To  him  the  bones  their  inmost  secret  yield,  35 

Each  notch  and  nodule  signify  their  use, 

On  him  the  muscles  turn,  in  triple  tier, 

And  pleasantly  entreat  the  entrusted  man, — 

"  Familiarize  thee  with  our  play  that  lifts 

"  Thus,  and  thus  lowers  again,  leg,  arm  and  foot !  "      40 

— Ensuring  due  correctness  in  the  nude. 

Which  done,  is  all  done  ?     Not  a  whit,  ye  know  ! 

He, — to  art's  surface  rising  from  her  depth, — 

If  some  flax-polled  soft-bearded  sire  be  found, 

May  simulate  a  Joseph,  (happy  chance  !)  45 

Limneth  exact  each  wrinkle  of  the  brow, 

Loseth  no  involution,  cheek  or  chap, 

Till  lo,  in  black  and  white,  the  senior  lives  ! 

Is  it  a  young  and  comely  peasant-nurse 

That  poseth?  (be  the  phrase  accorded  me  !)  50 

Each  feminine  delight  of  florid  lip, 

VOL.  III.  N 


178  THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

Eyes  brimming  o'er  and  brow  bowed  down  with  love, 

Marmoreal  neck  and  bosom  uberous; — 

Glad  on  the  paper  in  a  trice  they  go 

To  help  his  notion  of  the  Mother-Maid  :  55 

Methinks  I  see  it,  chalk  a  little  stumped  ! 

Yea  and  her  babe — that  flexure  of  soft  limbs, 

That  budding  face  imbued  with  dewy  sleep, 

Contribute  each  an  excellence  to  Christ. 

Nay,  since  he  humbly  lent  companionship,  60 

Even  the  poor  ass,  unpanniered  and  elate 

Stands,  perks  an  ear  up,  he  a  model  too  ; 

While  clouted  shoon,  staff,  scrip  and  water-gourd, — 

Aught  may  betoken  travel,  heat  and  haste, — 

No  jot  nor  tittle  of  these  but  in  its  turn  65 

Ministers  to  perfection  of  the  piece  : 

Till  now,  such  piece  before  him,  part  by  part, — 

Such  prelude  ended, — pause  our  painter  may, 

Submit  his  fifty  studies  one  by  one, 

And  in  some  sort  boast  "  I  have  served  my  lords."        70 

But  what  ?    And  hath  he  painted  once  this  while  ? 
Or  when  ye  cry  "  Produce  the  thing  required, 


JURIS    DOCTOR   JOHANNES-BAPTISTA   BOTTINIUS.       1 79 

"  Show  us  our  picture  shall  rejoice  its  niche, 

"  Thy  Journey  through  the  Desert  done  in  oils  ! " — 

What,  doth  he  fall  to  shuffling  'mid  his  sheets,  75 

Fumbling  for  first  this,  then  the  other  fact 

Consigned  to  paper, — "  studies,"  bear  the  term  ! — 

And  stretch  a  canvas,  mix  a  pot  of  paste, 

And  fasten  here  a  head  and  there  a  tail, 

(The  ass  hath  one,  my  Judges  !)  so  dove-tail  80 

Or,  rather,  ass- tail  in,  piece  sorrily  out — 

By  bits  of  reproduction  of  the  life — 

The  picture,  the  expected  Family  ? 

I  trow  not  !  do  I  miss  with  my  conceit 

The  mark,  my  lords  ?—  not  so  my  lords  were  served  !    85 

Rather  your  artist  turns  abrupt  from  these, 

And  preferably  buries  him  and  broods 

(Quite  away  from  aught  vulgar  and  extern) 

On  the  inner  spectrum,  filtered  through  the  eye, 

His  brain-deposit,  bred  of  many  a  drop,  90 

E  plurihis  imum  :  and  the  wiser  he  ! 

For  in  that  brain, — their  fancy  sees  at  work, 

Could  my  lords  peep  indulged, — results  alone, 

Not  processes  which  nourish  the  result, 


l8o  THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

Would  they  discover  and  appreciate, — life 
Fed  by  digestion,  not  raw  food  itself, 
No  gobbets  but  smooth  comfortable  chyme 
Secreted  from  each  snapped-up  crudity, — 
Less  distinct,  part  by  part,  but  in  the  whole 
Truer  to  the  subject, — the  main  central  truth 
And  soul  o'  the  picture,  would  my  Judges  spy, — 
Not  those  mere  fragmentary  studied  facts 
Which  answer  to  the  outward  frame  and  flesh — 
Not  this  nose,  not  that  eyebrow,  the  other  fact 
Of  man's  staff,  woman's  stole  or  infant's  clout, 
But  lo,  a  spirit-birth  conceived  of  flesh, 
Truth  rare  and  real,  not  transcripts,  fact  and  false. 
The  studies — for  his  pupils  and  himself  ! 
The  picture  be  for  our  eximious  Rome 
And — who  knows  ? — satisfy  its  Governor, 
Whose  new  wing  to  the  villa  he  hath  bought 
(God  give  him  joy  of  it)  by  Capena,  soon 
('T  is  bruited)  shall  be  glowing  with  the  brush 
Of  who  hath  long  surpassed  the  Florentine, 
The  Urbinate  and  .  .  what  if  I  dared  add, 
Even  his  master,  yea  the  Cortonese, — 


JURIS    DOCTOR   JOHANNES-BAPTISTA    BOTTINIUS.        l8l 

I  mean  the  accomplished  Ciro  Ferri,  Sirs  ! 
(—Did  not  he  die  ?     I'  11  see  before  I  print.) 

End  we  exordium,  Phoebus  plucks  my  ear  ! 

Thus  then,  just  so  and  no  whit  otherwise,  120 

Have  I, — engaged  as  I  were  Ciro's  self, 

To  paint  a  parallel,  a  Family, 

The  patriarch  Pietro  with  his  wise  old  wife 

To  boot  (as  if  one  introduced  Saint  Anne 

By  bold  conjecture  to  complete  the  group)  125 

And  juvenile  Pompilia  with  her  babe, 

Who,  seeking  safety  in  the  wilderness, 

Were  all  surprised  by  Herod,  while  outstretched 

In  sleep  beneath  a  palm-tree  by  a  spring, 

And  killed — the  very  circumstance  I  paint,  130, 

Moving  the  pity  and  terror  of  my  lords — 

Exactly  so  have  I,  a  month  at  least, 

Your  Fiscal,  made  me  cognizant  of  facts, 

Searched  out,  pried  into,  pressed  the  meaning  forth 

Of  every  piece  of  evidence  in  point,       .  135 

How  bloody  Herod  slew  these  innocents, — 

Until  the  glad  result  is  gained,  the  group 


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 


Demonstrably  presented  in  detail, 

Their  slumber  and  his  onslaught, — like  as  life. 

Yea  and,  availing  me  of  help  allowed 

By  law,  discreet  provision  lest  my  lords 

Be  too  much  troubled  by  effrontery, — 

The  rack,  law  plies  suspected  crime  withal — 

(Law  that  hath  listened  while  the  lyrist  sang 

"  Le?ie  tormentum  i?igenio  admoves" 

Gently  thou  joggest  by  a  twinge  the  wit, 

"  Plerumque  duro"  else  were  slow  to  blab  !) 

Through  this  concession  my  full  cup  runs  o'er  : 

The  guilty  owns  his  guilt  without  reserve. 

Therefore  by  part  and  part  I  clutch  my  case 

Which,  in  entirety  now, — momentous  task, — - 

My  lords  demand,  so  render  them  I  must, 

Since,  one  poor  pleading  more  and  I  have  done. 

But  shall  I  ply  my  papers,  play  my  proofs, 

Parade  my  studies,  fifty  in  a  row, 

As  though  the  Court  were  yet  in  pupilage 

And  not  the  artist's  ultimate  appeal  ? 

Much  rather  let  me  soar  the  height  prescribed 

And,  bowing  low,  proffer  my  picture's  self ! 


JURIS    DOCTOR  JOHANNES-BAPTISTA    BOTTINIUS.        1 83 


No  more  of  proof,  disproof, — such  virtue  was,  160 

Such  vice  was  never  in  Pompilia,  now  ! 
Far  better  say  "  Behold  Pompilia  !" — (for 
I  leave  the  family  as  unmanageable, 
And  stick  to  just  one  portrait,  but  life-size.) 
Hath  calumny  imputed  to  the  fair  165 

A  blemish,  mole  on  cheek  or  wart  on  chin, 
Much  more,  blind  hidden  horrors  best  unnamed  ? 
Shall  I  descend  to  prove  you,  point  by  point, 
Never  was  knock-knee  known  nor  splay-foot  found 
In  Phryne  ?  (I  must  let  the  portrait  go,  170 

Content  me  with  the  model,  I  believe) — 
— I  prove  this  ?     An  indignant  sweep  of  hand, 
Dash  at  and  doing  away  with  drapery, 
And, — use  your  eyes,  Athenians,  smooth  she  smiles  ! 
Or, — since  my  client  can  no  longer  smile,  175 

And  more  appropriate  instances  abound, — 
What  is  this  Tale  of  Tarquin,  how  the  slave 
Was  caught  by  him,  preferred  to  Collatine  ? 
Thou,  even  from  thy  corpse-clothes  virginal, 
Look'st  the  lie  dead,  Lucretia  !  180 

Thus  at  least 


184  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

I,  by  the  guidance  of  antiquity, 

(Our  one  infallible  guide)  now  operate, 

Sure  that  the  innocency  shown  is  safe ; 

Sure,  too,  that,  while  I  plead,  the  echoes  cry  185 

(Lend  my  weak  voice  thy  trump,  sonorous  Fame  !) 

"  Monstrosity  the  Phrynean  shape  shall  mar, 

"  Lucretia's  soul  comport  with  Tarquin's  lie, 

"  When  thistles  grow  on  vines  or  thorns  yield  figs, 

"  Or  oblique  sentence  leave  this  judgment-seat ! "        190 

A  great  theme  :  may  my  strength  be  adequate  ! 

For — paint  Pompilia,  dares  my  feebleness  ? 

How  did  I  unaware  engage  so  much 

— Find  myself  undertaking  to  produce 

A  faultless  nature  in  a  flawless  form  ?  195 

What 's  here  ?    Oh,  turn  aside  nor  dare  the  blaze 

Of  such  a  crown,  such  constellation,  say, 

As  jewels  here  thy  front,  Humanity  ! 

First,  infancy,  pellucid  as  a  pearl ; 

Then,  childhood — stone  which,  dew-drop  at  the  first,  200 

(An  old  conjecture)  sucks,  by  dint  of  gaze, 

Blue  from  the  sky  and  turns  to  sapphire  so  : 


JURIS    DOCTOR   JOHANNES-BAPTISTA    BOTTINIUS.        T85 

Yet  both  these  gems  eclipsed  by,  last  and  best, 

Womanliness  and  wifehood  opaline, 

Its  milk-white  pallor, — chastity, — suffused  205 

With  here  and  there  a  tint  and  hint  of  flame, — 

Desire, — the  lapidary  loves  to  find. 

Such  jewels  bind  conspicuously  thy  brow, 

Pompilia,  infant,  child,  maid,  woman,  wife — 

Crown  the  ideal  in  our  earth  at  last !  210 

What  should  a  faculty  like  mine  do  here  ? 

Close  eyes,  or  else,  the  rashlier  hurry  hand  ! 

Which  is  to  say, — lose  no  time  but  begin  ! 

Sermocinando  ne  dedamem,  Sirs, 

Ultra  clepsydram,  as  our  preachers  say,  215 

Lest  I  exceed  my  hour-glass.     Whereupon, 

As  Flaccus  prompts,  I  dare  the  epic  plunge — 

Begin  at  once  with  marriage,  up  till  when 

Little  or  nothing  would  arrest  your  love, 

In  the  easeful  life  o'  the  lady;  lamb  and  lamb,  220 

How  do  they  differ  ?     Know  one,  you  know  all 

Manners  of  maidenhood  :  mere  maiden  she. 

And  since  all  lambs  are  like  in  more  than  fleece, 


1 86  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

Prepare  to  find  that,  lamb-like,  she  too  frisks — 

O'  the  weaker  sex,  my  lords,  the  weaker  sex  !  225 

To  whom,  the  Teian  teaches  us,  for  gift, 

Not  strength, — man's  dower, — but  beauty,  nature  gave, 

"  Beauty  in  lieu  of  spears,  in  lieu  of  shields  ! " 

And  what  is  beauty's  sure  concomitant, 

Nay,  intimate  essential  character,  230 

But  melting  wiles,  deliciousest  deceits, 

The  whole  redoubted  armoury  of  love  ? 

Therefore  of  vernal  pranks,  dishevellings 

O'  the  hair  of  youth  that  dances  April  in, 

And  easily-imagined  Hebe-slips  235 

O'er  sward  which  May  makes  over-smooth  for  foot — 

These  shall  we  pry  into  ? — or  wiselier  wink, 

Though  numerous  and  dear  they  may  have  been  ? 

For  lo,  advancing  Hymen  and  his  pomp  ! 

Discedunt  nunc  amores,  loves,  farewell !  240 

Maneat  amor,  let  love,  the  sole,  remain  ! 

Farewell  to  dewiness  and  prime  of  life  ! 

Remains  the  rough  determined  day  :  dance  done, 

To  work,  with  plough  and  harrow  !    What  comes  next  ? 


JURIS    DOCTOR   JOHANNES-BAPTISTA   BOTTINIUS.        1 87 

Tis  Guido  henceforth  guides  Pompilia's  step,  245 

Cries  "  No  more  friskings  o'er  the  foodful  glebe, 

"  Else,  'ware  the  whip  !"     Accordingly, — first  crack 

O'  the  thong, — we  hear  that  his  young  wife  was  barred, 

Cohibitafuit,  from  the  old  free  life, 

Vitam  liberiorem  ducere.  250 

Demur  we  ?     Nowise  :  heifer  brave  the  hind  ? 

We  seek  not  there  should  lapse  the  natural  law, 

The  proper  piety  to  lord  and  king 

And  husband :  let  the  heifer  bear  the  yoke  ! 

Only,  I  crave  he  cast  not  patience  off,  255 

This  hind  ;  for  deem  you  she  endures  the  whip, 

Nor  winces  at  the  goad,  nay,  restive,  kicks  ? 

What  if  the  adversary's  charge  be  just, 

And  all  untowardly  she  pursue  her  way 

With  groan  and  grunt,  though  hind  strike  ne'er  so  hard  ? 

If  petulant  remonstrance  made  appeal,  261 

Unseasonable,  o'erprotracted, — if 

Importunate  challenge  taxed  the  public  ear 

When  silence  more  decorously  had  served 

For  protestation, — if  Pompilian  plaint  265 

Wrought  but  to  aggravate  Guidonian  ire, — 


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 


Why,  such  mishaps,  ungainly  though  they  be, 

Ever  companion  change,  are  incident 

To  altered  modes  and  novelty  of  life  : 

The  philosophic  mind  expects  no  less,  270 

Smilingly  knows  and  names  the  crisis,  sits 

Waiting  till  old  things  go  and  new  arrive. 

Therefore,  I  hold  a  husband  but  inept 

Who  turns  impatient  at  such  transit-time, 

As  if  this  running  from  the  rod  would  last !  275 

Since,  even  while  I  speak,  the  end  is  reached 

Success  awaits  the  soon-disheartened  man, 

The  parents  turn  their  backs  and  leave  the  house, 

The  wife  may  wail  but  none  shall  intervene, 

He  hath  attained  his  object,  groom  and  bride  280 

Partake  the  nuptial  bower  no  soul  to  see, 

Old  things  are  passed  and  all  again  is  new, 

Over  and  gone  the  obstacles  to  peace, 

Novorum — tenderly  the  Man tuan  turns 

The  expression,  some  such  purpose  in  his  eye —  285 

Nascitar  or  do  !    Every  storm  is  laid, 

And"  forth  from  plain  each  pleasant  herb  may  peep, 


JURIS    DOCTOR   JOHANNES-BAPTISTA   BOTTINIUS.        1 89 

Each  bloom  of  wifehood  in  abeyance  late  : 
(Confer  a  passage  in  the  Canticles.) 

But  what  if,  as  't  is  wont  with  plant  and  wife,  290 

Flowers, — after  a  suppression  to  good  end, 

Still,  when  they  do  spring  forth, — sprout  here,  spread 

there, 
Anywhere  likelier  than  beneath  the  foot 
O'  the  lawful  good-man  gardener  of  the  ground  ? 
He  dug  and  dibbled,  sowed  and  watered, — still  295 

'T  is  a  chance  wayfarer  shall  pluck  the  increase. 
Just  so,  respecting  persons  not  too  much, 
The  lady,  foes  allege,  put  forth  each  charm 
And  proper  floweret  of  feminity 

To  whosoever  had  a  nose  to  smell  300 

Or  breast  to  deck  :  what  if  the  charge  be  true  ? 
The  fault  were  graver  had  she  looked  with  choice, 
Fastidiously  appointed  who  should  grasp, 
Who,  in  the  whole  town,  go  without  the  prize  ! 
To  nobody  she  destined  donative,  305 

But,  first  come  was  first  served,  the  accuser  saith 
Put  case  her  sort  of  .  .  in  this  kind  .  .  escapes 


I90  THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 


Were  many  and  oft  and  indiscriminate — 

Impute  ye  as  the  action  were  prepense, 

The  gift  particular,  arguing  malice  so  ?  310 

Which  butterfly  of  the  wide  air  shall  brag 

u  I  was  preferred  to  Guido  " — when  't  is  clear 

The  cup,  he  quaffs  at,  lay  with  olent  breast 

Open  to  gnat,  midge,  bee  and  moth  as  well  ? 

One  chalice  entertained  the  company;  315 

And  if  its  peevish  lord  object  the  more, 

Mistake,  misname  such  bounty  in  a  wife, 

Haste  we  to  advertise  him — charm  of  cheek, 

Lustre  of  eye,  allowance  of  the  lip, 

All  womanly  components  in  a  spouse,  320 

These  are  no  household-bread  each  stranger's  bite 

Leaves  by  so  much  diminished  for  the  mouth 

O'  the  master  of  the  house  at  supper-time  : 

But  rather  like  a  lump  of  spice  they  lie, 

Morsel  of  myrrh,  which  scents  the  neighbourhood       325 

Yet  greets  its  lord  no  lighter  by  a  grain. 

Nay,  even  so,  he  shall  be  satisfied  ! 
Concede  we  there  was  reason  in  his  wrong, 


JURIS   DOCTOR   JOHANNES-BAPTISTA   BOTTINIUS.        I$l 

Grant  we  his  grievance  and  content  the  man  ! 

For  lo,  Pompilia,  she  submits  herself;  330 

Ere  three  revolving  years  have  crowned  their  course, 

Off  and  away  she  puts  this  same  reproach 

Of  lavish  bounty,  inconsiderate  gift 

O'  the  sweets  of  wifehood  stored  to  other  ends  : 

No  longer  shall  he  blame  "  She  none  excludes,"  335 

But  substitute  "  She  laudably  sees  all, 

"  Searches  the  best  out  and  selects  the  same." 

For  who  is  here,  long  sought  and  latest  found, 

Waiting  his  turn  unmoved  amid  the  whirl, 

"  Constans  in  levitate" — Ha,  my  lords ?  340 

Calm  in  his  levity, — indulge  the  quip  ! — 

Since  'tis  a  levite  bears  the  bell  away, 

Parades  him  henceforth  as  Pompilia's  choice. 

'Tis  no  ignoble  object,  husband  !     Doubt'st  ? 

When  here  comes  tripping  Flaccus  with  his  phrase      345 

u  Trust  me,  no  miscreant  singled  from  the  mob, 

"  Crede  non  ilium  tibi  de  s celesta 

"  Plebe  delectiun"  but  a  man  of  mark, 

A  priest,  dost  hear  ?    Why  then,  submit  thyself ! 

Priest,  ay  and  very  phoenix  of  such  fowl,  350 


I92  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

Well-born,  of  culture,  young  and  vigorous, 

Comely  too,  since  precise  the  precept  points — 

On  the  selected  levite  be  there  found 

Nor  mole  nor  scar  nor  blemish,  lest  the  mind 

Come  all  uncandid  through  the  thwarting  flesh  !  355 

Was  not  the  son  of  Jesse  ruddy,  sleek, 

Pleasant  to  look  on,  pleasant  every  way  ? 

Since  well  he  smote  the  harp  and  sweetly  sang, 

And  danced  till  Abigail  came  out  to  see, 

And  seeing  smiled  and  smiling  ministered  360 

The  raisin-cluster  and  the  cake  of  figs, 

With  ready  meal  refreshed  the  gifted  youth, 

Till  Nabal,  who  was  absent  shearing  sheep, 

Felt  heart  sink,  took  to  bed  (discreetly  done — 

They  might  have  been  beforehand  with  him  else)        365 

And  died — would  Guido  had  behaved  as  well ! 

But  ah,  the  faith  of  early  days  is  gone, 

Heu  pr is ca  fides  !    Nothing  died  in  him 

Save  courtesy,  good  sense  and  proper  trust, 

Which,  when  they  ebb  from  souls  they  should  o'erflow, 

Discover  stub,  weed,  sludge  and  ugliness.  371 

(The  Pope,  you  know,  is  Neapolitan 


JURIS    DOCTOR   JOHANXES-BAPTTSTA    BOTTINIUS.        1 93 

And  relishes  a  sea-side  simile.) 
Deserted  by  each  charitable  wave, 

Guido,  left  high  and  dry,  shows  jealous  now  !  375 

Jealous  avouched,  paraded :  tax  the  fool 
With  any  peccadillo,  he  responds 
"  Truly  I  beat  my  wife  through  jealousy, 
u  Imprisoned  her  and  punished  otherwise, 
u  Being  jealous  :  now  would  threaten,  sword  in  hand,  380 
"  Now  manage  to  mix  poison  in  her  sight, 
"  And  so  forth  :  jealously  I  dealt,  in  fine." 
Concede  the  fact  and  what  remains  to  prove  ? 
Have  I  to  teach  my  masters  what  effect 
Hath  jealousy  and  how,  befooling  men,  385 

It  makes  false  true,  abuses  eye  and  ear, 
Turns  the  mist  adamantine,  loads  with  sound 
Silence,  and  into  void  and  vacancy 
Crowds  a  whole  phalanx  of  conspiring  foes  ? 
Therefore  who  owns  u  I  watched  with  jealousy  390 

"  My  wife  "  adds  "  for  no  reason  in  the  world  !  " 
What  need  that  who  says  "madman  "  should  remark 
"  The  thing  he  thought  a  serpent  proved  an  eel  ?  " — 
Perchance  the  right  Comacchian,  six  foot  length, 
vol.  in.  o 


194  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

And  not  an  inch  too  long  for  that  same  pie  395 

(Master  Arcangeli  has  heard  of  such) 

Whose  succulence  makes  fasting  bearable ;    i 

Meant  to  regale  some  moody  splenetic 

Who  pleases  to  mistake  the  donor's  gift, 

And  spies — I  know  not  what  Lernsean  snake  4c o 

T  the  luscious  Lenten  creature,  stamps  forsooth 

The  dainty  in  the  dust. 

Enough  !     Prepare, 
His  lunes  announced,  for  downright  lunacy  ! 
Insanit  homo,  threat  succeeds  to  threat,  405 

And  blow  redoubles  blow, — his  wife,  the  block. 
But,  if  a  block,  shall  not  she  jar  the  hand 
That  buffets  her  ?     The  injurious  idle  stone 
Rebounds  and  fits  the  head  of  him  who  flung. 
Causeless  rage  breeds,  i'  the  wife  now,  rageful  cause,  410 
Tyranny  wakes  rebellion  from  its  sleep. 
Rebellion,  say  I  ? — rather,  self-defence, 
Laudable  wish  to  live  and  see  good  days, 
Pricks  our  Pompilia  on  to  fly  the  foe 
By  any  means,  at  any  price, — nay,  more,  415 


JURIS    DOCTOR   JOHANNES-BAPTISTA   BOTTINIUS.        1 95 

Nay,  most  of  all,  i'  the  very  interest 

Of  the  foe  that,  baffled  of  his  blind  desire 

At  any  price,  is  truliest  victor  so. 

Shall  he  effect  his  crime  and  lose  his  soul  ? 

No,  dictates  duty  to  a  loving  wife.  42° 

Far  better  that  the  unconsummate  blow, 

Adroitly  baulked  by  her,  should  back  again, 

Correctively  admonish  his  own  pate  ! 

Crime  then, — the  Court  is  with  me  ? — she  must  crush ; 

How  crush  it  ?     By  all  efficacious  means ;  425 

And  these, — why,  what  in  woman  should  they  be? 

"  With  horns  the  bull,  with  teeth  the  lion  fights, 

"  To  woman,"  quoth  the  lyrist  quoted  late, 

"  Nor  teeth,  nor  horns,  but  beauty,  Nature  gave  !  " 

Pretty  i'  the  Pagan  !     Who  dares  blame  the  use  430 

Of  the  armoury  thus  allowed  for  natural, — 

Exclaim  against  a  seeming-dubious  play 

O'  the  sole  permitted  weapon,  spear  and  shield 

Alike,  resorted  to  ?  the  circumstance 

By  poor  Pompilia  ?     Grant  she  somewhat  plied  435 

Arts  that  allure,  the  magic  nod  and  wink, 


ig6  THE  RING  AND  THE  EOOK. 

The  witchery  of  gesture,  spell  of  word, 

Whereby  the  likelier  to  enlist  this  friend, 

Yet  stranger,  as  a  champion  on  her  side  ? 

Such,  being  but  mere  man,  ('t  was  all  she  knew),%        44 

Must  be  made  sure  by  beauty's  silken  bond, 

The  weakness  that  subdues  the  strong,  and  bows 

Wisdom  alike  and  folly.     Grant  the  tale 

O'  the  husband,  which  is  false,  for  proved  and  true 

To  the  letter, — or  the  letters,  I  should  say,  44 

The  abominations  he  professed  to  find 

And  fix  upon  Pompilia  and  the  priest, — 

Allow  them  hers — for  though  she  could  not  write, 

In  early  days  of  Eve-like  innocence 

That  plucked  no  apple  from  the  knowledge-tree,  45 

Yet,  at  the  Serpent's  word,  Eve  plucks  and  eats 

And  knows — especially  how  to  read  and  write  : 

And  so  Pompilia, — as  the  move  o'  the  maw, 

Quoth  Persius,  makes  a  parrot  bid  "  Good-day  ! " 

A  crow  salute  the  concave,  and  a  pie  4c 

Endeavour  at  proficiency  in  speech, — 

So  she,  through  hunger  after  fellowship, 

May  well  have  learned,  though  late,  to  play  the  scribe : 


JURIS    DOCTOR   JOHANNES-BAPTISTA    BOTTINIUS.        1 97 

As  indeed,  there  's  one  letter  on  the  list 

Explicitly  declares  did  happen  here.  460 

"  You  thought  my  letters  could  be  none  of  mine," 

She  tells  her  parents — "  mine,  who  wanted  skill  ; 

"  But  now  I  have  the  skill,  and  write,  you  see  !  " 

She  needed  write  love-letters,  so  she  learned, 

"  Negatas  artifex  seqai  voces  " — though  465 

This  letter  nowise  'scapes  the  common  lot, 

But  lies  i'  the  condemnation  of  the  rest, 

Found  by  the  husband's  self  who  forged  them  all. 

Yet,  for  the  sacredness  of  argument, 

For  this  once  an  exemption  shall  it  plead —  470 

Anything,  anything  to  let  the  wheels 

Of  argument  run  glibly  to  their  goal ! 

Concede  she  wrote  (which  were  preposterous) 

This  and  the  other  epistle, — what  of  it  ? 

Where  does  the  figment  touch  her  candid  fame  ?         475 

Being  in  peril  of  her  life —  "  my  life, 

"  Not  an  hour's  purchase,"  as  the  letter  runs, — 

And  having  but  one  stay  in  this  extreme, 

And  out  of  the  wide  world  a  single  friend — 

What  could  she  other  than  resort  to  him,  480 


I98  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

And  how  with  any  hope  resort  but  thus  ? 

Shall  modesty  dare  bid  a  stranger  brave 

Danger,  disgrace,  nay  death  in  her  behalf — 

Think  to  entice  the  sternness  of  the  steel 

Save  by  the  magnet  moves  the  manly  mind  ?  485 

— Most  of  all  when  such  mind  is  hampered  so 

By  growth  of  circumstance  athwart  the  life 

O'  the  natural  man,  that  decency  forbids 

He  stoop  and  take  the  common  privilege, 

Say  frank  "  I  love,"  as  all  the  vulgar  do.  490 

A  man  is  wedded  to  philosophy, 

Married  to  statesmanship  ;  a  man  is  old  ; 

A  man  is  fettered  by  the  foolishness 

He  took  for  wisdom  and  talked  ten  years  since  ; 

A  man  is,  like  our  friend  the  Canon  here,  495 

A  priest,  and  wicked  if  he  break  his  vow  : 

He  dare  to  love,  who  may  be  Pope  one  day  ? 

Suppose  this  man  could  love,  though,  all  the  same — 

From  what  embarrassment  she  sets  him  free 

Should  one,  a  woman  he  could  love,  speak  first —       500 

"  'T  is  I  who  break  reserve,  begin  appeal, 

€i  Confess  that,  whether  you  love  me  or  no, 


JURIS    DOCTOR   JOHANNES-BAPTISTA   BOTTINIUS.        1 99 

"  I  love  you!  "     What  an  ease  to  dignity, 
What  help  of  pride  from  the  hard  high-backed  chair 
Down  to  the  carpet  where  the  kittens  bask,  505 

All  under  the  pretence  of  gratitude  ! 

From  all  which,  I  deduce — the  lady  here 

Was  bound  to  proffer  nothing  short  of  love 

To  the  priest  whose  service  was  to  save  her.     What  ? 

Shall  she  propose  him  lucre,  dust  o'  the  mine,  510 

Rubbish  o'  the  rock,  some  diamond,  muckworms  prize, 

Or  pearl  secreted  by  a  sickly  fish  ? 

Scarcely  !     She  caters  for  a  generous  taste. 

'T  is  love  shall  beckon,  beauty  bid  to  breast, 

Till  all  the  Samson  sink  into  the  snare  !  515 

Because,  permit  the  end — permit  therewith 

Means  to  the  end  ! 

How  say  you,  good  my  lords  ? 
I  hope  you  heard  my  adversary  ring 
The  changes  on  this  precept :  now,  let  me  520 

Reverse  the  peal !     Quia  dato  licito  fine, 
Ad  ilium  assequendum  ordinata 
Non  sunt  damnanda  media, — licit  end 


200  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

Enough  was  the  escape  from  death,  I  hope, 

To  legalize  the  means  illicit  else 

Of  feigned  love,  false  allurement,  fancied  fact. 

Thus  Venus  losing  Cupid  on  a  day, 

(See  that  Idyllium  Moschi)  seeking  help, 

In  the  anxiety  of  motherhood, 

Allowably  promised  "  Who  shall  bring  report 

"  Where  he  is  wandered  to,  my  winged  babe, 

"  I  give  him  for  reward  a  nectared  kiss  ; 

"  But  who  brings  safely  back  the  truant's  self, 

"  His  be  a  super-sweet  makes  kiss  seem  cold  !  " 

Are  not  these  things  writ  for  example-sake  ? 

To  such  permitted  motive,  then,  refer 

All  those  professions,  else  were  hard  explain, 

Of  hope,  fear,  jealousy,  and  the  rest  of  love  ! 

He  is  Myrtillus,  Amaryllis  she, 

She  burns,  he  freezes, — all  a  mere  device 

To  catch  and  keep  the  man  may  save  her  life, 

Whom  otherwise  nor  catches  she  nor  keeps  ! 

Worst,  once,  is  best  now  :  in  all  faith,  she  feigns : 

Feigning, — the  liker  innocence  to  guilt, 


JURIS    DOCTOR   JOHANNES-BAPTISTA   BOTTINIUS.       201 

The  truer  to  the  life  is  what  she  feigns  !  545 

How  if  Ulysses, — when,  for  public  good 

He  sunk  particular  qualms  and  played  the  spy, 

Entered  Troy's  hostile  gate  in  beggar's  garb — ■ 

How  if  he  first  had  boggled  at  this  clout, 

Grown  dainty  o'er  that  clack-dish  ?     Grime  is  grace    550 

To  whoso  gropes  amid  the  dung  for  gold. 

Hence,  beyond  promises,  we  praise  each  proof 

That  promise  was  not  simply  made  to  break, — ■ 

No  moonshine-structure  meant  to  fade  at  dawn  : 

So  call — (proofs  consequent  and  requisite) —  555 

What  enemies  allege  of — more  than  words, 

Deeds— meeting  at  the  window,  twilight-tryst, 

Nocturnal  entertainment  in  the  dim 

Old  labyrinthine  palace  ;  lies,  we  know — 

Inventions  we,  long  since,  turned  inside  out.  560 

Would  such  external  semblance  of  intrigue 

Demonstrate  that  intrigue  must  lurk  perdue  ? 

Does  every  hazel-sheath  disclose  a  nut  ? 

He  were  a  Molinist  who  dared  maintain 

That  midnight  meetings  in  a  screened  alcove  565 


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 


Must  argue  folly  in  a  matron — since 

So  would  he  bring  a  slur  on  Judith's  self, 

Commended  beyond  women  that  she  lured 

The  lustful  to  destruction  through  his  lust. 

Pompilia  took  not  Judith's  liberty,  570 

No  faulchion  find  you  in  her  hand  to  smite, — 

No  damsel  to  convey  the  head  in  dish, 

Of  Holophernes, — style  the  Canon  so — 

Or  is  it  the  Count  ?     If  I  entangle  me 

With  my  similitudes, — if  wax  wings  melt,  575 

And  earthward  down  I  drop,  not  mine  the  fault : 

Blame  your  beneficence,  O  Court,  O  sun, 

Whereof  the  beamy  smile  affects  my  flight ! 

What  matter,  so  Pompilia's  fame  revive 

F  the  warmth  that  proves  the  bane  of  Icarus  ?  580 

Yea,  we  have  shown  it  lawful,  necessary 

Pompilia  leave  her  husband,  seek  the  house 

O'  the  parents  :  and  because  'twixt  home  and  home 

Lies  a  long  road  with  many  a  danger  rife, 

Lions  by  the  way  and  serpents  in  the  path,  585 

To  rob  and  ravish, — much  behoves  she  keep 


JURIS   DOCTOR   JOHANNES-BAPTISTA    BOTTINIUS.        203 

Each  shadow  of  suspicion  from  fair  fame, 

For  her  own  sake  much,  but  for  his  sake  more, 

The  ingrate  husband  !     Evidence  shall  be, 

Some  witness  to  the  world  how  white  she  walks  590 

F  the  mire  she  wanders  through  ere  Rome  she  reach. 

And  who  so  proper  witness  as  a  priest  ? 

Gainsay  ye  ?     Let  me  hear  who  dares  gainsay  ! 

I  hope  we  still  can  punish  heretics ! 

"  Give  me  the  man  "  I  say  with  him  of  Gath,  595 

"  That  we  may  fight  together  ! "    None,  I  think  : 

The  priest  is  granted  me. 

Then,  if  a  priest, 
One  juvenile  and  potent :  else,  mayhap, 
That  dragon,  our  Saint  George  would  slay,  slays  him. 
And  should  fair  face  accompany  strong  hand,  601 

The  more  complete  equipment :  nothing  mars 
Work,  else  praiseworthy,  like  a  bodily  flaw 
T  the  worker :  as  't  is  said  Saint  Paul  himself 
Deplored  the  check  o'  the  puny  presence,  still  605 

Cheating  his  fulmination  of  its  flash, 
Albeit  the  bolt  therein  went  true  to  oak. 


204  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

Therefore  the  agent,  as  prescribed,  she  takes, — 
A  priest,  juvenile,  potent,  handsome  too, — 
In  all  obedience  :  "  good,"  you  grant  again. 
Do  you?    I  would  ye  were  the  husband,  lords  ! 
How  prompt  and  facile  might  departure  be  ! 
How  boldly  would  Pompilia  and  the  priest 
March  out  of  door,  spread  flag  at  beat  of  drum, 
But  that  inapprehensive  Guido  grants 
Neither  premiss  nor  yet  conclusion  here, 
And,  purblind,  dreads  a  bear  in  every  bush  ! 
For  his  own  quietude  and  comfort,  then, 
Means  must  be  found  for  flight  in  masquerade 
At  hour  when  all  things  sleep. — "  Save  jealousy  ! " 
Right,  judges  !     Therefore  shall  the  lady's  wit 
Supply  the  boon  thwart  nature  baulks  him  of, 
And  do  him  service  with  the  potent  drug 
(Helen's  nepenthe,  as  my  lords  opine) 
Shall  respite  blessedly  each  frittered  nerve 
O'  the  much-enduring  man  :  accordingly, 
There  lies  he,  duly  dosed  and  sound  asleep, 
Relieved  of  woes,  or  real  or  raved  about. 
While  soft  she  leaves  his  side,  he  shall  not  wake  ; 


JURIS    DOCTOR   JOHANNES-BAPTIST  A    BOTTINIUS.        205 

Nor  stop  who  steals  away  to  join  her  friend,  630 

Nor  do  hirn  mischief  should  he  catch  that  friend 
Intent  on  more  than  friendly  office, — nay, 
Nor  get  himself  raw  head  and  bones  laid  bare 
In  payment  of  his  apparition  ! 

Thus  635 

Would  I  defend  the  step, — were  the  thing  true 
Which  is  a  fable, — see  my  former  speech, — 
That  Guido  slept  (who  never  slept  a  wink) 
Through  treachery,  an  opiate  from  his  wife, 
Who  not  so  much  as  knew  what  opiates  mean.  640 

Now  she  may  start :  but  hist, — a  stoppage  still ! 
A  journey  is  an  enterprise"  which  costs  ! 
As  in  campaigns,  we  fight  and  others  pay, 
Suis  expeiisis,  nemo  militat. 

'T  is  Guido's  self  we  guard  from  accident,  645 

Ensuring  safety  to  Pompilia,  versed 
Nowise  in  misadventures  by  the  way, 
1  Hard  riding  and  rough  quarters,  the  rude  fare, 
The  unready  host.     What  magic  mitigates 


206  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

Each  plague  of  travel  to  the  unpractised  wife  ? 
Money,  sweet  Sirs  !     And  were  the  fiction  fact, 
She  helped  herself  thereto  with  liberal  hand 
From  out  the  husband's  store, — what  fitter  use 
Was  ever  husband's  money  destined  to  ? 
With  bag  and  baggage  thus  did  Dido  once 
Decamp, — for  more  authority,  a  queen  ! 

So  is  she  fairly  on  her  route  at  last, 
Prepared  for  either  fortune  :  nay  and  if 
The  priest,  now  all  a-glow  with  enterprise, 
Cool  somewhat  presently  when  fades  the  flush 
O'  the  first  adventure,  clouded  o'er  belike 
By  doubts,  misgivings  how  the  day  may  die, 
Though  born  with  such  auroral  brilliance, — if 
The  brow  seem  over-pensive  and  the  lip 
'Gin  lag  and  lose  the  prattle  lightsome  late, — 
Vanquished  by  tedium  of  a  prolonged  jaunt 
In  a  close  carriage  o'er  a  jolting  road, 
With  only  one  young  female  substitute 
For  seventeen  other  Canons  of  ripe  age 
Were  wont  to  keep  him  company  in  church, — 


JURIS   DOCTOR   JOHANNES-EAPTISTA   BOTTINIUS.        207 

Shall  not  Pompilia  haste  to  dissipate 

The  silent  cloud  that,  gathering,  bodes  her  bale  ? — 

Prop  the  irresoluteness  may  portend 

Suspension  of  the  project,  check  the  flight, 

Bring  ruin  on  them  both  ? — use  every  means,  675 

Since  means  to  the  end  are  lawful  ?    What  i'  the  way 

Of  wile  should  have  allowance  like  a  kiss 

Sagely  and  sisterly  administered, 

Sororia  saltern  oscula  ?     We  find 

Such  was  the  remedy  her  wit  applied  680 

To  each  incipient  scruple  of  the  priest, 

If  we  believe, — as,  while  my  wit  is  mine 

I  cannot, — what  the  driver  testifies, 

Borsi,  called  Venerino,  the  mere  tool 

Of  Guido  and  his  friend  the  Governor, —  685 

The  avowal  I  proved  wrung  from  out  the  wretch, 

After  long  rotting  in  imprisonment, 

As  price  of  liberty  and  favour  :  long 

They  tempted,  he  at  last  succumbed,  and  lo 

Counted  them  out  full  tale  each  kiss  required, —  690 

"  The  journey  was  one  long  embrace,"  quoth  he. 

Still,  though  we  should  believe  the  driver's  lie, 


2  08  THE  RING  AND  THE  COOK. 

Nor  even  admit  as  probable  excuse, 

Right  reading  of  the  riddle, — as  I  urged 

In  my  first  argument,  with  fruit  perhaps — 

That  what  the  owl-like  eyes  (at  back  of  head  !) 

O'  the  driver,  drowsed  by  driving  night  and  day, 

Supposed  a  vulgar  interchange  of  love, 

This  was  but  innocent  jog  of  head  'gainst  head, 

Cheek  meeting  jowl  as  apple  may  touch  pear 

From  branch  and  branch  contiguous  in  the  wind, 

When  Autumn  ^blusters  and  the  orchard  rocks. 

The  rapid  run  and  the  rough  road  were  cause 

O'  the  casual  ambiguity,  no  harm 

I*  the  world  to  eyes  awake  and  penetrative. 

Yet, — not  to  grasp  a  truth  I  can  forego 

And  safely  fight  without  and  conquer  still, — 

Say,  she  kissed  him,  and  he  kissed  her  again  ! 

Such  osculation  was  a  potent  means, 

A  very  efficacious  help,  no  doubt : 

This  with  a  third  part  of  her  nectar  did 

Venus  imbue  :  why  should  Pompilia  fling 

The  poet's  declaration  in  his  teeth  ? — 

Pause  to  employ  what, — since  it  had  success, 


JURIS    DOCTOR   JOHANNES-BAPTISTA  BOTTINIUS.        2  00 

And  kept  the  priest  her  servant  to  the  end, —  715 

We  must  presume  of  energy  enough, 
No  whit  superfluous,  so  permissible  ? 

The  goal  is  gained  :  day,  night  and  yet  a  day 

Have  run  their  round  :  a  long  and  devious  road 

Is  traversed, — many  manners,  various  men  720 

Passed  in  review,  what  cities  did  they  see, 

What  hamlets  mark,  what  profitable  food 

For  after-meditation  cull  and  store  ! 

Till  Rome,  that  Rome  whereof — this  voice, 

Would  it  might  make  our  Molinists  observe,  725 

That  she  is  built  upon  a  rock  nor  shall 

Their  powers  prevail  against  her  ! — Rome,  I  say, 

Is  all  but  reached ;  one  stage  more  and  they  stop 

Saved :  pluck  up  heart,  ye  pair,  and  forward,  then  ! 

Ah,  Nature — baffled  she  recurs,  alas  !  730 

Nature  imperiously  exacts  her  due, 
Spirit  is  willing  but  the  flesh  is  weak, 
Pompilia  needs  must  acquiesce  and  swoon, 
Give  hopes  alike  and  fears  a  breathing-while. 
vol.  in.  p 


2IO  THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

The  innocent  sleep  soundly  :  sound  she  sleeps.  735  ; 

So  let  her  slumber,  then,  unguarded  save 

By  her  own  chastity,  a  triple  mail, 

And  his  good  hand  whose  stalwart  arms  have  borne 

The  sweet  and  senseless  burthen  like  a  babe 

From  coach  to  couch, — the  serviceable  man  !  740 

Nay,  what  and  if  he  gazed  rewardedly 

On  the  pale  beauty  prisoned  in  embrace, 

Stooped  over,  stole  a  balmy  breath  perhaps 

For  more  assurance  sleep  was  not  decease — 

"  Ut  vidi"  "  how  I  saw  !  "  succeeded  by  745 

M  Ut perii"  "  how  I  sudden  lost  my  brains  ! " 

— What  harm  ensued  to  her  unconscious  quite  ? 

For,  curiosity — how  natural  ! 

Importunateness — what  a  privilege 

In  the  ardent  sex  !     And  why  curb  ardour  here  ?        750 

How  can  the  priest  but  pity  whom  he  saved  ? 

And  pity  is  how  near  to  love,  and  love 

How  neighbourly  to  unreasonableness  ! 

And  for  love's  object,  whether  love  were  sage 

Or  foolish,  could  Pompilia  know  or  care,  755 

Being  still  sound  asleep,  as  I  premised  ? 


JURIS    DOCTOR   JOHANNES-BAPTISTA    BOTTINIUS.        211 

Thus  the  philosopher  absorbed  by  thought, 

Even  Archimedes,  busy  o'er  a  book 

The  while  besiegers  sacked  his  Syracuse, 

Was  ignorant  of  the  imminence  o'  the  point  760 

O'  the  sword  till  it  surprised  him :  let  it  stab, 

And  never  knew  himself  was  dead  at  all. 

So  sleep  thou  on,  secure  whate'er  betide  ! 

For  thou,  too,  hast  thy  problem  hard  to  solve — 

How  so  much  beauty  is  compatible  765 

With  so  much  innocence  ! 

Fit  place,  methinks, 
While  in  this  task  she  rosily  is  lost, 
To  treat  of  and  repel  objection  here 
Which, — frivolous,  I  grant, — but,  still  misgives  770 

My  mind,  it  may  have  flitted,  gadfly-like, 
And  teazed  the  Court  at  times — as  if,  all  said 
And    done,    there    still    seemed,     one    might    nearly 

say, 
In  a  certain  acceptation,  somewhat  more 
Of  what  may  pass  for  insincerity,  775 

Falsehood,  throughout  the  course  Pompilia  took, 


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 


Than  befits  Christian.    Pagans  held,  we  know, 

We  always  ought  to  aim  at  good  and  truth, 

Not  always  put  one  thing  in  the  same  words  : 

Non  idem  semper  dicere  sed  sfiectare 

Deb  emus.    But  the  Pagan  yoke  was  light ; 

"  Lie  not  at  all,"  the  exacter  precept  bids  : 

Each  least  lie  breaks  the  law, — is  sin,  ye  hold. 

I  humble  me,  but  venture  to  submit — 

What  prevents  sin,  itself  is  sinless,  sure  : 

And  sin,  which  hinders  sin  of  deeper  dye, 

Softens  itself  away  by  contrast  so. 

Conceive  me  !     Little  sin,  by  none  at  all, 

Were  properly  condemned  for  great :  but  great, 

By  greater,  dwindles  into  small  again. 

Now,  what  is  greatest  sin  of  womanhood  ? 

That  which  unwomans  it,  abolishes 

The  nature  of  the  woman, — impudence. 

Who  contradicts  me  here  ?     Concede  me,  then, 

Whatever  friendly  fault  may  interpose  795 

To  save  the  sex  from  self-abolishment 

Is  three-parts  on  the  way  to  virtue's  rank  ! 

Now,  what  is  taxed  here  as  duplicity, 


JURIS    DOCTOR   JOHANNES-BAPTISTA   BOTTINIUS.        213 

Feint,  wile  and  trick, — admitted  for  the  nonce, — 

What  worse  do  one  and  all  than  interpose,  800 

Hold,  as  it  were,  a  deprecating  hand, 

Statuesquely,  in  the  Medicean  mode, . 

Before  some  shame  which  modesty  would  veil  ? 

Who  blames  the  gesture  prettily  perverse  ? 

Thus, — lest  ye  miss  a  point  illustrative,  —  805 

Admit  the  husband's  calumny — allow 

That  the  wife,  having  penned  the  epistle  fraught 

With  horrors,  charge  on  charge  of  crime,  she  heaped 

0?  the  head  of  Pietro  and  Violante — (still 

Presumed  her  parents) — and  despatched  the  thing      810 

To  their  arch-enemy  Paolo,  through  free  choice 

And  no  sort  of  compulsion  in  the  world — 

Put  case  that  she  discards  simplicity 

For  craft,  denies  the  voluntary  act, 

Declares  herself  a  passive  instrument  815 

I'  the  hands  of  Guido  ;  duped  by  knavery, 

She  traced  the  characters,  she  could  not  write, 

And  took  on  trust  the  unread  sense  which,  read, 

Were  recognized  but  to  be  spurned  at  once. 

Allow  this  calumny,  I  reiterate  !  820 


214  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

Who  is  so  dull  as  wonder  at  the  pose 
Of  our  Pompilia  in  the  circumstance  ? 
Who  sees  not  that  the  too-ingenuous  soul, 
Repugnant  even  at  a  duty  done 
Which  brought  beneath  too  scrutinizing  glare 
The  misdemeanours, — buried  in  the  dark, — 
Of  the  authors  of  her  being,  she  believed, — 
Stung  to  the  quick  at  her  impulsive  deed, 
And  willing  to  repair  what  harm  it  worked, 
She — wise  in  this  beyond  what  Nero  proved, 
Who,  when  needs  were  the  candid  juvenile 
Should  sign  the  warrant,  doom  the  guilty  dead, 
"  Would  I  had  never  learned  to  write,"  quoth  he  ! 
— Pompilia  rose  above  the  Roman,  cried 
"  To  read  or  write  I  never  learned  at  all !  " 
O  splendidly  mendacious ! 

But  time  fleets  : 
Let  us  not  linger  :  hurry  to  the  end, 
Since  end  does  flight  and  all  disastrously. 
Beware  ye  blame  desert  for  unsuccess, 
Disparage  each  expedient  else  to  praise, 


JURIS    DOCTOR   JOHANNES-BAPTISTA    BOTTINIUS.        215 

Call  failure  folly  !     Man's  best  effort  fails. 

After  ten  years'  resistance  Troy  fell  flat : 

Could  valour  save  a  town,  Troy  still  had  stood. 

Pompilia  came  off  halting  in  no  point  845 

Of  courage,  conduct,  the  long  journey  through  : 

But  nature  sank  exhausted  at  the  close, 

And,  as  I  said,  she  swooned  and  slept  all  night. 

Morn  breaks  and  brings  the  husband  :  we  assist 

At  the  spectacle.     Discovery  succeeds.  850 

Ha,  how  is  this  ?     What  moonstruck  rage  is  here  ? 

Though  we  confess  to  partial  frailty  now, 

To  error  in  a  woman  and  a  wife, 

Is  't  by  the  rough  way  she  shall  be  reclaimed  ? 

Who  bursts  upon  her  chambered  privacy?  855 

What  crowd  profanes  the  chaste  ciibiailum  I 

What  outcries  and  lewd  laughter,  scurril  gibe 

And  ribald  jest  to  scare  the  ministrant 

Good  angels  that  commerce  with  souls  in  sleep  ? 

Why,  had  the  worst  crowned  Guido  to  his  wish,  860 

Confirmed  his  most  irrational  surmise, 

Yet  there  be  bounds  to  man's  emotion,  checks 

To  an  immoderate  astonishment. 


2l6  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

'T  is  decent  horror,  regulated  wrath, 

Befit  our  dispensation  :  have  we  back 

The  old  Pagan  licence  ?     Shall  a  Vulcan  clap 

His  net  o'  the  sudden  and  expose  the  pair 

To  the  unquenchable  universal  mirth  ? 

A  feat,  antiquity  saw  scandal  in 

So  clearly,  that  the  nauseous  tale  thereof — 

Demodocus  his  nugatory  song — 

Hath  ever  been  concluded  modern  stuff 

Impossible  to  the  mouth  of  the  grave  Muse, 

So,  foisted  into  that  Eighth  Odyssey 

By  some  impertinent  pickthank.     O  thou  fool, 

Count  Guido  Franceschini,  what  were  gained 

By  publishing  thy  shame  thus  to  the  world  ? 

Were  all  the  precepts  of  the  wise  a  waste — 

Bred  in  thee  not  one  touch  of  reverence  ? 

Why,  say  thy  wife — admonish  we  the  fool, — 

Were  false,  and  thou  bid  chronicle  thy  shame, 

Much  rather  should  thy  teeth  bite  out  thy  tongue, 

Dumb  lip  consort  with  desecrated  brow, 

Silence  become  historiographer, 

And  thou — thine  own  Cornelius  Tacitus  ! 


JURIS    DOCTOR   JOHANNES-BAPTISTA    BOTTINIUS.        21 7 

But  virtue,  barred,  still  leaps  the  barrier,  lords  ! 

— Still,  moon-like,  penetrates  the  encroaching  mist 

And  bursts,  all  broad  and  bare,  on  night,  ye  know ! 

Surprised,  then,  in  the  garb  of  truth,  perhaps, 

Pompilia,  thus  opposed,  breaks  obstacle,  890 

Springs  to  her  feet,  and  stands  Thalassian-pure, 

Confronts  the  foe, — nay,  catches  at  his  sword 

And  tries  to  kill  the  intruder,  he  complains. 

Why,  so  she  gave  her  lord  his  lesson  back, 

Crowned  him,  this  time,  the  virtuous  woman's  way,     895 

With  an  exact  obedience ;  he  brought  sword, 

She  drew  the  same,  since  swords  are  meant  to  draw. 

Tell  not  me  'tis  sharp  play  with  tools  on  edge  ! 

It  was  the  husband  chose  the  weapon  here. 

Why  did  not  he  inaugurate  the  game  900 

With  some  gentility  of  apophthegm 

Still  pregnant  on  the  philosophic  page, 

Some  captivating  cadence  still  a-lisp 

O'  the  poet's  lyre  ?    Such  spells  subdue  the  surge, 

Make  tame  the  tempest,  much  more  mitigate  905 

The  passions  of  the  mind,  and  probably 

Had  moved  Pompilia  to  a  smiling  blush. 


2l8  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

No,  he  must  needs  prefer  the  argument 

O'  the  blow  :  and  she  obeyed,  in  duty  bound, 

Returned  him  buffet  ratiocinative —  910 

Ay,  in  the  reasoner's  own  interest, 

For  wife  must  follow  whither  husband  leads, 

Vindicate  honour  as  himself  prescribes, 

Save  him  the  very  way  himself  bids  save  ! 

No  question  but  who  jumps  into  a  quag  915 

Should  stretch  forth  hand  and  pray  one  "  Pull  me  out 

"  By  the  hand  ! "  such  were  the  customary  cry  : 

But  Guido  pleased  to  bid  "  Leave  hand  alone  ! 

"  Join  both  feet,  rather,  jump  upon  my  head,       , 

"  I  extricate  myself  by  the  rebound  V-  920 

And  dutifully  as  enjoined  she  jumped — 

Drew  his  own  sword  and  menaced  his  own  life, 

Anything  to  content  a  wilful  spouse. 

And  so  he  was  contented — one  must  do 

Justice  to  the  expedient  which  succeeds,  925 

Strange  as  it  seem  :  at  flourish  of  the  blade, 

The  crowd  drew  back,  stood  breathless  and  abashed, 

Then  murmured  "  This  should  be  no  wanton  wife, 


JURIS   DOCTOR   JOHANNES-BAPTISTA   BOTTINIUS.        219 

"  No  conscience-stricken  creature,  caught  i'  the  act, 

"  And  patiently  awaiting  our  first  stone  :  930 

"  But  a  poor  hard-pressed  all-bewildered  thing, 

"  Has  rushed  so  far,  misguidedly  perhaps, 

"  Meaning  no  more  harm  than  a  frightened  sheep. 

"  She  sought  for  aid ;  and  if  she  made  mistake 

"  I'  the  man  could  aid  most,  why — so  mortals  do  :      935 

"  Even  the  blessed  Magdalen  mistook 

"  Far  less  forgiveably :  consult  the  place — 

"  Supposing  him  to  be  the  gardener, 

"  '  Sir,'  said  she,  and  so  following."     Why  more  words  ? 

Forthwith  the  wife  is  pronounced  innocent :  940 

What  would  the  husband  more  than  gain  his  cause, 

And  find  that  honour  flash  in  the  world's  eye, 

His  apprehension  was  lest  soil  had  smirched  ? 

So,  happily  the  adventure  comes  to  close 

Whereon  my  fat  opponent  grounds  his  charge  945 

Preposterous  :  at  mid-day  he  groans  "  How  dark  ! " 

Listen  to  me,  thou  Archangelic  swine  ! 

Where  is  the  ambiguity  to  blame, 

The  flaw  to  find  in  our  Pompilia  ?     Safe 


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 


She  stands,  see  !     Does  thy  comment  follow  quick      950 

■  Safe,  inasmuch  as  at  the  end  proposed  ; 

'  But  thither  she  picked  way  by  devious  path — 

1  Stands  dirtied,  no  dubiety  at  all ! 

(  I  recognize  success,  yet,  all  the  same, 

'  Importunately  will  suggestion  prick —  955 

'  What,  had  Pompilia  gained  the  right  to  boast 

i  '  No  devious  path,  no  doubtful  patch  was  mine, 

1  6 1  saved  my  head  nor  sacrificed  my  foot  ? ' 

'  Why,  being  in  a  peril,  show  mistrust 

1  Of  the  angels  set  to  guard'the  innocent?  960 

'  Why  rather  hold  by  obvious  vulgar  help 
Of  stratagem  and  subterfuge,  excused 
Somewhat,  but  still  no  less  a  foil,  a  fault, 
Since  low  with  high,  and  good  with  bad  is  linked  ? 
Methinks  I  view  some  ancient  bas-relief.  965 

There  stands  Hesione  thrust  out  by  Troy, 

c  Her  father's  hand  has  chained  her  to  a  crag, 

'  Her  mother's  from  the  virgin  plucked  the  vest, 

'  At  a  safe  distance  both  distressful  watch, 

'  While  near  and  nearer  comes  the  snorting  ore.         970 

'  I  look  that,  white  and  perfect  to  the  end, 


JURIS    DOCTOR   JOHANNES-BAPTISTA    BOTTINIUS.        221 

M  She  wait  till  Jove  despatch  some  demigod ; 

"  Not  that, — impatient  of  celestial  club 

"  Alcmena's  son  should  brandish  at  the  beast, — 

"  She  daub,  disguise  her  dainty  limbs  with  pitch,         975 

"  And  so  elude  the  purblind  monster !    Ay, 

"  The  trick  succeeds,  but 't  is  an  ugly  trick, 

"  Where  needs  have  been  no  trick  ! " 

My  answer  ?  Faugh  ! 
Nimis  incongnie!  Too  absurdly  put !  980 

Sententiam  ego  teneo  contrai'iam, 
Trick,  I  maintain,  had  no  alternative. 
The    heavens   were    bound  with    brass, — Jove    far    at 

feast 
(No  feast  like  that  thou  didst  not  ask  me  to, 
Arcangeli, — I  heard  of  thy  regale  !)  985 

With  the  unblamed  ^Ethiop, — Hercules  spun  wool 
I'  the  lap  of  Omphale,  while  Virtue  shrieked — 
The  brute  came  paddling  all  the  faster.     You 
Of  Troy,  who  stood  at  distance,  where  's  the  aid 
You  offered  in  the  extremity?     Most  and  least,  990 

Gentle  and  simple,  here  the  Governor, 


THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 


There  the  Archbishop,  everywhere  the  friends, 
Shook  heads  and  waited  for  a  miracle, 
Or  went  their  way,  left  Virtue  to  her  fate. 
Just  this  one  rough  and  ready  man  leapt  forth  ! 
— Was  found,  sole  anti-Fabius  (dare  I  say) 
To  restore  things,  with  no  delay  at  all, 
Qui9  hand  cunctando,  rem  restituit !    He, 
He  only,  Caponsacchi  'mid  a  crowd, 
Caught  Virtue  up,  carried  Pompilia  off 
Thro'  the  gaping  impotence  of  sympathy 
In  ranged  Arezzo  :  what  you  take  for  pitch, 
Is  nothing  worse,  belike,  than  black  and  blue, 
Mere  evanescent  proof  that  hardy  hands 
Did  yeoman's  service,  cared  not  where  the  gripe 
Was  more  than  duly  energetic  :  bruised, 
She  smarts  a  little,  but  her  bones  are  saved 
A  fracture,  and  her  skin  will  soon  show  sleek. 
How  it  disgusts  when  weakness,  false-refined, 
Censures  the  honest  rude  effective  strength, — 
When  sickly  dreamers  of  the  impossible 
Decry  plain  sturdiness  which  does  the  feat 
With  eyes  wide  open  ! 


JURIS    DOCTOR   JOHANNES-BAPTISTA    BOTTINIUS.        223 

Did  occasion  serve, 
I  could  illustrate,  if  my  lords  allow  j  1015 

Quid  vetat)  what  forbids,  I  aptly  ask 
With  Horace,  that  I  give  my  anger  vent, 
While  I  let  breathe,  no  less,  and  recreate 
The  gravity  of  my  Judges,  by  a  tale — 
A  case  in  point — what  though  an  apologue  1020 

Graced  by  tradition, — possibly  a  fact  ? 
Tradition  must  precede  all  scripture,  words 
Serve  as  our  warrant  ere  our  books  can  be  : 
So,  to  tradition  back  we  needs  must  go 
For  any  fact's  authority  :  and  this  1025 

Hath  lived  so  far  (like  jewel  hid  in  muck) 
0'  the  page  of  that  old  lying  vanity 
Called  "  Sepher  Toldoth  Yeschu  : "  God  be  praised, 
I  read  no  Hebrew, — take  the  thing  on  trust : 
But  I  believe  the  writer  meant  no  good  1030 

(Blind  as  he  was  to  truth  in  some  respects) 
To  our  pestiferous  and  schismatic  .  .  well, 
My  lords'  conjecture  be  the  touchstone,  show 
The  thing  for  what  it  is  !     The  author  lacks 
Discretion,  and  his  zeal  exceeds  :  but  zeal, —  1035 


2  24  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 


How  rare  in  our  degenerate  day  !     Enough  ! 
Here  is  the  story, — fear  not,  I  shall  chop 
And  change  a  little,  else  my  Jew  would  press 
All  too  unmannerly  before  the  Court. 

It  happened  once, — begins  this  foolish  Jew,  1040 

Pretending  to, write  Christian  history, — 

That  three,  held  greatest,  best  and  worst  of  men, 

Peter  and  John  and  Judas,  spent  a  day 

In  toil  and  travel  through  the  country-side 

On  some  sufficient  business — I  suspect,  •  104.5 

Suppression  of  some  Molinism  i'  the  bud. 

Foot-sore  and  hungry,  dropping  with  fatigue, 

They  reached  by  nightfall  a  poor  lonely  grange, 

Hostel  or  inn  :  so,  knocked  and  entered  there. 

"  Your  pleasure,  great  ones  ?  " — "  Shelter,  rest  and  food  !  I 

For  shelter,  there  was  one  bare  room  above  ;  1051 

For  rest  therein,  three  beds  of  bundled  straw  : 

For  food,  one  wretched  starveling  fowl,  no  more — 

Meat  for  one  mouth,  but  mockery  for  three. 

"  You  have  my  utmost."     How  should  supper  serve  ? 

Peter  broke  silence.     "  To  the  spit  with  fowl !  1056 


JURIS    DOCTOR   JOHANNES-BAPTISTA    BOTTINIUS.        225 

"  And  while  't  is  cooking,  sleep  ! — since  beds  there  be, 

"  And,  so  far,  satisfaction  of  a  want. 

"  Sleep  we  an  hour,  awake  at  supper-time, 

"  Then  each  of  us  narrate  the  dream  he  had,  1060 

"  And  he  whose  dream  shall  prove  the  happiest,  point 

"  The  clearliest  out  the  dreamer  as  ordained 

"  Beyond  his  fellows  to  receive  the  fowl, 

"  Him  let  our  shares  be  cheerful  tribute  to, 

"  His  the  entire  meal,  may  it  do  him  good  ! "  1065 

Who  could  dispute  so  plain  a  consequence  ? 

So  said,  so  done  :  each  hurried  to  his  straw, 

Slept  his  hour's-sleep  and  dreamed  his  dream,  and  woke. 

I  I,"   commenced   John,    "  dreamed  that  I  gained  the 

prize 
I  We  all  aspire  to  :  the  proud  place  was  mine,  1070 

I  Throughout  the  earth  and  to  the  end  of  time 
I  I  was  the  Loved  Disciple :  mine  the  meal ! " 
I  But  I,"  proceeded  Peter,  "  dreamed,  a  word 
"  Gave  me  the  headship  of  our  company, 
"  Made  me  the  Vicar  and  Vice-regent,  gave  1075 

li  The  keys  of  Heaven  and  Hell  into  my  hand, 
"  And  o'er  the  earth,  dominion  :  mine  the  meal ! " 

VOL.    III.  Q 


2  26  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

"  While  I,"  submitted  in  soft  under-tone 

The  Iscariot — sense  of  his  unworthiness 

Turning  each  eye  up  to  the  inmost  white —  1080 

With  long-drawn  sigh,  yet  letting  both  lips  smack, 

"  I  have  had  just  the  pitifullest  dream 

"  That  ever  proved  man  meanest  of  his  mates, 

"  And  born  foot-washer  and  foot-wiper,  nay 

"  Foot-kisser  to  each  comrade  of  you  all  !  1085 

"  I  dreamed  I  dreamed ;  and  in  that  mimic  dream 

"  (Impalpable  to  dream  as  dream  to  fact) 

"  Methought  I  meanly  chose  to  sleep  no  wink 

"  But  wait  until  I  heard  my  brethren  breathe  ; 

"  Then  stole  from  couch,  slipped  noiseless  to  the  door, 

"  Slid  downstairs,  furtively  approached  the  hearth,     1091 

"  Found  the  fowl  duly  brown,  both  back  and  breast, 

"  Hissing  in  harmony  with  the  cricket's  chirp, 

"  Grilled  to  a  point;  said  no  grace  but  fell  to, 

"  Nor  finished  till  the  skeleton  lay  bare.  1095 

"  In  penitence  for  which  ignoble  dream, 

u  Lo,  I  renounce  my  portion  cheerfully ! 

"  Fie  on  the  flesh — be  mine  the  etherial  gust, 

"  And  yours  the  sublunary  sustenance  ! 


JURIS    DOCTOR   JOHANNES-BAPTISTA    BOTTINIUS.        227 

"  See,  that  whate'er  be  left,  ye  give  the  poor  !  "         noo 

Down  the  two  scuttled,  one  on  other's  heel, 

Stung  by  a  fell  surmise ;  and  found,  alack, 

A  goodly  savour,  both  the  drumstick-bones, 

And  that  which  henceforth  took  the  appropriate  name 

O'  the  merry-thought,  in  memory  of  the  fact  1105 

That  to  keep  wide  awake  is  our  best  dream. 

So, — as  was  said  once  of  Thucydides 

And  his  sole  joke,  "The  lion,  lo,  hath  laughed  ! "  — 

Just  so,  the  Governor  and  all  that 's  great 

I'  the  city,  never  meant  that  Innocence  1 1 1  o 

Should  starve  thus  while  Authority  sat  at  meat. 

They  meant  to  fling  a  bone  at  banquet's  end, 

Wished  well  to  our  Pompilia — in  their  dreams, 

Nor  bore  the  secular  sword  in  vain — asleep  : 

Just  so  the  Archbishop  and  all  good  like  him  1 1 1 5 

Went  to  bed  meaning  to  pour  oil  and  wine 

V  the  wounds  of  her,  next  day, — but  long  ere  day, 

They  had  burned  the  one  and  drunk  the  other :  while 

Just  so,  again,  contrariwise,  the  priest 

Sustained  poor  Nature  in  extremity  11 20 


228  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

By  stuffing  barley-bread  into  her  mouth, 

Saving  Pompilia  (grant  the  parallel) 

By  the  plain  homely  and  straightforward  way 

Taught  him  by  common-sense.     Let  others  shriek 

"  Oh  what  refined  expedients  did  we  dream  1125 

"  Proved  us  the  only  fit  to  help  the  fair  ! " 

He  cried  "A  carriage  waits,  jump  in  with  me  !  " 

And  now,  this  application  pardoned,  lords, — 

This  recreative  pause  and  breathing- while, — 

Back  to  beseemingness  and  gravity  !  11 30 

For  Law  steps  in  :  Guido  appeals  to  Law, 

Demands  she  arbitrate, — does  well  for  once. 

O  Law,  of  thee  how  neatly  was  it  said 

By  that  old  Sophocles,  thou  hast  thy  seat 

I'  the  very  breast  of  Jove,  no  meanlier  throned  !        113.5 

Here  is  a  piece  of  work  now,  hitherto 

Begun  and  carried  on,  concluded  near, 

Without  an  eye-glance  cast  thy  sceptre's  way ; 

And,  lo  the  stumbling  and  discomfiture  ! 

Well  may  you  call  them  "  lawless,"  means  men  take  1140 

To  extricate  themselves  through  mother-wit 


JURIS    DOCTOR   JOHANNES-BAPTISTA    EOTTINIUS.        229 

When  tangled  haply  in  the  toils  of  life  ! 

Guido  would  try  conclusions  with  his  foe, 

Whoe'er  the  foe  was  and  whate'er  the  offence ; 

He  would  recover  certain  dowry-dues  :  1145 

Instead  of  asking  Law  to  lend  a  hand, 

What  pother  of  sword  drawn  and  pistol  cocked, 

What  peddling  with  forged  letters  and  paid  spies, 

Politic  circumvention  ! — all  to  end 

As  it  began — by  loss  of  the  fool's  head,  n 50 

First  in  a  figure,  presently  in  a  fact. 

It  is  a  lesson  to  mankind  at  large. 

How  other  were  the  end,  would  men  be  sage 

And  bear  confidingly  each  quarrel  straight, 

O  Law,  to  thy  recipient  mother-knees  !  1155 

How  would  the  children  light  come  and  prompt  go, 

This,  with  a  red-cheeked  apple  for  reward, 

The  other,  peradventure  red-cheeked  too 

T  the  rear,  by  taste  of  birch  for  punishment. 

No  foolish  brawling  murders  any  more  !  1160 

Peace  for  the  household,  practice  for  the  Fisc, 

And  plenty  for  the  exchequer  of  my  lords  ! 

Too  much  to  hope,  in  this  world  :  in  the  next, 


230  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

Who  knows  ?    Since,  why  should  sit  the  Twelve  enthroned 
To  judge  the  tribes,  unless  the  tribes  be  judged  ?       1 165 
And  't  is  impossible  but  offences  come  : 
So,  all 's  one  lawsuit,  all  one  long  leet-day  ! 

Forgive  me  this  digression — that  I  stand 

Entranced  awhile  at  Law's  first  beam,  outbreak 

O'  the  business,  when  the  Count's  good  angel  bade  11 70 

"  Put  up  thy  sword,  born  enemy  to  the  ear, 

"  And  let  Law  listen  to  thy  difference  ! " 

And  Law  does  listen  and  compose  the  strife, 

Settle  the  suit,  how  wisely  and  how  well ! 

On  our  Pompilia,  faultless  to  a  fault,  1175 

Law  bends  a  brow  maternally  severe, 

Implies  the  worth  of  perfect  chastity, 

By  fancying  the  flaw  she  cannot  find. 

Superfluous  sifting  snow,  nor  helps  nor  harms  : 

'T  is  safe  to  censure  levity  in  youth,  1180 

Tax  womanhood  with  indiscretion,  sure  ! 

Since  toys,  permissible  to-day,  become 

Follies  to-morrow  :  prattle  shocks  in  church : 

And  that  curt  skirt  which  lets  a  maiden  skip, 


JURIS    DOCTOR   JOHANNES-BAPTISTA    BOTTINIUS.        23 1 

The  matron  changes  for  a  trailing  robe.  1185 

Mothers  may  risk  thus  much  with  half-shut  eyes 

Nodding  above  their  spindles  by  the  fire, 

On  the  chance  to  hit  some  hidden  fault,  else  safe. 

Just  so,  Law  hazarded  a  punishment — 

If  applicable  to  the  circumstance,  11 90 

Why,  well — if  not  so  apposite,  well  too. 

"  Quif  the  gay  range  o'  the  world,"  I  hear  her  cry, 

"  Enter,  in  lieu,  the  penitential  pound : 

"  Exchange  the  gauds  of  pomp  for  ashes,  dust : — 

"  Leave  each  mollitious  haunt  of  luxury,  1I9$ 

"  The  golden-garnished  silken-couched  alcove, 

"  The  many-columned  terrace  that  so  tempts 

"  Feminine  soul  put  foot  forth,  nor  stop  ear 

"  To  fluttering  joy  of  lover's  serenade, 

"  Leave  these  for  cellular  seclusion;  mask  1200 

"  And  dance  no  more,  but  fast  and  pray ;  avaunt — 

"  Be  burned,  thy  wicked  townsman's  sonnet-book  ! 

"  Welcome,  mild  hymnal  by  .  .  .  some  better  scribe  ! 

"  For  the  warm  arms,  were  wont  enfold  thy  flesh, 

"  Let  wire-shirt  plough  and  whip-cord  discipline     "  120 ; 

If  such  an  exhortation  proved,  perchance, 


232  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

Inapplicable,  words  bestowed  in  waste, 

What  harm,  since  law  has  store,  can  spend  nor  miss  ? 

And  so,  our  paragon  submits  herself, 

Goes  at  command  into  the  holy  house  12 

And,  also  at  command,  comes  out  again  : 

For,  could  the  effect  of  such  obedience  prove 

Too  certain,  too  immediate  ?     Being  healed, 

Go  blaze  abroad  the  matter,  blessed  one  ! 

Art  thou  sound  forthwith  ?     Speedily  vacate  12 

The  step  by  pool-side,  leave  Bethesda  free 

To  patients  plentifully  posted  round, 

Since  the  whole  need  not  the  physician  !     Brief, 

She  may  betake  her  to  her  parents'  place. 

Welcome  her,  father,  with  wide  arms  once  more,        12 

Motion  her,  mother,  to  thy  breast  again  ! 

For  why  ?     The  law  relinquishes  its  charge, 

Grants  to  your  dwelling-place  a  prison's  style, 

But  gives  you  back  Pompilia  ;  golden  days, 

Redeimt  Saturnia  regna  !     Six  weeks  slip,  1 2 

And  she  is  domiciled  in  house  and  home 

As  though  she  thence  had  never  budged  at  all. 


JURIS    DOCTOR   JOHANNES-BAPTISTA    BOTTINIUS.        233 

And  thither  let  the  husband,  joyous — ay, 

But  contrite  also — quick  betake  himself, 

Proud  that  his  dove  which  lay  among  the  pots  1230 

Hath  mued  those  dingy  feathers, — moulted  now, 

Shows  silver  bosom  clothed  with  yellow  gold. 

Quick,  he  shall  tempt  her  to  the  perch  she  fled, 

Bid  to  domestic  bliss  the  truant  back  ! 

O  let  him  not  delay  !     Time  fleets  how  fast,  1235 

And  opportunity,  the  irrevocable, 

Once  flown  will  flout  him  !     Is  the  furrow  traced  ? 

If  field  with  corn  ye  fail  preoccupy, 

Darnel  for  wheat  and  thistle-beards  for  grain, 

Infelix  lolium,  carduus  horridus,  1240 

Will  grow  apace  in  combination  prompt, 

Defraud  the  husbandman  of  his  desire. 

Already — hist — what  murmurs  'monish  now 

The  laggard  ? — doubtful,  nay,  fantastic  bruit 

Of  such  an  apparition,  such  return  1245 

Interdum,  to  anticipate  the  spouse, 

Of  Caponsacchi's  very  self !     'T  is  said 

When  nights  are  lone  and  company  is  rare, 


234  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

His  visitations  brighten  winter  up. 

If  so  they  did — which  nowise  I  believe —  1250 

How  can  I  ? — proof  abounding  that  the  priest, 

Once  fairly  at  his  relegation-place 

Never  once  left  it — still,  admit  he  stole 

A  midnight  march,  would  fain  see  friend  again, 

Find  matter  for  instruction  in  the  past,  125.5 

Renew  the  old  adventure  in  such  chat 

As  cheers  a  fireside  !     He  was  lonely  too, 

He,  too,  must  need  his  recreative  hour. 

Should  it  amaze  the  philosophic  mind 

If  one,  was  wont  the  empurpled  cup  to  quaff,  1260 

Have  feminine  society  at  will, 

Being  debarred  abruptly  from  all  drink 

Save  at  the  spring  which  Adam  used  for  wine, 

Dread  harm  to  just  the  health  he  hoped  to  guard, 

And,  meaning  abstinence,  gain  malady?  1265 

Ask  Tozzi,  now  physician  to  the  Pope  ! 

"  Little  by  little  break  "—(I  hear  he  bids 

Master  Arcangeli  my  antagonist, 

Who  loves  good  cheer — and  may  indulge  too  much — 

So  I  explain  the  logic  of  the  plea  1270 


JURIS    DOCTOR   JOHANNES-BAPTISTA   BOTTINIUS.        235 

Wherewith  he  opened  our  proceedings  late) — 

"  Little  by  little  break  a  habit,  Don  ! 

"  Become  necessity  to  feeble  flesh  ! " 

And  thus,  nocturnal  taste  of  intercourse 

(Which  never  happened, — but,  suppose  it  did)  1275 

May  have  been  used  to  dishabituate 

By  sip  and  sip  this  drainer  to  the  dregs 

O'  the  draught  of  conversation, — heady  stuff, 

Brewage    which    broached,     it    took    two    days    and 

nights 
,  To  properly  discuss  o'  the  journey,  Sirs  !  1280 

Such  is  the  second-nature,  men  call  use, 
That  undelightful  objects  get  to  charm 
Instead  of  chafe  :  the  daily  colocynth 
Tickles  the  palate  by  repeated  dose, 
Old  sores  scratch  kindly,  the  ass  makes  a  push,         1285 
Although  the  mill-yoke-wound  be  smarting  yet, 
For  mill-door  bolted  on  a  holiday — 
And  must  we  marvel  if  the  impulse  urge 
To  talk  the  old  story  over  now  and  then, 
The  hopes  and  fears,  the  stoppage  and  the  haste, —  1290 
Subjects  of  colloquy  to  surfeit  once  ? 


236  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

"  Here  did  you  bid  me  twine  a  rosy  wreath  !  " 

"  And  there  you  paid  my  lips  a  compliment  ! " 

a  There  you  admired  the  tower  could  be  so  tall ! " 

"  And  there  you  likened  that  of  Lebanon  1295 

"  To  the  nose  o'  the  beloved  !  "—Trifles— still, 

"  Forsa?i  d  hcec  olim" — such  trifles  serve 

To  make  the  minutes  pass  in  winter-time. 

Husband,  return  then,  I  re-counsel  thee  ! 

For,  finally,  of  all  glad  circumstance  1300 

Should  make  a  prompt  return  imperative, 

What  i'  the  world  awaits  thee,  dost  suppose  ? 

O'  the  sudden,  as  good  gifts  are  wont  befall, 

What  is  the  hap  of  the  unconscious  Count  ? 

That  which  lights  bonfire  and  sets  cask  a-tilt,  I3°5 

Dissolves  the  stubborn'st  heart  in  jollity. 

O  admirable,  there  is  born  a  babe, 

A  son,  an  heir,  a  Franceschini  last 

And  best  o'  the  stock  !     Pompilia,  thine  the  palm  ! 

Repaying  incredulity  with  faith,.  13 10  ; 

Ungenerous  thrift  of  each  marital  debt 

With  bounty  in  profuse  expenditure, 


JURIS    DOCTOR   JOHANNES-BAPTISTA   BOTTINIUS.        237 

Pompilia  will  not  have  the  old  year  end 

Without  a  present  shall  ring  in  the  new — 

Bestows  upon  her  parsimonious  lord  13 15 

An  infant  for  the  apple  of  his  eye, 

Core  of  his  heart,  and  crown  completing  life, 

The  summum  bonum  of  the  earthly  lot ! 

"  We,"  saith  ingeniously  the  sage,  "  are  born 

"  Solely  that  others  may  be  born  of  us."  1320 

So,  father,  take  thy  child,  for  thine  that  child, 

Oh  nothing  doubt !     In  wedlock  born,  law  holds 

Baseness  impossible,  since  "films  est 

Quemnupticz  denio?istra?it"  twits  the  text  1325 

Whoever  dares  to  doubt. 

Yet  doubt  he  dares  ! 
O  faith  where  art  thou  flown  from  out  the  world  ? 
Already  on  what  an  age  of  doubt  we  fall ! 
Instead  of  each  disputing  for  the  prize, 
The  babe  is  bandied  here  from  that  to  this.  1330 

Whose  the  babe  ?     "  Cujum  pecus  ?  "  Guido's  lamb  ? 
"  An  Meliboei  ?  "  Nay,  but  of  the  priest ! 
"  Non  sed  ^^onis  /"     Someone  must  be  sire  :     . 


238  THE   RING   AND   THE   BOOK. 

And  who  shall  say,  in  such  a  puzzling  strait, 

If  there  were  not  vouchsafed  some  miracle 

To  the  wife  who  had  been  harassed  and  abused 

More  than  enough  by  Guido's  family 

For  non-production  of  the  promised  fruit 

Of  marriage  ?    What  if  Nature,  I  demand, 

Touched  to  the  quick  by  taunts  upon  her  sloth, 

Had  roused  herself,  put  forth  recondite  power, 

Bestowed  this  birth  to  vindicate  her  sway  ? 

Like  to  the  favour,  Maro  memorized, 

Was  granted  Aristaeus  when  his  hive 

Lay  empty  of  the  swarm,  not  one  more  bee — 

Not  one  more  babe  to  Franceschini's  house — 

And  lo,  a  new  birth  filled  the  air  with  joy, 

Sprung  from  the  bowels  of  the  generous  steed  ! 

Just  so  a  son  and  heir  rejoiced  the  Count ! 

Spontaneous  generation,  need  I  prove 

Were  facile  feat  to  Nature  at  a  pinch  ? 

Let  whoso  doubts,  steep  horsehair  certain  weeks, 

In  water,  there  will  be  produced  a  snake ; 

A  second  product  of  the  horse,  which  horse 

Happens  to  be  the  representative — 


JURIS    DOCTOR   JOHANNES-BAPT1STA   BOTTINIUS.        239 


Now  that  I  think  on 't — of  Arezzo's  self 

The  very  city  our  conception  blessed  ! 

Is  not  a  prancing  horse  the  City-arms  ? 

What  sane  eye  sees  not  such  coincidence  ? 

Cur  ego,  boast  thou,  my  Pompilia,  then,  3360 

Desper em  fieri  sine  conjuge 

Mater — how  well  the  Ovidian  distich  suits  ! — 

Et  par  ere  intacto  dummodo 

Casta  viro  ?  but  language  baffles  here. 

Note,  further,  as  to  mark  the  prodigy,  1365 

The  babe  in  question  neither  took  the  name 

Of  Guido,  from  the  sire  presumptive,  nor 

Giuseppe,  from  the  sire  potential,  but 

Gaetano — last  saint  of  the  hierarchy, 

And  newest  namer  for  a  thing  so  new  :  T37° 

What  other  motive  could  have  prompted  choice  ? 

Therefore  be  peace  again  :  exult,  ye  hills  ! 

Ye  vales  rejoicingly  break  forth  in  song  ! 

Incipe,  parve  puer,  begin,  small  boy, 

Risu  eognoseere  patrem,  with  a  smile  1375 

To  recognize  thy  parent !     Nor  do  thou 


240  THE   RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

Boggle,  oh  parent,  to  return  the  grace — 

Nee  anceps  hcere,  pater,  pnero 

Cognoseendo — one  might  well  eke  out  the  prayer  ! 

In  vain  !     The  perverse  Guido  doubts  his  eyes, 

Distrusts  assurance,  lets  the  devil  drive ; 

Because  his  house  is  swept  and  garnished  now, 

He,  having  summoned  seven  like  himself, 

Must  hurry  thither,  knock  and  enter  in, 

And  make  the  last  worse  than  the  first,  indeed  ! 

Is  he  content  ?     We  are.     No  further  blame 

O'  the  man  and  murder  !     They  were  stigmatized 

Befittingly  :  the  Court  heard  long  ago 

My  mind  o'  the  matter,  which,  outpouring  full, 

Has  long  since  swept,  like  surge  i'  the  simile 

Of  Homer,  overborne  both  dyke  and  dam, 

And  whelmed  alike  client  and  advocate  : 

His  fate  is  sealed,  his  life  as  good  as  gone, 

On  him  I  am  not  tempted  to  waste  word. 

Yet  though  my  purpose  holds, — which  was  and  is 

And  solely  shall  be  to  the  very  end, 

To  draw  the  true  effigiem  of  a  saint, 

Do  justice  to  perfection  in  the  sex, — 


JURIS    DOCTOR   JOHANNES-BAPTISTA    BOTTINIU3.        241 

Yet,  let  not  some  gross  pamperer  o'  the  flesh. 

And  niggard  in  the  spirit's  nourishment,  1400 

Whose  feeding  hath  offuscated  his  wit 

Rather  than  law, — he  never  had,  to  lose — 

Let  not  such  advocate  object  to  me 

I  leave  my  proper  function  of  attack  ! 

"  What 's  this  to  Bacchus  ?" — (in  the  classic  phrase, 

Well  used,  for  once)  he  hiccups  probably.  1406 

O  Advocate  o'  the  Poor,  thou  born  to  make 

Their  blessing  void — beati  panperes ! 

By  painting  saintship  I  depicture  sin, 

Beside  the  pearl,  I  prove  how  black  the  jet,  14 10 

And  through  Pompilia's  virtue,  Guido's  crime. 

Back  to  her,  then, — with  but  one  beauty  more, 

End  we  our  argument, — one  crowning  grace 

Pre-eminent  'mid  agony  and  death. 

For  to  the  last  Pompilia  played  her  part,  141 5* 

Used  the  right  means  to  the  permissible  end, 

And,  wily  as  an  eel  that  stirs  the  mud 

Thick  overhead,  so  baffling  spearman's  thrust, 

She,  while  he  stabbed  her,  simulated  death, 

VOL.    III.  R 


242  THE  RING  AND  THE  BOOK. 

Delayed,  for  his  sake,  the  catastrophe,  1420 

Obtained  herself  a  respite,  four  days'  grace, 
Whereby  she  told  her  story  to  the  world, 
Enabled  me  to  make  the  present  speech, 
And,  by  a  full  confession,  saved  her  soul. 

Yet  hold,  even  here  would  malice  leer  its  last,  1425 

Gurgle,  its  choaked  remonstrance  :  snake,  hiss  free  ! 

Oh,  that 's  the  objection  ?    And  to  whom  ? — not  her 

But  me,  forsooth — as,  in  the  very  act 

Of  both  confession  and,  what  followed  close, 

Subsequent  talk,  chatter  and  gossipry,  143° 

Babble  to  sympathizing  he  and  she 

Whoever  chose  besiege  her  dying  bed, — 

As  this  were  found  at  variance  with  my  tale, 

Falsified  all  I  have  adduced  for  truth, 

Admitted  not  one  peccadillo  here,  1435 

Pretended  to  perfection,  first  and  last, 

O'  the  whole  procedure — perfect  in  the  end, 

Perfect  i'  the  means,  perfect  in  everything, 

Leaving  a  lawyer  nothing  to  excuse, 

Reason  away  and  show  his  skill  about !  144° 


JURIS    DOCTOR   JOHANNES-BAPTISTA    BOTTINIUS.        243 

— A  flight,  impossible  to  Adamic  flesh, 

Just  to  be  fancied,  scarcely  to  be  wished, 

And,  anyhow,  unpleadable  in  court ! 

"  How  reconcile  "  gasps  Malice  "  that  with  this  ?  " 

Your  "  this,"  friend,  is  extraneous  to  the  law,  1445 

Comes  of  men's  outside  meddling,  the  unskilled 

Interposition  of  such  fools  as  press 

Out  of  their  province.     Must  I  speak  my  mind  ? 

Far  better  had  Pompilia  died  o'  the  spot 

Than  found  a  tongue  to  wag  and  shame  the  law,        1450 

Shame  most  of  all  herself, — did  friendship  fail, 

And  advocacy  lie  less  on  the  alert. 

Listen  how  these  protect  her  to  the  end  ! 

Do  I  credit  the  alleged  narration  ?     No  ! 

Lied  our  Pompilia  then,  to  laud  herself?  1455 

Still,  no  ; — clear  up  what  seems  discrepancy  ? 

The  means  abound, — art 's  long,  though  time  is  short, 

So,  keeping  me  in  compass,  all  I  urge 

Is — since,  confession  at  the  point  of  death, 

Nam  in  articulo  mortis ',  with  the  Church  1460 

Passes  for  statement  honest  and  sincere, 


244  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

Nemo  p7'esumitur  reus  esse, — then, 

If  sure  that  all  affirmed  would  be  believed, 

'T  was  chanty,  in  one  so  circumstanced, 

To  spend  her  last  breath  in  one  effort  more  1465 

For  universal  good  of  friend  and  foe, 

And, — by  pretending  utter  innocence, 

Nay,  freedom  from  each  foible  we  forgive, — 

Re-integrate — not  solely  her  own  fame, 

But  do  the  like  kind  office  for  the  priest  1470 

Whom  the  crude  truth  might  treat  less  courteously, 

Indeed,  expose  to  peril,  abbreviate 

The  life  and  long  career  of  usefulness 

Presumably  before  him  :  while  her  lord, 

Whose  fleeting  life  is  forfeit  to  the  law, —  1475 

What  mercy  to  the  culprit  if,  by  just 

The  gift  of  such  a  full  certificate 

Of  his  immitigable  guiltiness, 

She  stifled  in  him  the  absurd  conceit 

Of  murder  as  it  were  a  mere  revenge  !  1480 

— Stopped  confirmation  of  that  jealousy 

Which,  had  she  but  acknowledged  the  first  flaw, 

The  faintest  foible,  might  embolden  him 


JURIS    DOCTOR   JOHANNES-BAPTISTA   BOTTINIUS.        245 

To  battle  with  his  judge,  baulk  penitence, 

Bar  preparation  for  impending  fate.  1485 

Whereas,  persuade  him  he  has  slain  a  saint 

Who  sinned  not  in  the  little  she  did  sin, 

You  urge  him  all  the  brisklier  to  repent 

Of  most  and  least  and  aught  and  everything  ! 

Next, — if  this  view  of  mine,  content  ye  not,       .       1490 

Lords,  nor  excuse  the  genial  falsehood  here, 

'T  is  come  to  our  Triarii,  last  resource, 

We  fall  back  on  the  inexpugnable, 

Submit  you, — she  confessed  before  she  talked  ! 

The  sacrament  obliterates  the  sin  :  1495 

What  is  not, — was  not,  in  a  certain  sense. 

Let  Molinists  distinguish,  "  Souls  washed  white 

"  Were  red  once,  still  show  pinkish  to  the  eye  !" 

We  say,  abolishment  is  nothingness 

And  nothingness  has  neither  head  nor  tail  1500 

End  nor  beginning ;  —better  estimate 

Exorbitantly, 'than  disparage  aught 

Of  the  efficacity  of  the  act,  I  hope  ! 

Solmintiir  tabula  ?  May  we  laugh  and  go  ? 


246  THE    RING   AND   THE    BOOK. 

Well, — not  before  (in  filial  gratitude  1505 

To  Law,  who,  mighty  mother,  waves  adieu) 

We  take  on  us  to  vindicate  Law's  self — 

For, — yea,  Sirs, — curb  the  start,  curtail  the  stare  ! — 

Remains  that  we  apologize  for  haste 

F  the  Law,  our  lady  who  here  bristles  up  15 10 

'  And  my  procedure  ?     Did  the  Court  mistake  ? 

'  (Which  were  indeed  a  misery  to  think) 

1  Did  not  my  sentence  in  the  former  stage 

'  O'  the  business  bear  a  title  plain  enough  ? 

'  Decretuni" — I  translate  it  word  for  word —  15 15 

'  '  Decreed  :  the  priest,  for  his  complicity 

'  '  F  the  flight  and  deviation  of  the  dame, 

'  '  As  well  as  for  unlawful  intercourse, 

'  '  Is  banished  three  years  :'  crime  and  penalty, 

'  Declared  alike.     If  he  be  taxed  with  guilt  1520 

1  How  can  you  call  Pompilia  innocent  ? 

'  If  they  be  innocent,  have  I  been  just  ?" 

Gently,  O  mother,  judge  men  ! — whose  mistake 

Is  in  the  poor  misapprehensiveness. 

The  Titulus  a-top  of  your  decree  1525 


JURIS    DOCTOR   JOHANNES-BAPTISTA    BOTTINIUS.        247 

Was  but  to  ticket  there  the  kind  of  charge 

You  in  good  time  would  arbitrate  upon. 

Title  is  one  thing, — arbitration's  self, 

Probatio,  quite  another  possibly. 

Subsistit,  there  holds  good  the  old  response,  1530 

Responsio  tradita,  we  must  not  stick, 

Quod  11011  sit  attendendus  Titulus, 

To  the  Title,  sed  Probatio,  but  to  Proof, 

Resultaas  ex  process?/,  and  result 

O'  the  Trial,  and  the  style  of  punishment,  1535 

Et  poena  per  sententiam  imposiia; 

All  is  tentative,  till  the  sentence  come, 

Mere  indication  of  what  men  expect, 

And  nowise  an  assurance  they  shall  find. 

Lords,  what  if  we  permissibly  relax  1540 

The  tense  bow,  as  the  law-god  Phoebus  bids, 

Relieve  our  gravity  at  close  of  speech  ? 

I  traverse  Rome,  feel  thirsty,  need  a  draught, 

Look  for  a  wine-shop,  find  it  by  the  bough 

Projecting  as  to  say  "  Here  wine  is  sold  !"  1545 

So  much  I  know, — "  sold  :  "  but  what  sort  of  wine  ? 

Strong,  weak,  sweet,  sour,  home-made  or  foreign  drink? 


248  THE    RING   AND    THE    BOOK. 

That  much  must  I  discover  by  myself. 

"  Wine   is   sold,"    quoth   the   bough,    "  but   good   or 

bad, 
"  Find,  and  inform  us  when  you  smack  your  lips  !  *'   1550 
Exactly  so,  Law  hangs  her  title  forth, 
To  show  she  entertains  you  with  such  case 
About  such  crime  :  come  in  !  she  pours,  you  quaff. 
You  find  the  Priest  good  liquor  in  the  main, 
But  heady  and  provocative  of  brawls.  T555 

Remand  the  residue  to  flask  once  more, 
Lay  it  low  where  it  may  deposit  lees, 
I'  the  cellar  :  thence  produce  it  presently, 
Three  years  the  brighter  and  the  better ! 

Thus,         1560 
Law's  son,  have  I  bestowed  my  filial  help, 
And  thus  I  end,  tenax  propositi ; 
Point  to  point  as  I  purposed  have  I  drawn 
Pompilia,  and  implied  as  terribly 

Guido  :  so,  gazing,  let  the  world  crown  Law —  1565 

Able  once  more,  despite  my  impotence, 
And  helped  by  the  acumen  of  the  Court, 


JURIS    DOCTOR   JOHANNES-BAPTISTA    BOTTINIUS.      249 

To  eliminate,  display,  make  triumph  truth  ! 

What  other  prize  than  truth  were  worth  the  pains  ? 


There  's  my  oration — much  exceeds  in  length  !57° 

That  famed  Panegyric  of  Isocrates, 

They  say  it  took  him  fifteen  years  to  pen. 

But  all  those  ancients  could  say  anything ! 

He  put  in  just  what  rushed  into  his  head, 

While  I  shall  have  to  prune  and  pare  and  print.         1575 

This  comes  of  being  born  in  modern  times 

With  priests  for  auditory.     Still,  it  pays. 


THE    END    OF   VOL.    III. 


-ink, is 
\J,3> 


h 


FOURTEEN  DAY  USE 

RETURN  TO  DESK  FROM  WHICH  BORROWED 

This  book  is  due  on  the  last  date  stamped  below,  or 

on  the  date  to  which  renewed. 

Renewed  books  are  subject  to  immediate  recall. 

ZliiOV'bJ}  } 

Pa.***  Br^s  \ 

)ep"K 

w    T1 

LD  21-100m-2,'55 
(B139s22)476 

General  Library 

University  of  California 

Berkeley 
