The Evolution of Arthurian Romance, Vol. I
James Douglas Bruce (1923) (Gottingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht; Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press)
Source: Internet Archive (Google Books scan)
Rights: Public Domain
Note: Foundational survey of Arthurian literature to 1300. OCR-derived from 1923 edition, lightly cleaned. Complete Vol. I (Parts I-III).

The


Evolution of Arthurian Romance


From the Beginnings
Down to the Year 1300


by


James Douglas Bruce, Ph. D.
Professor of the English Language and Literature
in the University of Tennessee. .


Volume I


Gottingen
Dandenhoed & Ruprecht
1923
Baltimore: The Johns Hoptins Press
Printed and bound in Germany by Hubert & Co. G.m.b.H. Gittingen
Preface.


The present volumes are the outgrowth of a series of six
lectures on the Arthurian Romances which I delivered before the
graduate students of the Modern Language Departments of the
Johns Hopkins University in December, 1912, and which I repeat-
ed in the Summer School of the University of Pennsylvania in
1915 as part of a general course on the Mediaeval Romances. It
was only after the repetition, however, just mentioned that I decided
to work these lectures out in a fuller form for publication. The
task of putting this purpose into effect grew constantly upon my
hands, so that the final result is a far bulkier treatment of the sub-
ject than I originally had in contemplation. On the other hand,
the need of a guide through the mazes of mediaeval Arthurian ro-
mance and of the vast body of modern critical writings pertaining
there-to has been long felt by students of mediaeval literature,
and the book, in its present form, is offered as an attempt to meet
that need. .

I regret the necessity of fixing upon 1300 as the downward
limit of the treatise. This regret applies less, to be sure, to the
continental romances of the cycle — since, notwithstanding the pop-
ularity in its own day of such a work as Le Petit Artus de Bre--
taigne, for example, all really notable productions in this genre
on the continent antedate that year — than to those written in
English. For, except Sir Tristrem and Arthour and Merlin, /
neither of which rise above mediocrity, the extant English ro-
mances of the cycle were composed after the year 1300. Never-
theless, even as regards the English romances, the expressed
regret was mitigated by the reflection that, after all, mediaeval
English literature can boast of only four contributions of sub-
stantial importance to Arthurian romance, viz. Sir Gawain and /”
the Green Knight, the alliterative Morte Arthure, the stanzaic
IV Preface


Morte Arthur, and Malory’s great compilation in prose. In any
event, the determining factor in the limitation of time which has
here been adopted was that to have attempted to carry on the work
any further would have meant an indefinite postponement of its
completion.

In a domain where almost everything is the subject of con-
troversy, as is the case with Arthurian romance, it is difficult
for the author of a general treatise, like the present one, who has
strong convictions in regard to the questions under debate, not to
seem frequently over-dogmatic or even unfair to his opponents
in the expression of these convictions. In the notes and in the
division of the book entitled ‘‘Discussions’’, I have endeavored
to justify at length my own position in many of these matters, but,
owing to considerations of space, it has been obviously impossible
to do this in all instances, and so I have ten fom compelled to
content myself with inserting into my presentation of the subject
such qualifying clauses as “in my opinion”’ and the like. But
since such clauses are apt to become tiresome by repetition, I have
on many occasions ventured to omit them, without intending, of
course, to claim infallibility in leaving the expression of my views
thus unqualified. As an example of such controversial questions
the age-long debate concerning the debt of the Arthurian romances

~~to Celtic sources may be cited. Like Professors Foerster and Golther
~~ before me, I am convinced that this debt has been, generally speak-
ing, greatly exaggerated and that personal invention was the most
important factor in the creation of these romances — that we have,
therefore, in this species of literature the products of a literary
fashion steadily developed by successive generations of writers in
an age when the sense of literary property was virtually non-
existent and men did not hesitate to use their predecessors’ com-
positions for any purpose they chose — not, in any essential degree,
the reflection of a great body of oral tradition.1 My presentation


™


* This is undeniably true of the prose romances. I believe,
however, that if we deduct most of the lays and a few episodes
(indicated passim below) in the earlier romances, the statement will
also hold good of the metrical romances. After all, most of the extant
Preface | V


of the matter proceeds, accordingly, from this point of view, al-
though I have, of course, tried to be fair to the scholars who espouse
the opposite theory. Indeed, my position with regard to the whole
general question concerning the folk-tale sources of the Arthurian
romances will be found to be somewhat similar to that just indi-
cated in the case of the Celtic problem. For, even apart from
the question of specifically Celtic sources, in my opinion, the ele-
ment of individual invention and of purely literary origins in the
romances has been unduly minimized. The authors of these ro-
mances were primarily poets, not transcribers of folk-tales, and
it seems strange that scholars should so often have imputed to them
the strictest accuracy in following imaginary folk-tale sources when
we know that even the professional collectors of folk-tales in modern
times have rarely taken down such stories from oral recitation
without introducing into their texts numerous unauthorized alter-
ations.

A further word of explanation is, perhaps, due with regard
to the inclusion of many romances that are mediocre or even worse
in the division of Vol. II which is devoted to analyses. This haa
been done with an especial view to the students of stories, who are,
of course, particularly numerous in the field of mediaeval studies.
The more tedious the romance, the more grateful for such con-
densed synopses, doubtless, will be the specialist who is endeavor-
ing to run down the history of some motif in fiction. In any event,
as I hardly need observe, these analyses have been grouped to-
gether in a section by themselves, so that they do not interrupt the
general narrative of the development of Arthurian romance, and,
consequently, readers who may be interested in the remainder of
the book will be able to omit without inconvenience such analyses
in this section as do not attract them, or, indeed, the whole section.

In conclusion, I wish to express my gratitude to Professor
James W. Bright for having offered to include this book in the


romances in verse were written after the composition of the prose ro-
mances had begun, and, obviously, there was no reason why the
authors of the former and of the latter, respectively, should have drawn
upon sources of a different character.
VI Preface


series, Hesperia, — also, to the authorities of the British Museum
and Widener Library (Harvard University), to whose well-known
liberality and courtesy I have been deeply indebted whilst eae
ing my Arthurian studies in those institutions.
University of Tennessee, |
Knoxville, Tennessee, J. D. BRUCE.
November 16, 1922.
Contents of vol. I.


Part I: Traditions, Chronicles, Lays, and Romances
Chapters
I. Early Traditions concerning Arthur .
II. Origin of the Lays and Romances
1. The Lays 4 x
2. The Romances. .
3. The Origin of the Round Table and Some Other Questions
of Celtic Origins . eee oe eee
Ill. Chrétien de Troyes and his Successors .
IV. Merlin
V. Tristan .
VI. Lancelot


Part II: The Holy Grail


I. Chrétien, Robert de Boron, and the nee of Christian Origin
II. The Theory of Celtic Origin ; : - & 4
II. The Ritual Theory
IV. Continuations of Chrétien .
V. Sir Perceval of Galles .
VI. Wolfram’s Parzival
VII. Peredur, Diu Créne, and Sone de Nausay . ;
VUI. Other Theories Concerning the Origin of the Grail .


Part III: The Prose Romances


I. Beginnings of the Prose Romances .
II. The Prose Cycles
III. The Vulgate Cycle ,
1. L’Estoire del Saint Graal
2. L’Estoire de Merlin .
3. Li Livres de Lancelot ..
4, La Queste del Saint Graal
>. La Mort Artu. . ,
IV. Variant Versions of Parts of the ‘Vulgate Cycle
V. Date of the Vulgate Cycle Bt wh A
VI. Development of the Vulgate Cycle...
VII. The Pseudo-Robert de Boron Cycle of the Prose Romances
VIII. Li Contes del Brait Merlin &e iis acre, A &
IX. The Prose Tristan
Abbreviations employed in the present treatise.
(Herrig’s) Archiv f. d. St. der n. Spr. = Archiv fir das Studium der neueren


Sprachen.
LB == Literaturblatt fiir Germanische und Romanische Philologie.
LZ == Literarisches Zentralblatt fiir Deutschland.
MLN = Modern Language Notes.
MLR = Modern Language Review.
MPh = Modern Philology.


PMLA = Publications of the Modern Language Association of America.

RR == Romanic Review.

RTR = Paulin Paris's Romans de la Table Ronde (5 vols., Paris,
1868—1877).

Sommer = H. O. Sommer’s The Vulgate Version of the Arthurian
Romances (7 vols. plus Index, Washington, D. C., 1908—1916).

Vollméller, JB = K. Vollméllers Jahresbericht iiber die Fortschritte der
Romanischen Philologie.

Zs. f. celt. Ph. = Zeitschrift fir celtische Philologie.

Zs. f. d. A. = Zeitschrift fir deutsches Altertum.

Zs. f. ad. Ph. = Zeitschrift fiir deutsche Philologie.

Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt. = Zeitschrift fir franzésische Sprache und Litteratur.

Zs. f. rom. Ph. = Zeitschrift fiir romanische Philologie.
Page 8,


3’syvwvueyvywyvwywywe se ese YS


¥'YM¥’¥seveswevwvevesweyvy vFvwvysevesssy is


ss us YS Y


¥yv-3y3 &


12,


27,
29,


Errata. :


note 19 — for attribude a Nennius read attribude & Nenntus
note (last §) for “A’propos de Nennius” read “Apropos de Nennius”’
note 25 — for Romauia read Romania


9, end of 20th line — for fictitous read fictitious


15th line — for Goeffrey of Monmouth read Geoffrey of Monmouth
10th line from end — for Gallowey read Galloway

3d line from end — for Celtic cources read Celtic sources

note 41 — for H. Tausenfreund read H. Tausendfreund

note 46 — for Wacc’s life read Wace’s life

15th line of text — for thatis read that is,

last word of 7th line — read expanded

8th line of text — for (11. read (Il.

19th line — for Holinshead read Holinshed


, @th line, 5th word — read supplying


38, note 2, 18th line — for ,,Znr Frage nach ... read ,,Zur Frage


nach...

18th line of footnote — for will be fonnd read will be found
6th line of verse — for retnrned read returned

9th line of text — place a comma after undoubtedly

4th line of text — for zentury read century

first line — for no phiysician read no physician

16th line, 3d word — for companion read companions

13 lines from bottom, first word — read Guigemar
beginning of 3d line — read (Il. 8383ff.):


63, note 52, end of first line — for G. Cohn read G. Cohen


69,


113,
124,


130,
130,
151,
162,


20th line of text — place a comma after Henry I


, 4th line of text — for Wales — read Wales,


2d line of footnote — for Morgan le Fe read “Morgan le Fe

2d line of note 86 — for W. HE. Meade’s read W. E. Mead’s

16th line of text — place a comma after Conalle

note 108 — for Introdnction read Introduction

end of 2d line of full paragraph — read prob-able

11th line — read As was said above

text, 3d line from end — for Heinrich von der Tiirlin read Heinrich
von Tiirlin

6 lines from bottom — for Perceval**) read Perceval*®

4th line — for and Taliesin, wsich read and Taliesin, which
6th line — for exzept read except

note 6 — for Caerlleon read Caerleon

5 lines from end — for work**) read work*®

note 12 — for all tojd read all told; for Saga of ... read Saga


| er

18th line of text — read Her lover, however,

6th line of text — read until

note 47 — for A. de Braz’s read A. le Braz’s

note 4, end of first line — for comance read romance
note 12, 10th line — for “Ynisuutrin” read “Ynisgutrin”
X


Errata


Page 203, 11th line of note — for Otherwold bridge read Otherworld bridge
07, note 26, 4th line from end — for Ja Lancelot read le Lancelot


¥’yweyweysese se Fe ea sesvsswesyeysswvsesesveoyweyvsevsvsds<wsvwsesvssvsvdssuwsessrz2:2 BdvsvsxsessyBssyswss sy


~~ a a |


last line of footnote — for elsew-here read else-where


, note 37, 2d line — for critieism read criticism


note 3, 19th line, end — read More likely it

note B, 6th line — omit the comma after He argues

9th line — begin a new paragraph with Next follows

line 3 — for put in chaims read put in chains

7th line from end of text — place a comma after (conception)
8th line — for wides-pread read wide-spread


50, 5th line of note 33 — for thero is any read there is any


19th line — for a holy a thing read a holy thing

9th line of new paragraph — for religous read religious

note 56, 9th line from end — for condusively read conclusively

note 4, 10th line from end — for I do read “I do

next to last line of footnote — for fhe African read the African
— for Naassenc read Naassene

od line — ” place a comma after although

19th line — for his discardal of read his discarding of

6th line of note — for Christ’ smiracle read Christ’s miracle

15th line — place a comma after (416, 17)

5th line of first note — for expedition tho read expedition to


, last word of text — for Chretien read Chrétien


6th line — for is, baptized, read is baptized,
4th line of note — for Chrétien” read Chrétien


, note 10, 3d line — for has read has
, note 21, 3d line — for to his source. read to his source,


note 38, 4 lines from end — for ,Zamcelot, read ,in Lancelot,
— number of last footnote is 58
first word of last line of note 67 — for ime read time


, 13th line, last word — for Charate read Charete


last word of note 69 — for note read note.


, 2d word of new paragraph should be come


note 119 — for Lot, Lancelot, read Lot, Lancelot
7th line from end of text — read in terms of
note 178, last word of 3d line — read constructive
last word of 4th line — read places
last word of 6th line — read Didot Perceval
last word on the page should be of
note 214, end of first line — for thougth read thought
ilth line — for contains read contains,


, page caption — for Conte del Brait Merlin read Li Contes del


Bratt Merlin

note 13, 4th line of 3d paragraph — for was completed-in read
was completed, in

note 17, first line — for stemma read statement
PART I.»


TRADITIONS, CHRONICLES, LAYS, AND ROMANCES.
Original from


Digitized by Google UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA


Chapter I.


Early Traditions Concerning Arthur in the Chro-
nicles and Elsewhere.


In the earliest recorded traditions concerning Arthur, he is
represented as a victorious leader of the Britons — early in the
sixth century, it would appear — in their desperate struggle
against the Anglo-Saxon invaders. But did any such person ever
actually exist? The candid historian must admit that the evi-
dence on the subject (which we shall review in this chapter) is
meagre, relatively late, and almost wholly fantastic, and that,
consequently, an affirmative answer to this question is, by no
means, inevitable. Nevertheless, we may say that under the con-
ditions that prevailed in the wild years just referred to there is
nothing unlikely in the supposition that some born leader of men
may have emerged from the mass of the Britons and by his energy
and valor have enabled them to win such signal, though temporary,
successes over their enemies as to have secured for him a legendary
fame with posterity. Moreover, strong confirmation of Arthur’s
historical character seems afforded by the fact that his name 1s,
in its origin, not Celtic, but Roman, being derived from the name,
Artorius,| which occurs in Tacitus? and Juvenal® and which 1s,


* Cp. Heinrich Zimmer, Géttingische Gelehrte Anzeigen for Oct.
10, 1890, p. 818. The German scholar cites sbid., note 1, various
Celts with Roman names, e. g. Constantinus and Aurelius (Conan) among
the Celtic princes denounced by Gildas (first half of the sixth century).
Even the names of some of the best-known characters that figure in
Celtic tales were derived from the Romans, e. g. Yvain-Owein from
Eugenius, Geraint from Gerontius, Kei (perhaps) from Caius. Simil-
arly, R. Thurneysen, Zs. f. deutsche Philologie, XXVIII, 91, note 1,
with reference to Ywein, and tbid., 97, note 1, with reference to Urien
(Urbgen) = Urbigenus. It was a curious fancy of A. Holtzmann’s,


1*
4 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


indeed, the name of a Roman gens. During the long centuries of
Roman occupation of Britain (from the first century to the fifth),
many Romans, from one circumstance or another, had settled in
that country, and a still larger number of the native Celtic in-
habitants had become Romanized. When the Anglo-Saxon on-
slaught came, such elements in the population shared, of course,
the fortunes of the rest, and, owing to the superiority in education
and wealth which they generally enjoyed, were, perhaps, even more
likely than the pure Britons to produce a national hero. Certainly
we know from Gildas (ch. 5) that one of the principal leaders of
the Britons in their wars against the invaders was Ambrosius A ure-
lianus, ““a man of Roman race.”’ When the chroniclers, then, report
that Arthur won the battle of Mons Badonis (Badon Hill) — an
historical battle fought, undoubtedly, as we know, in the first part
of the sixth century — it seems wiser to accept this statement as
authentic and to recognize in him a man of Roman descent or a
Romanized Celt, who, in these times of stress, attained the leader-
ship of the British hosts. There is no need, therefore, of regarding
him simply as a creature of the popular imagination or of vapori-
zing him into a hypothetical culture-divinity, as various scholars
have done.‘


Pfeiffer’s Germania, XII, 279 (1867) that not only were Arthur and
Vortimer, son of Vortigern and enemy of Hengist and Horsa, the same
person, in British and Anglo-Saxon tradition, respectively, but that their
names were, also, identical, Vortwmer having become Arthur, as he sur-
mises, in Welsh pronunciation.

* Annals, Book XV, ch. 71.

* Satires, I, 29 — here in the feminine form, as a woman’s
name, Artoria Flaccilla.

“So John Rhys, Studies in the Arthurian Legend, pp. 39tt.
(Oxford 1891). He acknowledges that the derivation of Arthur from
Artor, Artorius is, phonetically, unobjectionable; nevertheless, with
his customary weakness for the fanciful mythological interpretations of
Max Miiller and his school — once so popular, but now generally dis-
credited — he endeavors to connect the name with the Aryan root,
ar — (= to plough), and hence conjectures that Arthur was by origin
a culture-divinity.

Among the interpretations of Arthur’s name, I note, also, the follo-
wing: In his article, “King Arthur and Gildas”, The Academy, Oct.
Early Traditions Concerning Arthur 5


Let us examine now in due order the testimony of the earliest
records with respect to Arthur and his achievements.

It appears surprising, at first sight, that Gildas, the British
historian, who is our earliest authority on the Anglo-Saxon con-
quest of Britain, in his De Ezxcidio et Conquestu Britanniae —5
written about 540, A. D. — should not mention Arthur, although
he refers (ch. 26) to the battle of Badon Hill with which later
chroniclers connected that hero’s fame.* The explanation, however,
may well lie in the fact that Gildas’s ‘“‘Epistle’”’, as he calls it (ch.
1), is not a regular historical narrative — it was not composed as
such — but rather a homily on the misfortunes of the Britons
as due to their sins — a “tract for the times’, as a modern editor
has aptly called it —’ and that it gives us, therefore, simply glimpses
of persons and events rather than an orderly account of them. In-
deed, a large part of the work consists of a mere cento of passages


12, 1895, E. W. B. Nicholson identifies with Arthur the personage
referred to by Gildas, ch. 32, as “Ursus”, and regards Arthur as made
up of two old Celtic words, artos (= bear) and viros (= man). Hence,
the name would mean Bear-male or He-bear. J. Pinkerton, I may
remark, in his edition of Barbour’s Bruce, I, 26 (London, 1790), had
anticipated Nicholson’s etymology, but had interpreted the combination
as meaning simply “the great man”. As a matter of fact, Celtic proper
names with artos (= bear) in composition are numerous. Cp. A. Holder,
Alt-Celtischer Sprachschatz, 2264. (Leipzig 1891), although Holder,
himself, suggests a probable connection of Arthur with Irish art (= stone).

° The standard text of this work is Theodor Mommsen’s, in the
Monumenta Germaniae Historica, Auctorum Antiquissumorum, vol.
XII, (Berlin, 1898). Hugh Williams has reprinted this text (with a
few changes) in his edition, Cymmrodorion Record Series, No. 8
(London, 1899—1901). He gives, also, a translation and valuable
notes. Among the older editions, San Marte’s — Nennius und Gildas,
(Berlin, 1844) — is still useful. For the critical literature on Gildas,
cp. R. H. Fletcher, The Arthurian Material of the Chronicles, espe-
cially those of Great Britain and France, pp. 2f., note, (Boston, 1906):
[Harvard] Studies and Notes in Philology and Literature, X.

° According to the most acceptable construction of this same
passage, indeed, he tells us in it, also, that he was born in the year
of that battle. He wrote the De EKxcidio before 547. Cp. Mommsen’s
edition, p. 5.


* Hugh Williams, p. V. m
6 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


from the Scriptures — especially, thunders of the Old Testament
prophets against the sins of the Jews — both people and rulers —

which Gildas here applies to his own fellow-countrymen.? From
the silence of such a work no inference can be drawn as to the
matter in hand. The first record? of the name, Arthur, occurs in
Adamnan’s life of Saint Columba,!° the famous Irish missionary,
who founded the monastery at Iona in the Hebrides. In a Latinized
form, Arturius — for Adamnan’s work is in Latin — it is there
found as the name of a young Irish prince who perished in a battle
at Tigernach (Ireland) in the year, 596. The father of this young
man, Aed mac Gabrain, was the ruler of an Irish state, Dalraida,
on the southwest coast of Scotland. Still further, in the seventh
century we find a Welsh prince," a British prince’? and an Irish-
man whose rank is unknown, all bearing this name, and since
Arthur was not a common name among the Celts, perhaps, we are
justified in interpreting these instances of its occurrence as testi-
mony to the existence of legends in the sixth and seventh centuries
concerning the person who was destined to render it so illustrious.'4
The first direct mention, however, of the great sovereign of ro-
mance occurs in the account of his exploits in the Historia Brit-


* Virtually only Part I (ch. 1—26) gives any historical infor-
mation.

° For the first three Arthurs here noted, cp. H. Zimmer. Nennius
Vindicatus, pp. 283ff. (Berlin 1893).

*° Book I, ch. 9. Cp. J. T. Fowler’s second edition (Oxford, 1920).
Adamnan died in 704. His Vita Columbae was written before 697
and is preserved in a MS. not later than 714.

“2 Arthur map Petr, who was ruling in Dyfed (Southwest Wales)
in the first decade of the seventh century.

** Arthur, son of Bicuir, apparently a prince. He slew a famous
Ulster chieftain in Cantire (Southwest Scotland) in 625.

*° Cp. Kuno Meyer in his article “Eine verschollene Artursage”’,
pp. 63ff. of the Festschrift fiir Ernst Windisch (Leipzig, 1914). The
name occurs here in a list of ecclesiastics who stood security for the
execution of the law known as Cain Adamnain. The list was compiled
in 697 and contains the name, Yaradach hoa Artur — i.e. “Faradach,
grand-son of Arthur’. This Arthur, then, must have lived in the early
part of the seventh century. .

** So Zimmer, loc. cit.
Early Traditions Concerning Arthur 7


tonum (ch. 56), which goes under the name of Nennius.5 Here
it is said that, after the death of Hengest, the Saxon chieftain,
Arthur fought against the Saxons cum regibus Brittonum, sed
ipse dux erat bellorum — that is to say, that he was not himself
one of the British kings, although he commanded their forces in
battle.¢ Then follows an enumeration of his twelve great vic-
tories,1” concluding with that of Badon Hill, which we know from
Gildas to be historical — only here in Nennius the narrative is
already colored with legend, for it is said that Arthur alone slew
960 of the enemy in a single attack.18


7° The standard edition of Nennius is T. Mommsen’s. It is in the
same volume as his edition of Gildas, mentioned above. San Marte,
also, edited Nennius, in the same volume as his Gildas. Cp. p. 5,
note 5, above. His notes are still useful: For bibliography of Nennius,
cp. Fletcher, op. cit., pp. 8f., note.

*° Richard Thurneysen, Zs. f. deutsche Philologie, XXVIII, 98,
note 1 (1895), suggests that the term dux was applied to rulers who
did not spring from the hochadel (higher nobility). It is evident, how-
ever, here that Arthur is not conceived of as a ruler.

** The variants in Mommsen’s edition (p. 200) show great con-
fusion in regard to the eleventh in the list of Arthur’s battles, “bellum
in monte qui dicitur Agned.’ We shall see below, Part IV, that
Anscombe has argued that “Mons Badonis” is simply a corruption
for “Mons Hagonis” (“Hill of Agon”). Except for one MS., however,
all MSS. seem to have “Mons Badonis’” for the twelfth. A. Wade-
Evans, Y Cymmrodor, XXIU, 155, contends that the name of this
battle got into the list from “pseudo-Gildas” (i. e. Gildas, whose work
he regards as spurious and late) and Bede; but the analyses of Zimmer
and Thurneysen seem to establish the antiquity of the whole list. The
entry in the Annales Cambriae (under 516), however, concerning Mons
Badonis apparently possesses no value. The annalist, it seems, took it
from Nennius and attached to it details which he found in Nennius con-
nected with the eighth battle (“in castello Guinion”). Cp. on the sub-
ject A. de la Borderie, Revue Celtique, VI, 2, and W. H. Stevenson,
The English Historical Review, XVI, 633, note 34.

The most detailed effort to identify the sites of the twelve battles
is Anscombe’s Zs. f. celt. Ph., V, 103ff. (1905), but in no case can
he be said to have attained assured results.

*® Anscombe, in the artiele just cited (p. 116), interprets this 960
as due to some scribal blunder. The figure was originally 470, he
says, and indicated, really, the date of the battle of Mons Hagonis (the
8 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


In the section of this work (ch. 73) called De mirabilibus
Britanniae, we have still further mention of Arthur in connection
with a marvel localized in the region called Buelt — the present
Builth in South Wales. Here it is stated that there was in this
place a heap of stones, which was crowned by one stone that bore
the impress of the foot of Arthur’s dog, Cabal. The stone had
received this impress during Arthur’s hunting of the boar Troynt
— an adventure which is related fully in the mediaeval Welsh tale
of Kulhwch and Olwen. Nennius says that, although one might
remove this stone from the heap one day, it would always be found
there the next. Immediately after this we find still another mar-
vel connected with Arthur — the tomb of his son, Anir, who had
fallen at the hands of his father. This tomb varied in length at
every new measurement. At one time it might measure six feet,
at another fifteen — “and I alone have tested it,” says the vera-


cious chronicler.
The work which bears the name of Nennius is composite in
character, and the history of its growth seems to be as follows:19


name he gives to the great British victory over the Saxons which in
our text of Gildas is called, in the genitive, “Badonici montis’). Geof-
frey of Monmouth, Book IX, ch. 15, as Anscombe contends, preserves
the correct figure, viz. 470, only Geoffrey, too, uses it of the number
of men that Arthur killed in the battle of Mount Badon. Wade-Evans,
also, adopts these views of Anscombe’s. Cp. Y Cymmrodor, XXII, 128.
The speculation, however, is anything but convincing.

*® My account of this growth is based on the investigations of
Heinrich Zimmer, in his Nennius Vindicatus (Berlin, 1893) and of
Thurneysen, in his reviews of this work of Zimmer’s in the Zs. ff.
deutsche Philologie, XXVIII, 80ff. (1895) and of Mommsen’s edition
of Gildas and Nennius in Zs. f. celt. Ph., I, 157ff. (1896), respec-
tively.

Before the publication of Zimmer’s work the value of the Historia
Brittorum was underestimated and the connection of any one named
Nennius with it doubted. Moreover, no part of it was regarded as of
so considerable an antiquity as now seems to have been actually the
case. The best representative of this depreciatory tendency is Arthur
de la Borderie: L’ Historia Britonum attribuée a Nennius et M-
storia Britannica avant Geoffroi de Monmouth (Paris and London,
1883). Similarly, G. Heeger, Uber die Trojanersagen der Britten
(Munich, 1886), and even later, W. W. Newell, “Doubts concerning
Early Traditions Concerning Arthur 9


In the third decade of the ninth century a writer named Nen-
nius, who lived in South Wales, re-edited and expanded an older
Historia Brittonum that dated back to 679, or, perhaps, in part,
to an even earlier period in the seventh century. Now, the passage
cited above concerning Arthur and his twelve victories belongs
to the oldest portion of the work and shows the vigorous develop-
ment of legend about the hero’s name within something like one
hundred and fifty years of the time when he must have lived.
The section which relates the marvels of Arthur’s dog and of Anir’s


the British History attributed to Nennius”, PMLA, XX, 622ff. (1905).
Both Zimmer and Thurneysen accept the earlier Historia Brittonum
(mentioned in the text above) as dating from 679 and as containing still
older materials. Thurneysen, Zs. f. d. Ph., XXVIII, 83f., is inclined,
still further, to ascribe to a Run (Rum) mab Urbgen (mentioned in
Nennius, ch. 63) the compilation of a part of these older materials.
Urbgen (a historical character who died between 572 and 579) seems
to have been the Urien of the romances; Run would, therefore, be the
brother of the Yvain (Ivain) of these romances.

Zimmer neglected the important Chartres MS. (ninth or tenth cen-
tury) of the Historia Brittonum, which preserves us the work in a
pre-Nennian form. L. Duchesne published the text of this MS. in the
Revue Celtique, XV, 174 ff. (1894), “Nennius Retractatus”, together
with a discussion of Nennius problems. Thurneysen had the advantage
over Zimmer of the use of the Chartres text, and, taken altogether, his
conclusions concerning the origin and development of the Historia
Brittonum, as stated Zs. f. celt. Ph., I, 166f. (1896), are to be pre-
ferred, viz. that in the neighborhood of Builth (in South Wales), in the
year 826, Nennius (Nemnius), compiled the work in the full form, known
as the Harleian recension. Immediately thereafter, on the advice of
his teacher, Beulan (cp. ch. 10), he prepared an abbreviated edition of
this Harleian recension. Later on, he entered additions and corrections
in this abbreviated recension. Excerpts from the life of St. Germanus
by Map Urbgen constitute the oldest elements of the work. For the
MSS. of the different recensions, see Mommsen, pp. 119ff. and Thur-
neysen, Zs. f. celt. Ph., I, 1581. — Windisch, Das keltische Britannien,
etc., p. 41, speaks of the Harleian recension as ‘‘vornennianisch”, which
seems, however, an error.

In Romania, XXIII, 432ff. (1894) César Boser, in his article,
“A’propos de Nennius”, had already (before Thurneysen) attacked the
argument by which Zimmer had attempted to fix the date of Nennius.
He suggests, however, no alternative date.
10 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


tomb is one of the later additions, as the manuscript tradition
proves, but it testifies also to the continued growth of wonderful
legends about the British chieftain. It does not surprise us then
to find that in the year, 1113, stories concerning Arthur were
firmly established both in Brittany and in Cornwall. In that year
certain monks of Laon in Brittany were sent to England to beg mo-
ney for the rebuilding of their cathedral which had recently been de-
stroyed by fire. We have an account of their experiences preser-
ved in a treatise by Hermann of Tournai.2° From this account
it appears that a servant of the monks got into a dispute with a
Cornishman as to whether Arthur was still alive — “exactly in the
same way’ remarks the chronicler significantly, ‘‘as the inhabi-
tants of Brittany dispute with the French over Arthur.” The
affair drew together a mob and there would have been bloodshed.
if a local ecclesiastic had not intervened. The chronicler con-
cludes naively that the man who started this brawl was punished
for doing so — for he had a withered hand and had come there
to be cured by the relics which the visiting monks had brought
with them. The Holy Virgin, however, was evidently displeased
with him, for the relics would not work a miracle on him that day.

Still further, in a life of the Cornish saint, St. Carantoc, also
dating from about the beginning of the twelfth century, we find
Arthur reigning in Cornwall and hunting a dragon which had
devastated his dominions.*!


°° Cp. Migne’s Patrologia Latina, Vol. 156, col. 973.

"! Cp. F. Lot, Romania, XXX, pp. 2ff. (1901). St. Carantoc,
however, did not allow any one to kill the serpent. He led the monster
about like a lamb. Lot identifies Dindraithov, where, according to the
legend, Arthur was reigning, with the modern Castle an Dinas (about
ten miles east of Crantock). He points out, moreover, that Arthur is
represented in Kulhwch and Olwen (Loth’s Mabinogion’*, I, 344) as
chasing the marvellous boar, Twrch Trwyth, in Cornwall (Kernyw) and
as having (Loth, op. cit., I, 38, 331, 334 et passim) a royal residence
at Kelliwic (Bodmin) in Cornwall. He commands troops from Cornwall
and Devon in the Vita Gildae, ch. 10, and has among his retinue
Gwynnhyvar (Loth, op. cit., I. 277), who is a high officer in those
kingdoms — a man who was, also, among the persons responsible for
the battle of Camlan. Cornwall figures, furthermore. in the tale of
Arthur’s fight with the Cath Paluc; for the mother (the sow, Henwen)
Early Traditions Concerning Arthur. — 11


We need not linger over the meagre borrowings from Nen-
nius which are incorporated in certain chronicles of the two cen-
turies or slightly upwards that followed the compilation of that
work in its final form,?? for they have no independent value. In
these chronicles of the succeeding centuries, only one entry is of
importance, namely, that which in the Annales Cambriae, under
the year 537, records for the first time in the barest possible


of this monster was, according to a triad (Loth, op. cit., Il, 271), in
a drove of swine kept at Glynn Dallwyr, in Cornwall. On Arthur’s
combat with the Cath Paluc, cp. E. Freymond’s monograph, Artus’
Kampf mit dem Katzenungestiim in the Festgabe fiir Gustav Gréber
(Halle, 1899). — The discussion of Arthurian localities in Cornwall
by W. H. Dickinson in his Arthur in Cornwall (London, 1900) has
been superseded by that of J. Loth, in his Contributions a l’étude
des Romans de la Table Ronde (Paris, 1912).


It should be remembered, too, that according to the Welsh tra-
dition, Arthur’s last battle took place at Camlan — doubtless, Camel-
ford in Cornwall, with which it is still locally identified. Cp. F. Lot,
Romania, XXX, pp. 16ff. (1901) and my edition of the Mort Artu,
pp. 291ff. This Welsh tradition would naturally be of Cornish origin.
On the improbable identification of Camelon in Scotland as the scene
of Arthur’s final battle, cp. the works named, p. 73, note 72, below.


** There are four such chronicles: 1. Annales Cambriae, compiled
in Wales in the second half of the tenth century. 2. A brief Chronicle
of Mount St. Michael, apparently, of Breton origin, and probably of
the eleventh century. 3. Aethelweard’s Chronicle, written by an Eng-
lishman, probably early in the eleventh century. 4. Henry of Hun-
tingdon’s Historia Anglorum, English, of course, and probably not long
before 1133. For these chroniclers and their relations to Nennius, the
various editions of their works, etc., cp. Fletcher, op. cit., pp. 31ff.
The best editions of the four chronicles, respectively, are by, 1. E. Philli-
more, Y Cymmrodor, IX, 141 ff. (1888), reprinted by J. Loth, Mahi-
nogion®, Il, 370ff. This gives the oldest (uninterpolated) version, which
is the only one we need consider. 2. Migne, Patrologia Latina, vol.
202, cols. 1323ff. Cp. first entry. 3. H. Petrie and J. Sharpe’s Mo-
numenta Historica Britannica, I, 499ff. Aethelward uses Nennius,
it seems, but does not mention Arthur. 4. Thomas Arnold in Rolls
Series, vol. 74 (London, 1879). Cp. p. 48.


There is no need of conjecturing with Fletcher that nos. 3 and
4 may owe something, also, to popular tradition.
12 - Evolution of Arthurian Romance


way* the final battle (here called of Camlann) between Arthur
and Mordred (Medraut).

The first indisputable indication that the fame which Arthur
enjoyed among the Celts had spread to other peoples is supplied
by the Gesta Regum Anglorum of William of Malmesbury, which
was completed in 1125. Besides the information concerning the
British chieftain which he derived from the above-mentioned pas-
sages in Nennius, this writer condemns (I—8) the idle tales which
the Britons circulate about their hero as detracting from, rather
than adding to, his real glory, and explains (III, 287) the belief
that this hero will return from the fact that no one has seen his
tomb, adding at the same time an account of the death and sup-
posed tomb of his nephew, Gawain, in Wales. The same writer’s
work on the antiquities of Glastonbury — De Antiquitate Glasto-
niensis Ecclesiae — contains more Arthurian material, but the
passages are, no doubt, late interpolations and will be dealt with
elsewhere.*4

If we could accept the contention of some scholars, much the
most interesting evidence in regard to the diffusion of Arthurian
stories before Geoffrey of Monmouth, would be that which was
brought to light in the year, 1888, by the Italian scholar, Pio
Rajna.*5 In the articles referred to Rajna collected numerous ex-
amples of the names, Artusius and Galvanus (Walwanus, Wal-
quanus, etc.) — that is, Arthur and Gawain, as he interpreted
them? — from the historical records of ‘Northern Italy, including
Tuscany and the Marches in the twelfth century. Artusius is
found as early as 1114 and Galvanus as early as 1186 — and,
in both cases, as the names of grown men — so that these names
must have been given many years earlier to the persons that bore


** Gueith Camlann (battle of Camlann) in qua Arthur et Medraut
corruerunt; et mortalitas in Britania et in Hibernia fuit. Cp. Loth’s
Mabinogion’, II, 372. The Annales, in their earliest form, belong
to the latter part of the tenth century. Cp. op. cit., p. 370.

** Cp. Part IL.

*° See his articles entitled “Gli eroi Brettoni nell’ onomastica Ita-
liana”, Romauia, XVII, 161ff., 355ff. (1888).

*° Even Foerster accepted Rajna’s interpretations without question.
Cp. Zs. f. rom. Ph., XX, 247.
Early Traditions Concerning Arthur 13


them — in the case of Artusius not later than 1090. Here, then,
in the closing years of the eleventh century the tales concerning
Arthur, if we accept Rajna’s interpretation, were so widespread
and popular as to affect the nomenclature of Northern Italy.
Moreover, the forms of these names would appear to make it
evident that the stories in question reached Italy in French ver-
sions, for Artusius seems, at first sight, plainly a Latinization of
Artus, the Old French nominative of Arthur, and Galvanus si-
milarly the Latinization of Old French Gauvain.?" It is to be ob-
served, however, that even if Rajna’s identifications of those
names are correct, it does not follow necessarily that his inferences
are equally so, for Arthur was a Breton name and may have been
brought to Italy by actual Bretons or inhabitants of French di-
stricts contiguous to Brittany, independently of any specifically
Arthurian traditions.2® The correctness of the identifications in
question, however, is not entirely assured, and the forms, Artusius
and Galvanus, respectively, may be variants of other names than
those proposed by the Italian scholar.?9


*7 In Geoffrey of Monmouth, Arthur’s name is Latinized as Ar-
thurus, Gawain’s as Walgannus, Walgainus — probably from French
Gauvain. Cf. Lot, Romania, XXVff. (1896).

*° This objection was already, raised by Suchier in Suchier and
Birch-Hirschfeld’s, Geschichte der Franzésischen Literatur’, p. 141
(Leipzig, 1900).

H. Zimmer, Géttingische Gelehrie Anzeigen for Oct. 1, 1890,
p. 831, note, suggests that the names may have been brought to Northern
Italy by Norman mercenaries, who are known to have been in the ser-
vice of states in that part of the peninsula as early as the eleventh
century. He recalls, too, the Norman conquest of Sicily by Robert
Guiscard and his followers in the same century.

°° In his Recherches sur les sources latines des contes et romans
courtois du moyen age, pp. 396f. (Paris, 1913), Edmond Faral has
suggested that Artusius may really be identical with Germanic Hartewic
and Galvanus (Galgano, Gualguano, Walwanus, Walquano, Val-
vanus) with either Galganus (name of an Italian saint) or Galbanus
(the Roman cognomen). Faral refers, p. 397, note 1, to studies of the
question of these names undertaken by a student of F. Lot’s and by
Professor Bédier. As far as I am aware, however, these studies have
not yet got into print.

Faral’s criticism (pp. 393ff.) of Rajna’s articles strikes me as the
14 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


Less open to dispute are the Arthurian names which are at-
tached to certain bas-reliefs over the northeast portal (Porta della
Pescheria) of the Cathedral of Modena,® representing the siege of


best that has appeared. Obviously, as he observes, Arthurian names
in Italian documents of later date than 1200 have no significance, since
by that time the French romances had made these names familiar all
over Western Europe. In the above-mentioned articles Rajna cites many
such names — Galasso (= Galaad), Yvannus (= Yvain), ete.,
— for this later period. Besides, Artusius and Galvanus (with variants),
he cites only Seldina (= Iselt, Iseut), from the year, 1180, for the
period before 1200. As Faral remarks, the paucity of the names from
the earlier period which Rajna conjectures to be Arthurian is in striking
contrast to the abundance of indisputably Arthurian names for the later
period.

In the Archiv fiir das Studium der neueren Sprachen, CXLI,
235 (1921), F. Liebermann has noted the occurrence of Arthur as the
name of a man born, at the latest, about 1140 — apparently, in Sussex.
But he may have had Welsh or Breton connections of some sort or other.

*° Wendelin Foerster was the first person to bring these figures
into Arthurian discussion, viz. in his article, “Ein neues Artusdokument”’,
Zs. f. rom. Ph., XXII, 243—8 (1898). See, too, his supplementary
article, ‘‘Das neue Artusdokument”’, ibid., pp. 526—529 (1898). The
archivolt and its figures, however, had been the subject of repeated dis-
cussion before this, in works on Italian architecture. Cp. tbid., p. 526.
Foerster accepted the usual dating of the bas-reliefs (first decades of
the twelfth century). He thought the situation represented on the archi-
volt was not derived from any extant Arthurian romance and observes
that it is nearer to the episode of Carados and the Dolerose Tor in the
prose Lancelot (cp. Sommer’s Vulgate Version of the Arthurian
Romances, IV, 90 ff.) than to anything else in the surviving romances
and was possibly derived from some lost romance, which was the source
of that episode. Foerster makes no effort to reconcile the evidence of
these bas-reliefs with his customary theory that Chrétien invented the
genre of the Arthurian romance.

Foerster’s reading of the names attached to the respective figures
and his identifications of thé same, where offered, are probably right.
They are as follows (p. 244): 1. Winlogee = Guinloie or Guenloie
(which occurs in two romances, viz. Li Chevaliers as deus espees and
Yder). 2. Mardoc (= Madoc, or, as I believe, more likely, the common
Arthurian Mariadok, etc.). 3. Burmaitus, or Burmaltus (cp. p. 526),
not known elsewhere. 4. Isdernus, probably = Yder (name of four
different Arthurian knights). 5. Carrado = Caradoc (the giant, rather
than Briebraz). 6. Galvaginus, probably = Gawain. 7. Galvarium
Early Traditions Concerning Arthur 15


a castle by Arthur and his followers, with knights issuing there-
from to attack the besiegers. These bas-reliefs have been gene-
rally dated early in the twelfth century and they include labelled
images of Arthur, Kay, Caradoc, etc., which prove, if the above
dating is correct, that stories concerning Arthur and the cha-
racters associated with him were current in Northern Italy in
that period. The evidence of these figures, however, stands in such
absolute isolation for so early a period that one is disposed to
await further investigation of their date, before accepting finally
the dating which has prevailed among authorities on the archi-
tectural history of Lombardy up to the present time.*! For the


(unknown). Foerster observes that this name seems Norman, whereas
G. Paris, Romania, XXVIII, 145 (1899), was inclined to connect it
with Galuron in the Chronique de Nantes. 8. Che = Kai (Kay).
— The castle is at the top of the archivolt, in the centre, and nos. 1
and 2 are inside its walls. On the left hand, no. 3 comes forth to
attack Arthur, no. 4, and a third (unnamed) knight. On the right,
no. 5 rides out against nos. 6, 7 and 8.

Pictures of the figures which we have been discussing will be
found in many publications that deal with the history of Italian archi-
tecture or the Modena cathedral, more specifically, e. g. M. G. Zimmer-
mann, Oberitalische Plastik im friihen und hohen Mittelalter (Leipzig,
1897), Plate 18; A. Venturi, Storia dell’ Arte Italiana, III (Milan,
1904), Plate 138: Giulio Bertoni, Atlante Storico-Paleografico del
Duomo di Modena, Plate X (Modena, 1909); A. K. Porter, Lombard
Architecture, Plate 144, (3 vols. New Haven and London, 1917). Among
discussions of the figures, cp. B. Colfi, “Di una recente interpretazione
[i. e. Foerster’s} data alle sculture dell’ archivolto nella porta setten-
trionale del duomo di Modena”, Att: e Memorie della R. Deputazione
di Storia Patria per le Provincie Modenesi, Serie IV, vol. IX (1899)
— also, Zimmermann, p. 44, Venturi, III, 160ff., and Porter, I, 436f.,
I, 44f.

*' Faral, op. cit., p. 395, dates these bas-reliefs about 1200. Pos-
sibly, he may have authority for this dating, but the writers whose
works I have cited above place them in the first half of the twelfth
century, and Foerster (pp. 244f.), on the basis of the costumes, gives
the same date as the latter. Venturi, III, 160, remarks: “Si e molto
discusso sull’ eta della porta della Pescheria, che pure mostra ad evi-
denza la mano di Niccolo, cooperatore di Wiligelmo, di lui piu giovane
® meno arcaico etc.” Wiligelmo, it should be remarked, worked on the
cathedral at the beginning of the twelfth century. Porter, IL, 48, says:
16 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


names attached to them suggest an Arthurian romance from the
period of the fullest development of the genre, viz., the late twelfth
or early thirteenth century,*? and it accords with this dating
that the architecture of the same portal contains figures from the


“Between 1099 and 1106 were erected, of the existing cathedral, the
crypt and also part of the facade with its sculptures and the Porta
della Pescheria, but the crypt and the Porta della Pescheria were sub-
sequently very materially altered.” Later on, he again speaks of there
being “abundant contemporary evidence that alterations and additions
to the church were made constantly during the XII and XIV centuries”,
but he evidently does not include the Arthurian figures among these
later additions, for in his interesting section, I, 434—438, on “Secular
Subjects”’ (including romances) in Lombard church architecture, he dates
(p. 436) these Arthurian figures, “1099—1106”. On the other hand,
quite recently, G. Bertoni, who has made a special study of these
figures, has expressed the opinion, Zs. f. rom. Ph., XI, 363 (1920)
that they cannot be later than the second half of the twelfth century
and more probably belong to the middle of the century.

Both Venturi, II, 167 and Porter, I, 436f., emphasize the resem-
blance of these figures to those which are found on the southwestern
side-portal of S. Nicolo at Bari (cp. Venturi, Plate 140, at III, 163):
“From a central structure issue on foot four men, two on either side;
against them come a series of men on horseback” (Porter, I, 436). Ana-
logous, too, are figures at Bobbio, and Porter, Joc. cit., thinks that ex-
cavation of the pavement there will throw light on the Modena archivolt.


** Guenloie, with whom Foerster identifies Winlogee, first occurs
in Yder, among the extant romances, and that is dated by its editor
in the second decade of the thirteenth century. Cp. H. Gelzer, Der
altfranzdsische Yderroman, p. LXXIX (Dresden, 1913). To be sure,
it is probably based on an older romance, but the character of the story
shows that even this last source did not go beyond the latter part of
the thirteenth century. If Mardoc is the same as Meriadoc, the same
applies here. Cp. the Chevaliers as deus espees, whose hero is named
Meriadeus (= Meriadoc), and the Latin romance Historia Meriadoci,
edited by J. D. Bruce, Historia Meriadoci and De Ortu Waluuann,
Gottingen and Baltimore, (1913). Both, probably, belong to the second
quarter of the thirteenth century. Mariadok is the name of Marc’s
seneschal in Thomas’ 7'ristan (third quarter of the twelfth century),
but the character is less prominent than would seem to be required by
the Modena Mardoc. Besides, the latter evidently has nothing to do
with the T7'ristan legend.
Early Traditions Concerning Arthur 17


French beast-epic which flourished in that period.?3 Even if the
early dating, however, is correct, here, as in the previous case,
there is always the possibility to be reckoned with that these
Arthurian names may have been derived from oral tradition
through Bretons or Normans.*4

Leaving now these scanty indications of what may possibly
be merely precipitates, so to speak, of tales transmitted orally,
we come to the later written records of Arthur that have been pre-
served. Whatever interpretation we may put upon the above-
mentioned indications, unquestionably the matiére de Bretagne®
entered upor a new phase of influence with the publication of


** Lucien Foulet, Le Roman de Renard, p. 60 (Paris, 1914)
assigns to 1152 Nivard’s Latin poem Ysengrimus, which he thinks
started the whole French beast-epic. He takes (p. 115) 1165 as the
earliest possible date for any part of the Roman de Renard, but he
assigns all branches but the second to the period after 1170.

** The sculptors of the figures may themselves have been from
Normandy or Brittany, for such workmen in the Middle Ages often found
employment in foreign countries. In any event, the immediate source
was French. This is proved by the French forms of some of the names,
viz., 1. Artus (Artus de Bretania in the inscription), not Artur or
Arturus. 2. Galvaginus (formed on Galvagin). 3. Che (= French
Ke), not Caius (Geoffrey of Monmouth). 4. Winlogee, not Winlogea,
as the Latin form would be. Cp. Foerster, op. cit., p. 248. 5. Mardoc,
without Latin -wus.

It must be confessed, however, that Isdernus is closer to the Welsh
Edeyrn (Edern) than to the French Ider (Idier, Yder) in our MSS.
of Erec, Yder, etc. Cp. too, Geoffrey's Hiderus. (The first s is, no doubt,
due to the sculptor’s blunder). Foerster, 1bid., plausibly surmises that
Carrado stands for Carradocus — only limitations of space, as an in-
spection of the archivolt shows, prevented the sculptor from completing
the name, -

*° The term, now in general use for Arthurian traditions, is taken
from the famous lines of Jean Bodel, La Chanson des Saxons, 11. 6ff.:

“Ne sont que. iii. matieres a nul home antandant:
De France et de Bretaigne et de Rome la grant;
Et de ces. iij. matieres n’'i a nule samblant.
Li conte de Bretaigne sont si vain et plaisant;
Cil de Rome sont sage et de san aprenant;
Cil de France de voir chascun jor apparant.”
The poem was written in the middle of the thirteenth century.


Hefperia, Ergdnzungsreihe: 8. 2
18 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


Geoffrey of Monmouth’s Historia Regum Britanniae about the
year 1137.%* In the dedication to this work, the author remarks


°° The date of Geoffrey's work, as was pointed out by Sir Frederick
Madden in his article, “The Historia Britonum of Geoffrey of Mon-
mouth”, The Archaeological Journal, XV, 299 ff. (1858), is determined
by the double dedication which is preserved in the Bern MS. of the
Historia. This MS., which dates from about 1160, still remains un-
published. Unlike the other MSS., it contains a double dedication to
King Stephen and Robert of Gloucester. King Stephen is here extolled
in almost the same words that we find applied to Robert of Gloucester
in the other MSS. Robert, himself, is addressed as altera regm nostri
columna and is eulogized at greater length in terms of the most exalted
flattery. The text of this important preface is given in full in W. L.
Jones’ above-mentioned paper. Cp. ibid., p.65, note. Now, as Madden
remarks, this dedication, if genuine — and there is no reason to doubt
that it is so — must have been written between April, 1136 and
May 1138, for only during this period were Stephen and Robert
of Gloucester on friendly terms. From the last-named date down to
his death in 1147 Robert was the principal supporter of the cause of
Queen Matilda in her strife with Stephen, and it is, of course, out of
the question that under these circumstances Geoffrey should have coupled
his name with that of the king in a joint dedication. The fact that
Henry of Huntingdon, writing in January, 1139, was able to give a
summary of Geoffrey's Historia in his letter to Warinus gives us that
year — or better, 1138 — as the terminus ad quem for the work. Con-
firmatory of Madden’s dating of the Historia is A. Leitzmann’s obser-
vation, that Geoffrey, at the end of his dedication, refers to Henry I
as dead, the “alterum Henricum” of that passage being really that
monarch (who died on Dec. 1, 1135), and not Henry II, as has often
been thought. See Leitzmann’s “Bemerkungen zu Galfrid von Mon-
mouth”, Archiv fiir das Studium der neueren Sprachen, vol. 134,
pp. 373 ff. (1916).

The Latinity of the Bern MS. is less polished than that of the
other MSS., but, according to Professor Jones, who has collated it with
San Marte’s edition (Halle, 1854), it does not differ in any essential
from the current text.

Owing to differences in Henry of Huntingdon’s summary, the idea
formerly prevailed that there was a (lost) earlier recension of Geoffrey's
Mistoria. R. H. Fletcher, however, in his “Two notes on the Historia
Regum Britanniae of Geoffrey of Monmouth,” PMLA (Publications
of the Modern Language Association of America), XVI, 461 ff. (1901),
has shown that this is incorrect. For the text of Henry’s Letter to
Warinus see the edition of Robert de Torigni’s chronicle by Leopold
Delisle, I, 97ff. (2 vols. Rouen, 1872—8).
Early Traditions Concerning Arthur 19


that he had often marvelled at the little that had been recorded
of the kings that had dwelt in Britain before the Incarnation of
Christ and even concerning Arthur and his successors who lived
after the Incarnation. ‘‘Now whilst I was thus thinking upon such
matters, Walter, Archdeacon of Oxford, a man learned not only
in the art of eloquence, but in the histories of foreign lands, offered
me a certain most ancient book in the British language (quendam
Britannici sermonis librum vetustissimum) that did set forth the
doings of them all in due succession and order from Brutus, the
first king of the Britons, onward to Cadwallader, the son of Cad-
wallo, all told in stories of exceeding beauty.’’ Geoffrey’s own
work purports to be his translation of this ancient book. It is
divided into twelve books, of which Book VII is really an earlier
work of the same author, — viz. the pretended prophecies of
Merlin — — and it introduces into European literature a host of
new characters such as Lear, Cymbeline, Locrine, etc., whom the
poets of later ages were destined to render famous. Here in the
Historia (Book VIII, ch. 14 to Book XI, ch. 2), then, for the first
time, we have related in pseudo-historical form, the glories of
Uther Pendragon and Arthur, his son, the latter’s birth and fic-
titous conquests extending as far as Rome, on the one hand,
and the Baltic, on the other, until his downfall in his last battle
with Mordred and his translation to Avalon. Merlin’s marvels
of enchantment and prophecy, Gawain’s valorous deeds, and Guine-
vere’s (Guanhamara’s) marital disloyalty all form, likewise, a part
of the story. The author of this book, though born in Wales, was
probably the son of a Breton — a member of the Norman garri-
son stationed at Monmouth.?? Between the years 1129 and 1151
he was living in the neighborhood of Oxford — probably as a
canon of St. George’s in the Castle of Oxford.** Some time sub-


*7 A man named Geoffrey at this time would hardly be a Welshman.
Cp. J. E. Lloyd’s History of Wales down to the Edwardian Con-
quest, II, 524 (2 vols. Oxford, 1911). Geoffrey signed himself Gal-
fridus Artur — so his father was named Arthur.

*° For Geoffrey’s connection with Oxford, cp. the documents in
which he figures as a witness (some of them new) discussed by H. Salter,
“Geoffrey of Monmouth and Oxford,” English Historical Review, XXXIV,
382 ff. (1919). The best summary of all that was previously known


Q*
20 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


sequent to 1140 he was appointed an archdeaconry in the dio-
cese of Llandaff, and on Feb. 24, 1152, after having been or-
dained priest only eight days before, he was made bishop of St.
Asaph in his native land, but died two years later, before he had
actually assumed the duties of his office. To few works in the
history of literature can the much-abused term, ‘‘epoch-making,”
be so justly applied as to Geoffrey’s Historia. Under any suppo-
sition, it was indubitably the most notable production in the Ar-
thurian field that had appeared up to that date, and, in all pro-
bability, it was owing to the influence of this book, direct and
indirect, that the Arthurian stories leapt into general literary
popularity just at this time. The conception of Arthur as a great
mediaeval monarch, the ideal representative of chivalry — not
a merely fairy-tale king — originated, we may say, entirely with
Goeffrey of ‘Monmouth. He succeeded in embodying this idea
in his work in a truly imposing literary form, and the pretended
historical character of the Historia gave a dignity to the theme
which it had not hitherto possessed. We need not take very seri-
ously the author’s declaration in his dedication to Robert, Earl
of Gloucester, that he was translating into Latin an old book in
the British language furnished him by his friend Walter, Arch-
deacon of Oxford. There is no evidence that he had a more than
superficial acquaintance with Welsh®® and probably he knew Bre-
ton no better. As a matter of fact, in addition to some borrowings
from oral traditions, not exclusively of the Celts,‘° he drew ma-


concerning Geoffrey of Monmouth is W. Lewis Jones’ paper on him in
the Transactions of the Honourable Society of Cymmrodorion for
the session, 1898—99, pp. 52ff. Cp. too, H. L. D. Ward’s Catalogue
of Romances in the Department of MSS. in the British Museum,
I, 203ff. (1883) and E. Windisch, Das Keltische Britannien bis zu
Kaiser Artur, pp. 123ff. (Leipzig, 1912).

°° Cp. Ward’s Catalogue of Romances in the Department of
MSS. in the British Museum, I, 205.

“° In his “Bretonische Elemente in der Arthursage des Gottfried
von Monmouth”, Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Lit., XII’, 231 ff. (1890), H. Zimmer
endeavors to prove from the forms of certain Arthurian names that
Geoffrey used Armorican sources as well as Welsh — more specifically,
that he derived such materials from men who were Bretons by race,
but who spoke French exclusively, or, at least, were bilingual. The
Early Traditions Concerning Arthur 21


terials from Gildas, Nennius, Bede, Livy and others — in fine,
from any quarter he chose, added to these materials from his own


most important names are Eventus (= Yvain), Walgainus, Walguainus
(= Gawain, who in Welsh is called Gwalchmei), Caliburnus (= Arthur’s
sword, Excalibur, which in Old French is called Calibor(e), Escalibor(e),
etc.). In the same journal, XIII’, 41, note 1, (1891), he adds Ritho
to the list of such names. F. Lot, however, has pointed out, Romama,
XXV, 1ff. (1896), that Hweint, of which Hventus is the Latinized
form, occurs as early as the tenth century in Welsh genealogies and
that Caliburnus is as difficult to explain on the hypothesis of Armorican
origin as on that of Welsh origin. On the other hand, he acknowledges
that Walgainus is based rather on French Gauvain (Gaugain) than
on Welsh Gwalchmei or Breton Walehmoe. In that case, however,
I may remark, Geoffrey could have derived it as well from a Frenchman
or from a French book as from a Breton. Lot, moreover, cites the
form Walven for Gawain in William of Malmesbury’s description (De
gestis Regum Angliae, III, under the date 1086) of Gawain’s tomb in
the Welsh province Ros. Here it is stated that Gawain was ruler over
Waluuthia (= Galloway), but was expelled from his kingdom by
the brother and nephew of Hengist. Walven, however, probably rests
on French Walwains, and Lot, loc. cit., conjectures that the tomb in
question was really that of Maelgwn, and that the new identification
was suggested by the name of a neighboring district, viz., Castell
Gwalchmai (= Gawain’s Castle). In any event, as Brugger, Zs. f.
frz. Spr. u. Lit., XXXII", 59f. (including p.60, note 3) (1908), remarks,
the connection of Gawain with Walweitha (Walwithia) is, no doubt,
“eine gelehrte Erfindung”, and, although the Welsh called Geoffrey's
Walgainus (French Gauvain) by the name of Gwalchmei, it still
remains uncertain whether the former is of Welsh origin, although this
is @ priori probable. In “Arthurian Notes”, MLN, XVII, cols. 277f.
(1902) W. W. Newell suggests that Gawain’s name (cp. Walwen) is
formed from Walweitha, just as Geoffrey formed Locrin from Loegria
and that Geoffrey represented him as the son of Lot (Loth), because
of the usual association of Lothian and Gallowey. This theory, however,
seems hardly admissible.

There is, of course, nothing surprising in Geoffrey’s use of French
sources. Apart from the Arthurian materials under discussion, Lot, loc.
cit., points out his use of such sources in the episodes of Gormond
(XI, 8—10, XII, 2) and Mont St. Michel (X, 3). It is evident, too,
from the same scholar’s discussion, Romania, XXX, 11ff. (1901) that
among Geoffrey’s Celtic cources some were Cornish. The names of the
Cornish dukes, Cador and Gorlois, prove this. So, too, with the name
Modredus; Cp. Lot, Romania, XXV, 2 and Loth’s Mabinogion*, II,
22 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


imagination — the most important element of all — and moulded
the whole into the pseudo-historical work which we know.*! In-
deed, it is hardly open to question that Geoffrey’s narrative re-
flects, in many particulars, even actual historical events of the
eleventh and twelfth centuries‘? — more especially, events of Nor-


238, note 1. Zimmer argues, Zs. f. fre. Spr. uv. Lit., XI‘, 254f. that
it might be also a Breton form of the twelfth or thirteenth century,
but that is too late for Geoffrey’s source.

San Marte (edition of Geoffrey's Historia, pp. LXXIIff.), like some
other students of his time and of earlier times, believed that the Welsh
Brut Tysilio was one of the sources of Geoffrey’s Historia. But the
reverse is undoubtedly true, as has been shown by F. Zarncke and
B. Ten Brink in Ebert's Jahrbuch fiir englische und romanische
Philologie. . Cp. the former’s article, “Uber das Verhdltnis des Brut y
Tysilio zu Galfrid’s Hist. Reg. Brit.”, V, 249ff. (1863), and the latter’s
“Wace und Galfrid von Monmout ” IX, 241ff. (1868). For some
additional points see, too, G. Heeger: Uber die Trojanersage der Britten,
79f. (Munich, 1886).

Altogether, I agree with Brugger, Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Lit., XXXII’,
127 (1908), that Geoffrey borrowed names from Welsh tradition, but
little else. There are, doubtless, some exceptions, like the story of
King Leir (Lear) and his ungrateful daughters (II, 11—15). This story,
too, has analogues, it is true, outside of Celtic territory. Cp. J. Bolte
and G. Polivka, Anmerkungen zu den Kinder- und Hausmdrchen
der Briider Grimm, Il, 47ff. (3 vols. Leipzig, 1913—1915), and
Miss C. A. Harper, “A King Lear Analogue”, The Nation, (New York)
for Feb. 10, 1916 (Correspondence Supplement, p. 17). The first is a
German, the second an Indian folktale. The German is closer to Geof-
frey. In the Indian tale — entitled The Hireling Husband and printed
by Shovona Devi in her collection, The Ortent Pearls (London, 1815) —
the choleric old king has seven sons and the youngest fills the réle of
Cordeilla (Cordelia).

E. G. Cox’s “King Lear in Celtic Tradition”, MLN, XXIV, 1ff.
(1909), gives no parallels to this immortal story. On the legend in
general, cp. W. Perrett, The Story of King Lear: Palaestra, no. 35
(Berlin, 1904).

a On Geoffrey’s sources, in general, see R. H. Fletcher, Arthurian
Material in the Chronicles, ch. 3, and PMLA, XVI, 4691. (1901).
His debt to Virgil has been investigated by H. Tansenfreund, Vergil
und Gottfried von Monmouth, Halle, 1913, and his debt to the Old
Testament by Paul Feuerherd, Geoffrey of Monmouth und das Alte
Testament, ibid., 1915.

“So Zimmer, Gott. G. A. tor Oct. 1890, pp. 824ff. According
Early Traditions Concerning Arthur 23


man history — of the reigns of William the Conqueror and his
successors. Thus he gives Arthur in the beginning of the latter’s
career an imaginary King Hoel of Brittany with 15,000 Bretons
as allies, no doubt, because a large number of Breton troops aided
William the Conqueror in his invasion of England — these troops
being led by the nephews of Count Hoel, who was then ruler of
Brittany. Similarly, the way in which Arthur parcels out Gaul
among his followers was doubtless suggested by the Conqueror’s
distribution of English lands among his companions in arms. The
prominence that Winchester and Carlisle have in the Arthurian
narratives of Geoffrey is also plainly due to the importance which
these cities possessed in Geoffrey’s own time. The former, though
no longer the capital of England, as in Anglo-Saxon days, was
often the residence of the Norman kings, and Carlisle under Wil-
liam Rufus had become one of the strong places. of the kingdom.

In writing his history, Geoffrey’s aim was primarily to exalt
his own race. Nothing is more striking about the Normans than
the interest which they took in their past and a whole crop of
chronicles was the result of this interest. Geoffrey opposes now
to these Norman chronicles a chronicle of the Celts with Arthur
as the great hero. In an age when even such a man as Lanfranc,
the great Norman Archbishop of Canterbury, could connive at
forgery it is not surprising that a Celtic ecclesiastic, with the
lively fancy of his race, should palm off a hoax like the Historia
on the public of his time. That public was, in the main, uncriti-
cal and swallowed this pretended history as it swallowed the Con-
stitutions of Constantine, which were invented to justify the tem-
poral claims of the papacy.** Moreover, it touched the vanity of the


to Fletcher (second citation in the previous note), the kernel of the
Belinus and Brennius episode of the Historia, Il], 1—10, was supplied
by the feud between Harold, the last Anglo-Saxon king, and his brother,
Tostig. 3
| *® Although most mediaeval readers accepted Geoffrey’s Historia
as authentic, there were writers already in the latter part of the twelfth
century who voiced their scepticism — so William of Newburgh and
Giraldus Cambrensis, especially, in passages that have been often quoted.
See the editions of their respective works in the Rolls Series, Vol. I,
of the Chronicles of Stephen, etc. (1884), William’s Prooemium, and
24 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


Anglo-Norman nobility, who were now identified with Great Bri-
tain, that they could claim a hero who was the equal, if not the su-
perior, of Charlemagne, the great hero of their Continental kins-
men. The consequence of all this was that Geoffrey’s Historia
had an instantaneous and prodigious success and it stimulated im-
mensely whatever interest there may already have been in Arthur
and his companions.

The first sign of Geoffrey’s influence on the vernacular lite-
rature appears in the metrical chronicles. Between 1147 and 1151
Geffrei Gaimar had used Geoffrey of Monmouth in compiling
a chronicle of Great Britain in French verse.*4 His own statement
is that he followed “the good book of Oxford which belonged to
Walter the Archdeacon”, but it is safe to say that this really
means Geoffrey's Historia. The work was undertaken at the in-
stance of Constance, wife of Ralph Fitz-Gilbert, an Anglo-Norman
noble to whom Gaimar was chaplain. Women rarely understood
Latin in the Middle Ages, and so just as vernacular versions of
Biblical books were often composed for their benefit in that period,
so too with the chronicles.


Giraldus’ Opera, VI, 57f. (1868) — also, the summaries of these
passages in Fletcher, op. cit., pp. 101f. and 180, respectively. Among
modern scholars who have expressed a belief in the reality of Geoffrey’s
liber are H. L. D. Ward, “Postscript to the article upon Geoffrey in
the Catalogue of Romances, Vol. I (1883),” Anglia, XXIV, 383¢f.
(1901), E. Windisch, Das Keltische Brittanien bis zu Kaiser Arthur,
pp. 126ff., (1912), and A. Leitzmann, op. cit., pp. 375f. (1916). Ward
conjectures that the liber consisted of an Old-Welsh MS. containing
many British genealogies and several historical glosses, brought home
from Brittany by Archdeacon Walter. Windisch and Leitzmann argue
that Geoffrey would not have dared to pass off on Robert of Gloucester
— the most powerful man in the kingdom — so audacious an invention.
But the examples cited above show to what length mediaeval audacity
might go in such matters, and, besides, Robert of Gloucester, though
cognizant of the fraud, may not have taken the matter seriously, or
may have even accepted the Historia gladly as a sort of national epos.
As such it has been interpreted with some plausibility by Sebastian
Evans in his translation of the Historia, pp. 357ff. (London, 1904).

““ L’Estorie des Engles, edited by T. D. Hardy and C. T. Martin
for the Rolls Series, 2 vols., (London, 1889), is all that survives of it.
Early Traditions Concerning Arthur 25


The MSS. of Gaimar’s chronicle preserve only the later por-
tion of the work, — L’Estorie des Engles, as it is called. To be
sure, the so-called Munich Brut,“ which appears to be of the
same date, is by some eminent scholars supposed to be a fragment
of the earlier portion. Even this fragment, however, ends before
it reaches the reign of Arthur. The only part of the extant por-
tion of Gaimar’s Chronicle, then, that contains any mention of
Arthur is the story of Havelock which he has inserted in his poem.
The Arthurian allusions here accord substantially with Geoffrey
of Monmouth.


Of far greater importance, however, was the paraphrase com-
pleted by Wace in 1155 — the poem which is commonly called
the Roman de Brut, or simply, Brut,** although the author’s own
name for it was Geste des Bretons. There is no dedication of it
preserved in the MSS., but the English poet, Layamon (11. 42ff.),
tells us that Waco “‘gave it to the noble Eleanor, who was the


*® Edited by K. Hoffmann and K. Vollmiéller, Halle, 1877. There
is still another fragmentary French version of Geoffrey of Monmouth
in monorhymed /aisses preserved in M. S. Harley, 1605 (British Museum).
Cp. Ward, Catalogue of Romances, I, 272ff. and Otto Wendeburg,
Ueber die Bearbeitung von Gottfried von Monmouths Historia Regum
Britanniae in der HS. Brit. Mus. Harl. 1605. Braunschweig, 1881
(Erlanger Diss.). H. Suchier, LB, Il, 107f. (1882), pronounces the
dialect Picard and the date not much later than Wace. The fragments
have no especial interest. The condition of this version and of the
Munich Brut (both preserved in fragmentary and unique MSS.) shows,
however, how easily the French original of Layamon could be lost.


*° Edited by Le Roux de Lincy, 2 vols., Rouen, 1836—1838.
F. M. Warren, MLN, XIV, 95, points out that the numbering in this
edition is wrong — 130 lines too high. A new edition of this work
based on all the MSS. is a great desideratum. Brut is the French
form of Brutus, name of the first king of Britain, according to Geof-
frey. For Wacc’s life, cp. especially, G. Paris, Romania, IX, 592 ff.
(1880). He was born in the island of Jersey about 1100 — was a
canon of Bayeux in the latter part of his life. He is also well cha-
racterized by G. Paris in his Mélanges, I, 85f. For a full bibliography
of Wace, cp. Annette B. Hopkins, The Influence of Wace on the
Arthurian Romances of Crestien de Trotes, University of Chicago
dissertation, 1913, p. 10, note 24a.
26 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


high King Henry’s queen’’ — that is to say, the wife of Henry II
of England, who ascended the throne in 1154.

A detailed study of Wace’s relation to Geoffrey*’ proves that
he followed his original closely, as far as the facts are concerned.‘
Allusions which we shall consider later on in another connection show
that he knew of an oral tradition of Arthur outside of Geoffrey, but
he adds practically no new material to that which his original
offered and so the advantage which his work has over Geoffrey’s
is merely in its superior vivacity and vividness. A French poem
in octosyllabic couplets was likely to be livelier than a pseudo-
chronicle in the artificial Latin prose of the Middle Ages, and
Wace’s style, as it happens, is particularly lively, so that Geoffrey’s
legends and fictions are now cast in the form which was really
appropriate to them — namely, that of a metrical romance.‘®
He substitutes direct for indirect discourse, is fond of rhetorical
questions and exclamations, and amplifies, especially, the des-
criptions of battles and festivities. Even in respect to style, then,
Wace is an important factor in the development of the Arthurian
romances. He accordingly contributed largely to the spread of interest
in the Arthurian stories, for in the Middle Ages, as well as now, more
people could enjoy a tale in the vernacular than in Latin. But he
influenced Arthurian literature in another way, also — that is to
say, the genre of the Brut —*° the chronicle of British history


*? Cp. Fletcher, Arthurian Material in the Chronicles, pp. 127 fe.,
Alfred Ulbrich’s, “Ueber das Verhiltnis von Wace’s Roman de Brut zu
seiner Quelle, der Historia regum Britanniae des Gottfried von Mon-
mouth”, Romanische Forschungen, XXVI, 181ff. (Erlangen, 1908),
and Leo Waldner, Wace’s Brut und seine Quellen. Jena diss. (Karls-
ruhe, 1914). | |

*® For the main additions made by Wace, cp. Waldner, pp. 120ff.

“© Substantially true is the remark of the Abbé de la Rue, who
calls Wace’s Brut “incontestablement le premier Roman de la Table
Ronde.” See his Essais historiques sur les bardes, les jongleurs et
les trouvéres normands et anglo-normands, etc., I, 50 (8 vols., Caen,
1834). M. Wilmotte, Le Moyen Age, XXVIU, 100f. (1914), makes
the same observation.

°° The term, Brut, in the sense of chronicle, was also adopted
from the French by the Welsh, and so we have in Welsh the Brut
Tysilio, Gwentian Brut, etc.
Early Traditions Concerning Arthur 27


which follows the Geoffreyan tradition and makes a fabulous Bru-
tus the founder of the kingdom — did not end with him. Curi-
ously enough, the most important representatives of this genre
actually preserved are not in French, but in English; neverthe-
less, the English poems undoubtedly are based on (lost) French
originals. The poems in question are, 1. Layamon’s paraphrase
of Wace, which it is common to call, after Sir Frederick Madden’s
example, Layamon’s Brué —*! a poem which was finished not
long before 1205. 2. The alliterative Morte Arthure® of the four-
teenth century, which has often been ascribed —*® wrongly, no
doubt — to the Scotch poet, Huchown of the Awle Ryale. In
both of these poems the principal interest is pseudo-historical.
Indeed, the narrative of the second is almost wholly taken up with
the continental wars of Arthur and his final conflict with Mord-
red — that is selected episodes of some lost Brut. The spirit is,
therefore, considerably nearer that of the chansons de geste or
poems of the Charlemagne cycle than is the case with the Arthu-
rian romances proper. Indeed, the encounter of Gawain and the
Saracen prince, Priamus, together with the latter’s conversion to
Christianity in the Morte Arthure, is actually drawn from Fiera-
bras,*4 one of the most famous of the chansons de geste. More-


*? The only edition is Madden’s, in 3 vols. (London, 1847), for
the Society of Antiquaries of London. A complete bibliography of
Layamon down to 1906 was published by B. S. Monroe, Journal of
English and Germanic Philology, VII, no. 1, pp. 139ff. (1908). For
the critical literature since then, cp. J. E. Wells, A Manual of the
Writings in Middle English, 1050—1400 (Yale University Press,
1916), and the supplements thereto. Layamon’s terminus a quo is
1189, since he refers I, 3, to Henry II as dead; his terminus ad
quem is 1205, date of the crisis over the collection of Peter's pence,
which, contrary to Madden, seems in the allusion to this tax, III, 286,
unknown to him.

°° The latest and best edition is Erik Bjérkman’s (Heidelberg and
New York, 1915), in Morsbach and Holthausen’s Alt- und mittel-
englische -Texte, no. 9.- The Introduction contains a full bibliography.

°° Cp., for example, G. Neilson, Huchown of the Awle Ryale,
(Glasgow, 1902). : i

*“ Cp. R. H. Griffith, ““Malory, Morte Arthure, and Fierabras”’,,
Anglia, XXXII, 389ff. (1909).
28 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


over, the parts played in the story by Lancelot, Gawain, and others
show plainly the influence of the fully developed Arthurian ro-
mances; and there is nothing surprising in this, seeing that the
alliterative poem belongs to the fourteenth century. But in its
essentials the Morte Arthure is based on a lost Brut.

Of far greater importance, however, in this connection is
Layamon’s Brut, which is a specimen of a metrical chronicle pre-
served in its entirety. At the beginning of his poem Layamon
gives as his sources “the English book that Saint Bede made,
another, in Latin, that Saint Albin made and the fair Austin who
brought baptism in hither” (i. e. St. Augustine, the missionary),
and, lastly, Wace. It is of little importance that he has cited
here other books besides Wace. His poem does not show any use
of such books and there can be little doubt that he took over me-
chanically from his French original this citation of authorities.5¢
With regard to the question of his relations to Wace, Layamon’s
poem is about double the length of Wace’s: the one contains so-
mething upwards of 15000 lines, the other something upwards
of 32000.57 Until quite recently it has been the common assump-


°° On its sources see P. Branscheid, “Ueber die Quellen des stab-
reimenden Morte Arthure”, Anglia, Anzeiger, VII, 179ff. (1885) and,
especially, R. Imelmann’s treatise, named in the next note. Branscheid’s
idea that Layamon is a source of the poem is certainly wrong.

°° In his treatise, Layamon, Versuch iiber seine Quellen (Berlin,
1906), p. 17, R. Imelmann has pointed out that this coupling of Wace
and Bede as authorities is found in other chronicles which relate the
history of Great Britain under Anglo-Saxon as well as Celtic rule. The
addition of Albin the abbot, who died at Canterbury in 732, and
St. Augustine to the list of authorities was also, no doubt, already in
Layamon’s original. And this addition is not hard to explain — for
Bede incorporates in his work the long interrogatories which St. Augustine
addressed to Pope Gregory asking for instructions as to how he should
proceed in his mission of converting the Anglo-Saxons, and he still
further speaks of Abbot Albin in his Preface as auctor ante omnes
atque adjutor opusculs hujus. So Albin and Augustine were to a
certain degree part-authors of his Ecclesiastical History. It was an
easy blunder, of which the Middle Ages furnishes many examples, to
make them now the authors of a separate work, although Augustine
died, of course, before Albin was born.

°? Wace’s poem is written in octosyllabic couplets — which became
Early Traditions Concerning Arthur 29


tion that the expansions of the English poem were due to Laya-
mon himself and that its author, who was a priest at Arley-Regis
(modern Ernley) on the Severn in Worcestershire, not far from
the Welsh border, had derived the most remarkable of these ex-
pansions from Welsh oral tradition. In the light of recent re-
search, however, it is no longer open to doubt that this assumption
was mistaken and that Layamon was merely following an cx-
panded (French) version of Wace, now lost.59 As long as the


the regular form of the French Arthurian romances; Layamon’s in allite-
rative verse, but in a somewhat disintegrated form and with frequent
admixture of rhyme.

°® Such was the view enunciated by Sir Frederick Madden in
editing Layamon’s poem and it has found especial advocates, also, in
R. Wuelcker, “Ueber die Quellen Layamon’s”’, Paul and Braune’s Bei-
trdge, Ill, 524ff. (1876) and in A. C. L. Brown, “Welsh Traditions
in Layamon’s Brut”, MPh., I, 95ff. (1908). |

°° R. Imelmann, in the above-mentioned treatise, was the first
scholar to propose this view. See, too, J. D. Bruce, “Some proper
names in Layamon’s Brut, not represented in Wace or Geoffrey of
Monmouth”, MLN, XXVI, 65ff. (1911). According to Imelmann, Laya-
mon’s original was an enlargement of Wace by combination with
material drawn from Gaimar. He imagines, moreover, that the text
which resulted from this combination still further underwent the in-
fluence of the Vulgate Mort Artu. But the latter was certainly later
than Layamon’s source — later, indeed, probably than Layamon. It
is to be observed that other poems of Wace’s underwent expansion in
the way that we are here assuming for his Brut, viz. his Conception
and Assumption. For a version of the former, expanded by the inter-
polation of passages from another French poem, L’histoire de Marie et
de Jesus, cp. P. Meyer, Romania, XVI, 232ff. (1887).

According to MS. 749 (fol. 132) of the Bibl. Nat., Robert de Boron
in his Merlin, refers to a Brut translated from the Latin by a certain
Martin of Rochester, who is otherwise unknown. The passage, which
is quoted from this MS. by P. Paris, RTR, I, 36, note, is not found
in most MSS. and may be merely a scribal invention. Besides, in the
MSS. where it does occur, we do not always find rowecestre (Rochester).
Rouain and other names occur, instead. Cp. W. E. Mead’s Merlin
treatise, E. E. T. S., Original Series, no. 112, (1899), pp. CLI, CLIX,
CLXI, CLXXI. Some scholars have accepted this Martin as Robert's
chronicle-source, instead of Wace, e. g. Wechssler, Sage vom Heiligen
Gral, p. 124 (1898), Brugger, Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Lit., XXIX', 60,
30 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


forms of certain names in the French poet’s Brut were known only
through our sole printed edition of that work, which is based on
an indifferent. MS., it was possible to maintain that the greater
similarity of these same names in Layamon to the corresponding
Welsh names revealed a direct contact with Welsh Arthurian tra-
ditions on the part of the latter. But investigation has proved
that the better MSS. of Wace’s Brut, which its editor left unused,
show no such divergence between the two poets in respect to the forms
of these names, and the argument from such alleged differences
has consequently collapsed. As a matter of fact, the whole nomen-
clature of Layamon’s poem bears throughout the stamp of French
origin and he was so ignorant of Welsh that he did not recognize
what are often originally Welsh names in the French forms with
which they were clothed in the manuscript that lay before him.


Now the conclusion to which the unmistakably French cha-
racter of the nomenclature points is borne out by other evidence.
Above all, the circumstance that certain features which the Eng-
lish poem has in common with the Old French prose romance, the
‘Mort Artu, are entirely absent from the Wace of our MSS., puts
beyond dispute the fact that these two works, which were nearly
contemporary *! and quite independent of each other, had a common
source, not identical with Wace’s Brut in its original form.*? The
features here in question are: 1. Arthur learns from a messenger
of Mordred’s treason in usurping the throne, whilst the former is
engaged in a war against Lancelot on the continent, and sees in


including note 8 (1905), XXX*, 182ff. (1906), XLIV’, 13ff. (1916),
and elsewhere. If Martin’s chronicle really existed, it may very well
have been the expanded Wace.

Sommer, Introduction to his Vulgate Version of the Arthurian
Romances, pp. XXff., cites a number of passages in the prose Lancelot
(to be found II, 3, 46, V, 130, 117, 144, respectively, in his series)
as allusions to a lost Brut, which Brugger, op. cit. XLIV*, 14, identifies
with Martin’s. None of these supposed allusions, however, are con-
vincing. They are much more likely to be mere inventions for the nonce.


°° Cp. Bruce, op. cit., pp. 67 ff.
*? For the date of the Mort Artu, cp. Part III.
°* Bruce, RR, IV, 451ff. (1918).
Early Traditions Concerning Arthur 31


this intelligence the realization of a prophetic dream.® 2. At the
end of the final battle between Arthur and Mordred only the for-
mer and two of his knights are said to be left alive.4 3. Arthur is
translated to Avalon by Morgan and her fairy ladies.®. 4. One
of Mordred’s sons who seized the kingdom after Arthur’s death
is given a definite name.

Many other names and details which distinguish Layamon
from Wace are found scattered through different French works
or works of French origin.6? From these various circumstances
the conclusion, then, is unescapable that the version of Wace which
constitutes the basis of the English poem had received here and
there additions of considerable significance. Some of these additions,
perhaps, should be accredited ultimately to Celtic — most likely
. Armorican — sources, but, in any event, Layamon was not re-
sponsible for them.

The matters which have just been cited prove beyond reaso-
nable doubt that Layamon in many instances drew from an ex-
panded Wace. In the light of these instances, it is a pretty safe
inference that all other additions to the story of the English poem
of any considerable extent come from this same source. There
are, for example, long passages in the former where, over against
the concise and matter-of-fact account of Wace, we have a full
and circumstantial narrative with free introduction of speeches

*8 Bruce’s edition of MA (the Mort Artu), p. 202 and Madden’s
edition of Layamon, III, 117ff. There are some differences between
the two, for a discussion of which cp. Bruce, RR, IV, 451f.

** MA, p. 244, and Layamon, III, 143.

°> MA, pp. 250ff., and Layamon, III, 144.

°° MA, p. 254, and Layamon, III, 150.

*7 Cp. Imelmann, pp. 24ff. The chief works which he cites are,
1. The prose Brut d’ Angleterre (unpublished), apparently of the fifteenth
century. According to Imelmann, it is the prose rendering of a lost
Norman verse-chronicle, closely connected with Wace. 2. The Middle
English alliterative Morte Arthure. 3. An unprinted French verse-
chronicle preserved in the British Museum MS., Royal 13, A. XXI.
This MS. is of the early fourteenth century. 4. The Munich Brut,
which may well be a fragment of Gaimar’s lost chronicle of the Britons.
It was from such works, no doubt, that Layamon really derived the
details noted by Fletcher in his article “Did Layamon make any use
of Geoffrey’s Historia?’”, PMLA, XVIII, 91ff. (1903).
32 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


and dialogues — in fine, a leisurely breadth of narrative art that
approaches that of the French Arthurian romances. To say that
an English writer of about the year 1200 was capable of this
genial amplification is contrary to all the evidence. Not only
is there no other example in this early time of such amplification
of his originals on the part of any English author, but one may
extend the assertion to the entire Middle English period. There
is nothing like this, for instance, in the relations of the whole body
of the Middle English romances to their French sources, for here
compression, not expansion, is the rule.

The amplified passages in question occur in all parts of the
English poem,® but those pertaining to Arthur possess naturally
the greatest interest. Thus it is the English poem which first
tells us®® of how the elves (fairies) conferred on the king their
best gifts at his birth: “They enchanted the child with magic most
strong; they gave him might to be the best of all knights; they
gave him another thing, that he should be a rich king; they gave
him the third that he should live long; they gave to him — that
royal child — virtues very good, so that he was the most generous
of all men alive.” Still further, we have here among other novel-
ties, detailed descriptions of Arthur’s armor,’® an account which
we shall return to later on, in another connection, of how the Round
Table was founded,?! and an allegorical dream in which the mon-
arch is warned of his impending destruction through Mordred.
In this dream Arthur finds himself on top of a great hall from
which he looks out over his dominions. Mordred comes and hews
down the posts that hold up the hall and Guinevere aids the
traitor in pulling down the building, so that Arthur and Gawain


°° For a list of them cp. Sir F. Madden’s Preface, pp. XIVff.

°° Madden, II, 384f. Layamon here shows a serious discrepancy
as compared with Wace which seems to prove that the MS. of the
expanded. version of that author which he was using was defective in
this place; for when Arthur is next mentioned (after Uther’s death),
he is — in some unexplained manner — in Britanny. See on the
passage, Bruce, MLN, XXVI, 69f., note. Other examples of discre-
pancies like this in Arthurian literature, due to defective MSS., are
there given.

° Thid., 463, 576. ** Thid., 531 ff.
Early Traditions Concerning Arthur 33


had their arms broken in its fall. He rises, however, and slays
Mordred and Guinevere. His followers had all fled and he wan-
ders alone until a lion takes him into the sea, where he is rescued
by a fish — but at this point he awakes.

Most justly celebrated of all the amplified passages, however,
is the one which gives us the first vernacular description of Ar-
thur’s translation to Avalon (the Celtic Elysium).*? Wace merely
remarks (11. 18683ff.) of this translation that Arthur caused
himself to be carried to Avalon to have his wounds cured. He is
‘still there and the Britons expect his return, as they say, — with
# few more words in the same vein. Instead of these bald state-
ments, however, we have in the English poem the following highly
poetical lines, which open with Arthur’s speech to his successor,
Constantine, after he (Arthur) has been grievously wounded in
his final battle with Mordred: ‘‘‘I give thee here my kingdom,
and defend thou my Britons ever in thy life, and maintain them
all the laws that have stood in my days, and all the good laws
that in Uther’s days stood. And I will fare to Avalun, to the
fairest of all maidens, to Argante the queen,”® an elf most fair,
and she shall make my wounds all sound, make me all whole with
healing draughts. And afterwards I will come again to my king- ~
dom and dwell among the Britons with great joy.’ Even with these
words there approached from the sea a little boat, floating with
the waves; and two women therein wondrously formed; and they


* Ill, 144f. The one in Geoffrey's Latin poem, Vita Merlini,
discussed below, is about 50 years earlier than Layamon.

** Miss Paton, Fairy Mythology, pp. 26. has tried to show
that Argante was a Celtic divinity, but we have here indisputably
merely a corruption of Morgan (Morgant), name of the famous fairy
queen of Arthurian romance — Arthur’s sister — whom Malory calls
Morgan le Fay. Cp. on the subject, Bruce, MLN, XXVI, 65ff. and
RR, I, 190f. In these places examples are given of corruptions of
the character’s name that involve the loss of initial M and change of
o to a — especially, in Roman de Troie, 1. 8024 (most MSS.), and
in the Spanish romances, where the name becomes Urganda.

This passage may have been. suggested to the author of the
expanded Wace by Geoffrey's poem Vita Merlint — for there, too,
Morgan (Morgen) figures as the healer of Arthur’s wounds — but, in
my opinion, it was more probably drawn directly from Celtic tradition.

BHefperia, Ergdngungsreihe: 8. 8
34 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


took Arthur anon and bare him quickly to the boat and laid him
softly down and forth they gan depart. Then was it accomplished
that Merlin formerly said that there should be great care on ac-
count of Arthur’s departure. The Britons believe yet that he is
alive and dwelleth in Avalun with the fairest of all elves; and the
Britons yet expect when Arthur shall return.”* _

Although translating a French poem which constitutes a sort
of spacious antechamber to the vast new palace of Arthurian ro-
mance, Layamon is himself thoroughly under the dominion of
the old Germanic epic tradition. He inherits its metrical form
— although admitting into his verse many laxities — its stock
of epic formulae, and, above all, its ethical emphasis and its spirit
of staunch courage and devotion. His patriotism is so sturdy that
Arthur, the scourge of the English according to Celtic tradition,
becomes in his work, himself, an Englishman. Despite his dif-
fuseness, which, by its insistent elaboration of detail, made a poem,
already long, intolerably longer, Layamon had a larger share of


This account of Arthur’s end accords, in general, with
Geoffrey’s Historia and Wace — also, with the former’s Vita Merlini.
There were other legends, however, about his death: 1. He is still
asleep with his warriors in a cave, whence he will issue some day to
restore the glory of his people. The earliest recorded forms of this
legend represent him as in Mount Aetna. Cp. Gervase of Tilbury in
his Otia Imperialia (composed about 1211), Secunda Decisio, cap. 12
(ed. F. Liebrecht, Hannover, 1856) and Caesarius of Heisterbach,
Dialogus Miraculorum, Distinctio XII, cap. 12, ed. Joseph Strange
(Cologne, 1851). Crusaders were, doubtless, responsible for this loca-
lization. There are similar legends connected with hills in England,
Scotland and Wales. 2. He is the Wild Huntsman of the storm-myth.
Cp. Index, below. 3. He was turned into a bird: (a) a chough. Cp. M. A.
Courtney’s Cornish Feasts and Folk-Lore, p. 58 (Penzance, 1890)
and Notes and Queries (7th series), IV, 247. (b) a raven. This
superstition is first mentioned by Cervantes, Don Quixote, Part I,
ch. 13. See, too, for Cornwall, Notes and Queries (First Series) VI,
618, and for Brittany, Felix Bellamy’s Forét de Bréchéliant, I, 129
(Rennes, 1896). 4. He was killed by the Cath Paluc, a catlike
monster. Cp. p. 41, note 9, below. Nos. 1, 2, 3 are mere adaptations to
Arthur of widespread motifs. On everything relating to Arthur’s end
ep. Bruce, Mort Artu, pp. 298ff. (Halle, 1910). There, inter alta,
fuller details concerning the legends just enumerated are given.
Early Tradttions Concerning Arthur 35


the genuine poetic spirit than any other Englishman during the
two centuries and a half that followed the Norman Conquest. He
was connected, however, with a perishing tradition, and it was
this circumstance rather than the defects of his work that caused
him to pass away without leaving a trace of influence on English
poetry. The author of his French original may seem, at first
sight, to have been even more unfortunate, since not a single copy
of his work has survived.?® He bequeathed, however, to a man of
greater genius than his own — the author of the Vulgate Mort
Artu — the materials for one scene, at least, through which he
has merited a reflected immortality — namely, the scene of Ar-
thur’s translation to Avalon near the end of that romance.


There is no profit in following the stream of the Geoffreyan
tradition concerning Arthur — his achievements and his tragic
end — further down than Layamon. As late as the sixteenth cen-
tury and occasionally even beyond the pseudo-historical fables
which had their fountain-head in Geoffrey found a place in all
histories of Great Britain. It was through such channels that
the story of King Lear, for example, reached Holinshead, and
then Shakespeare. The later chroniclers, however, it is evident,
contented themselves with copying and combining the accounts
of their predecessors. If they made any additions to their sources,
it was not from oral tradition that they did so, but from their own


"> Of Layamon’s poem only two copies} have survived, one
dating from the first part of the thirteenth century, the other from the
latter part, or, perhaps, even from the first part of the fourteenth.
Both are in the Cottonian collection of the British Museum. The
second, which is much mutilated by fire is inferior to the first and
represents a‘ new recension of Layamon’s work. Cp. Rudolf Seyger,
Beitrdge zu Layamon’s Brut (Halle diss., 1912). — Layamon’s im-
mediate original, after all, was substantially identical with Wace. The
ratio of the added lines to those in the original Wace could not have
been large. Nevertheless, one has to make allowance for the fact that
all apparent expansions in Layamon of any extent were already in
his French original. This is neglected by Miss Frances Lytle Gillespy
in her , Layamon’s Brut: A. Comparative Study in Narrative Art’, Univer-
sity of California Publications in Modern Philology, I, 361 ff. (1916).


3*
36 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


fancies, mainly in the way of interpreting what seemed to them
difficulties of their originals.”


© In his Arthurian Material in the Chronicles, to which I
have already often referred, R. H. Fletcher has sifted this enormous
mass of writings — in Latin, French and English, in verse and in
prose — with an industry and judgment that leaves nothing to be
desired. If the result for the period subsequent to Layamon is almost
wholly negative, he has none the less earned the gratitude of all
students of these subjects.
Chapter II.
Origin of the Lays and Romances.


The first French chronicles in verse, based on Geoffrey, which
developed the Arthurian theme were somewhat earlier in date than
any of the Arthurian romances that have come down to us, the
earliest of the extant romances being the Erec of Chretien de
Troyes, which was composed, as was stated above, about 1168.
The influence of the chronicles on the new genre is important, but
it was not in supplving the latter with specific narrative motifs for
development, but rather in giving éclat to Arthur and his court
and turning the attention of the literary world of the time in the
direction of the stories already connected with his name,! and in


* For the specific influence of Wace on Chrétien, the most im-
portant of the romancers and the one whose works are the earliest
that have survived, cp. Annette B. Hopkins, The Influence of Wace
on the Arthurian Romances of Crestien de Troies (Chicago diss.,
1913). Even the rather modest claims which Miss Hopkins makes on
behalf of Wace are somewhat exaggerated. Brugger, moreover, in
his review of her study, Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt. XLIV’, 13 ff. (1916),
criticizes her for attributing to Wace influences that may have been
really due to the versions of Gaimar or Martin (of Rochester), to the
Munich Brut or the version in laisses monorimes. The versions just
named, as stated above, have all perished, except for fragments that
are not pertinent to our inquiry, so that one cannot control the matter
with certainty. Nevertheless, we know that Wace — thongh only
named once in subsequent mediaeval literature, viz. in the prologue
to Guiron le Courtois — was much read and we have seen that
his Brut, in an expanded form, was used in two of the most impor-
tant of Arthurian texts, whilst there is no indication at all that the
other paraphrases of Geoffrey ever exercised the slightest influence.
I cannot, therefore, regard Brugger’s point as possessing any real
importance.
38 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


stimulating the poets to still other inventions of the same nature.
That is to say, their influence was the same as Geoffrey of Mon-
mouth’s — only more powerful, for, as has been already remarked,
poems in the vernacular commanded a more extensive audience
than pseudo-histories in Latin.

Since the metrical romances have only this general relation
to the chronicles, we have to look elsewhere for their origin, and
here we are brought back again to the question of those traditions
of the Celtic races which gave the starting-point for the narratives
of Geoffrey and his followers. This problem of the relations of
the Arthurian romances to Celtic tradition has been hotly debated
and some extremists have gone so far as to deny that the French
writers owed practically anything to this tradition.?


* This is, virtually, the position of Adolf Holzmann in his very
able article, Artus, Pfeiffer’s Germania, XII, 257 ff. (1867). In most
of his contentions with respect to fundamental questions of Arthurian
discussion he agrees with the Anti-Celticists of later decades. Thus,
pp. 262ff., he regards the three Welsh tales, Geraint, Owen and
Peredur as derived from the French; pp. 276ff. he argues that the
Arthurian passages in William of Malmesbury’s De Antiquitate Glas-
tomensis Ecclesiae are late interpolations, and that the same thing
is true of the passage concerning Gawain’s tomb in that writer’s Gesta
Anglorum, Ill, 287, else, the author would have told of Arthur in
his First Book; p. 282 he declares that the Brut Tysilio is based
on Geoffrey, etc., etc. Foerster and Golther do not go to such ex-
tremes as Holtzmann, but the whole tendency of their work, as we
shall see, throughout the present treatise, is, likewise, to minimize
Celtic influences in the Arthurian romances. Perhaps, the best general
statement of Golther’s position in the matter is to be found in two
articles which he contributed to the Zs. fir vergleichende Literatur-
geschichte, Neue Folge, II (1890), viz., pp. 211ff., ,Znr Frage nach
der Entstehung der bretonischen oder Artus-Epen”, and pp. 409ff.,
,Beziehungen zwischen franzésischer und keltischer Literatur im Mittel-
alter“. Golther distinguishes (pp. 212ff.) three different successive
forms in which the matiére de Bretagne was embodied. 1. Sagen-
bestandteile, i. e. the episodes which constitute the materials of the
Breton epics and which, also, occur independently of these, e. g. the
chastity ordeal of Iseult in the Tristan poems. 2. Sagendichtung,
i. e. oral tales which might combine and elaborate earlier independent
incidents. 3. Die vorhandenen altfranzésischen Epen aller Art, i. e.
the Old French romances. The Celts, he thinks, (p. 213) are impor-
Origin of the Lays and Romances 39


The principal circumstance which renders a satisfactory judg-
ment in the matter so difficult'is that we have so little preser-
ved of the early literature of the two Celtic peoples who are most
directly concerned in the debate — namely, the Welsh and the
Bretons. Indeed, nothing but names and glosses in the Breton
language have survived from the Middle Ages. The folk-songs
which Th. H. de la Villemarqué published in 1839 under the title
of Barzaz-Breiz and which related in some instances to the prin-
cipal characters of the Arthurian legend — for example, the king
himself and Merlin — being so late, would not have had very
much value for our purpose, even if they had been genuine. As a
matter of fact, however, these have been proved to be substantially
forgeries and not songs taken down from oral recitation, as they
pretended to be.t Yndeed, they are, in a large measure, free in-
ventions of their nineteenth century author — sometimes owmg
a mere suggestion to genuine folk-songs, but more frequently based
on books. It is a case of the Macpherson forgeries over again —
the fraud of a perfervid patriot — only the connection with ac-
tual tradition in this instance is even slighter than could be claim-
ed for the Ossian and Fingal pieces.

The conditions are somewhat better with Welsh literature,
for here we have in verse the poems of the Four Ancient Books


tant only for no. 1, and with regard even to no. 1, not all of the
materials under this heading, by any means, are of Celtic origin. No. 2
is French (developed by itinerant and often bilingual conteurs), and
we find combined here not only Celtic materials, but others drawn from
the general fund of mediaeval stories. The Celtic names in the French
romances of the Arthurian cycle are due, in a large measure, to
fashion and caprice (p. 215), after the conquest of England had made
the matter popular, and they no more imply necessarily Celtic origin
for the stories in which they appear than Germanic names in the
chansons de geste imply Germanic origin for the stories of those poems.
Golther ascribes to the combinations and inventions of the authors a
large share in no. 3.

* Cp. H. Zimmer, Die romanischen Literaturen und Sprachen,
mit Hinschluf des Keltischen, p. 133 (1909) in Paul Henneberg’s
series, Kultur der Gegenwart.

“ Cp., especially, F. M. Luzel: De Vauthenticité des chants du
Barzaz-Breiz de M. de la Villemarqué (Paris, 1872).
40 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


of Wales —® The Black Book of Caermarthen, The Book of Aneu-
rin, The Book of Taliessin, The Red Book of Hergest. These
poems, although they purport to be the work of Welsh bards of
the sixth century, are dated by modern scholars in a much later
time — from the tenth to the twelfth centuries.6 They relate in
part to battles which fall in the period to which Arthur belonged
— that is to say, the sixth century — and a few of them mention
Arthur? and certain characters connected with him who play a


* Edited, with translation by W. F. Skene, under this title, in
2 vols. (Edinburgh, 1868.)

* Zimmer, op. cit., p. 116.

" English translations of the poems relating to Arthur in the
four ancient books of Wales are given by Skene, I, 259—268. There
are only four of such poems and of these four the first, entitled Zhe
Chair of the Sovereign (Book of Taliessin, XV), seems to mention
Arthur only incidentally. The poem, it is true, is obscure to the
last degree. In the second (Black Book of Caermarthen, XXXI)
Arthur and Cai (Kay) are seeking entrance to a castle, but the porter.
Glewlwyd Gavaelvawr (represented in the Welsh prose tales as one
of Arthur’s own porters), refuses until he knows more about the per-
sons who wish to be admitted. Arthur eulogizes, then, his followers —
particularly, Cai, to a-description of whose exploits most of the poem
is devoted. Thus, although Arthur is the speaker, the piece is really
a glorification of Cai. In the fourth poem, Geraint, son of Erbin
(Black Book of Caermarthen, XXII), Arthur is barely mentioned
(Skene, I, 267) as “emperor, and conductor of the toil’ in the battle
of Llongborth (wherever that may be), in which Geraint, the hero of
the poem, was slain. Only the third poem, Preiddeu Annwon (= The
Harryings of Hades), Book of Taliessin, XXX (Skene, I, 264 ff.)
celebrates Arthur as the central character. I have quoted an extract
from this poem in the text above. The piece, as will be seen, refers
in an obscure manner to expeditions which Arthur and his men —
in his ship, Prydwen — made against certain places, named in the
poem, but not yet identified. Sir John Rhys, pp. XXIVf. of his pre-
face to the edition (London, 1906) of Malory’s Morte Darthur in
Everyman’s Library, says: “The poem evidently deals with expeditions
conducted by Arthur by sea to the realms of twilight and darkness’.
He also compares the quest of the cauldron of the Head of Hades in
the Welsh poem to a similar quest in Kulhwch and Olwen, only
the cauldron in the latter is in Ireland, not Hades. The preface, just
mentioned, contains the best discussion of Arthurian allusions in these
Welsh poems that we have. Rhys, however, omits to comment on
Origin. of the Lays and Romances 41


large part in the French Arthurian romances — for instance,
Gwalchmei® (Gawain) and Kay (Kei),? Arthur’s seneschal


the passages (Skene I, 263, 295) about Llachau, son of Arthur. This
son reappears in several of the French romances under the name of
“Lohot’”. Cp. my discussion of the character in RR. ILI, 179 ff. (1912).

*) For Gwalchmei (Gawain of the French romances) in Welsh
literature cp. Loth’s Mabinogion*, I, 288, note 1. Ibid. in Kulhwch
and Olwen he is called son of Gwyar, and it is said of him: “He
never returned from a mission without having achieved it; he was the
best of footmen and the best of horsemen. He was Arthur’s nephew,
son of his sister and cousin’. In a triad, Loth, II’, 89, he is one
of the “three goldentongued knights at Arthur’s court”; but this last
may have been written under French influence. lLoth observes, I’,
288, note 1, that gwalch means “male falcon” and gwyar, “blood”.
He does not explain met. According to Rhys, Arthurian Legend,
p. 13, Gwalchmet probably means “hawk or falcon of May”.

As has just been stated, Gwalchmei’s father in Kulhwch and
Olwen is named Gwyar; in Geoffrey (Book VII, ch. 21, et. seq.) and
the French romances Gawain’s father is named Lot (Loth). In his
article, “Le roi Loth des romans de la Table Ronde”, Revue Cel-
tique, XVI, 67 (1895), J. Loth is inclined to identify this Loth with
the Lloch Llawwynnyawe who figures among Arthur’s warriors in
Kulhwch and Olwen (Loth’s Mabinogion’, I, 264) and in the Black
Book of Caermarthen (Skene, I, 262). It is to be observed, however,
that further on in Kulhwch and Olwen (op. cit. p. 276) this Lloch
(or Llwch, as the name is there spelt) is represented as the great-
uncle of Arthur (on his mother’s side), not his brother-in-law. Since
Geoffrey's Lot (Loth), Book VIU, ch. 21, e¢. seq. is from Lothian
(Londonesia), may not Geoffrey have fabricated this name from the
name of the country with which he connects him, just as he fabri-
cated (XII, 19) the name of his fictitious prince of Wales, Gualo, from
- Guallia (Wales) or Sabrina, (II, 5), name of the goldess of the river
Severn, from Sabren? Loth, in the above-mentioned article, does not
credit Geoffrey’s invention, I believe, with its proper share in what
that writer says in regard to Loth.

”) In these poems, as in Welsh literature, generally — excepting
the pieces that betray French influence (cp. Loth’s Mabinogion"), I,
256, note 1) — Cai (Kay) plays a heroic réle — not that of a butt,
as in the French romances. For instance, in the Black Book of
Caermarthen, XXXI (Skene, I, 264) he slays the monster, Cath Palug
or Cath Paluc (Capalu or Chapalu of the Old French), which, accor-
ding to one line of Arthurian tradition, killed Arthur. Cp. on this
subject E. Freymond’s masterly monograph, mentioned above, viz.,
42 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


in the French romances. Indeed, Urien, a prince of the North,
who figures in the French romances as the husband of Morgan le
Fay and the father of Ivain, is even more frequently mentioned
than Arthur himself. The style of these poems, however, as of the
Bardic poetry generally, is obscure and oracular. ‘They are, be-
sides, lyrical, not epical, so that they could not in themselves con-
tribute to the transmission of legends concerning the heroes that
are mentioned in them. The following, for instance, is from one
of the poems concerning Arthur in the Book of Taliessin.1° It


Artus’ Kampf mit dem Katzenungesttim: Sonderabzug aus: Beitrdge
zur romanischen Philologie, Festgabe fiir Gustav Groéber (Halle, 1899).
I have summarized the main points of this monograph in my edition
of the Mort Artu, pp. 304f. The idea of Arthur’s death through
this monstrous cat (water demon, according to Freymond) may be one
of the debts of French romance to Wales, although it is not found in
the extant Welsh texts. A similar tradition may have prevailed in
Brittany. Cp. Galeran de Bretagne, 5068ff., where it is ascribed
to the Bretons. In any event, early in the thirteenth centnry we
find it localized at Lake Bourget in Savoy and J. Loth, Romania,
XXIX, 125f. (1900) suggests that the story reached Savoy by way of
Champagne and Flanders-Alsace, whose princes (patrons of Chrétien
de Troyes) we know were interested in the materials of romance.
Freymond, to be sure, thinks that travellers crossing the Alps brought
the tale to Savoy. The earliest allusions to the killing of Arthur by
a monster cat occur in texts of the latter part of the twelfth cen-
tury — not all of them romances. A lengthy account of this fight
_will be fonnd in the Merlin of the Vulgate cycle. Cp. Sommer’s
Vulgate Version of the Arthurian Romances, II, 441ff. Here, ho-
wever, Arthur is victor. The episode is plainly connected with the
localization of the legend in Savoy, only in the Merlin the combat
is represented as taking place on Lake Lausanne (i. e. Geneva), and
not on Lake Bourget, where the Mont du Chat still preserves a trace
of the early localization.

For some corrections to Freymond’s monograph, cp. Loth, loc. cit.
In “Arthurian Notes”, MLN, XVI, 277, W. W. Newell identifies the
monster of no. 30 in Child’s English and Scottish Ballads with
the Chapalu.

According to Kulhwch and Olwen (Loth, I*, 275) Cai was slain
by Gwyddawc, son of Menestyr, who, in turn, was slain — and his
brothers, too —- by Arthur in revenge for Cai. There is nothing to
correspond to this in the French romances.

*° Skene, I, 264.
Origin of the Lays and Romances 43


celebrates apparently some disastrous expedition by sea of the
great hero:


“Am I not a candidate for fame with the listened song
In Caer Pedryvan, in the isle of the strong door?
The twilight and pitchy darkness were mixed together,
Bright wine their liquor before their retinue.
Thrice enough to fill Prydwen (i. e. Britain) we went on the sea;
Except seven none returned from Caer Rigor.
I shall not deserve much from the ruler of literature.
- Beyond Caer Wydyr they saw not the prowess of Arthur.
Three score Canhwr (i. e. centuries of men or a legion) stood on
the wall;
Difficult was a conversation with its sentinel.
Thrice enough to fill Prydwen there went with Arthur.
Except seven, none returned from Caer Golud.


I shall not deserve much from those with long shields.
They know not what day, who the causer,

What hour in the serene day Cwy was born,

Who caused that he should not go to the dales of Devwy.
They know not the brindled ox, thick his head-band.
Seven score knobs in his collar.

And when we went with Arthur of anxious memory,
Except seven, none returned from Caer Vandwy.”

To the uninitiated such a piece as this would not convey much
information concerning the events to which it relates, and the
rest are no better. The same is true of the dialogue between Arthur
and Guinevere,!! the only Welsh poem in which these two cha-
racters appear together. |

Besides the poems from which extracts have been given above,
we have the highly characteristic brief poems called Triads.1? The
nature of these pieces will be sufficiently manifest from the follo-
wing specimens,!3 which have reference to incidents and personages
in Arthurian saga:

“Three furious blows in the isle of Prydein [1. e. Britain |:

“One was given by Matholwch the Gael to Branwen daughter


** Printed, with translation, by J. Rhys, Studies in the Ar-
thurian Legend, pp. 57f. (Oxford 1891). He gives it no date.

** The best translations are in French by J. Loth, Les Ma-
binogion®, II, 223%. (Paris, 1913).

** Thid., p. 246, and p. 247, respectively.
44 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


of Llyr, the second by Gwenhwyvach [ i. e. a sister of Guinevere’s |
to Gwenhwyvar!t [i. e. Guinevere], which led to the battle of
Kamlan [i. e. Arthur’s final battle with Mordred ]; the third by
Golyddan, the bard, to Kotwaladyr Vendigeit.”’

Or again:

“Three costly pillaging expeditions in the isle of Prydein
[i. e. Britain]. The first took place when Mordred went to Ar-
thur’s court at Kelliwic in Cornwall: He left neither food nor
drink in the court; he consumed everything; he drew Guinevere
from her royal chair and buffeted her. The second was when
Arthur went to Mordred’s court; he left neither food nor drink
in the court nor in the district. The third was when Aeddan Vra-
dawe (the traitor) went to Alclut to the court of Rydderch Hael;
after him there was left neither drink nor beast alive.”

The triad-form seems to have originated in Ireland, but it
received its especial development in Wales, and Loth’s collection
contains 153 of these pieces — only an insignificant portion, no
doubt, of those that once existed. There are others besides the
ones just quoted that contain allusions to Arthurian matters and
we shall have occasion later on to return to them, but, after all,
the information we glean from them is scanty and it is obvious
that these little poems played virtually no part in the transmission
of Arthurian material to the French poets.1


‘“ Sir John Rhys, Studies in the Arthurian Legend, pp. 35 ff.,
cites one of the Welsh triads as declaring that Arthur had three
wives of this name. But, according to the translation of J. Loth,
Mabinogion*, TI, 250, the three Gwenhwyvars there named are merely
called the “principal ladies of Arthur’s court”. To be sure, the third
of these Gwenhwyvars (the one whose father was Ocvran Gawr, the
giant) is Arthur’s consort. Rhys’s comparison, loc. cit., with the Irish
Echaid Airem and the three Etains, therefore, falls to the ground.

For Gwenhwyvar (Guinevere) in Welsh literature cp. Loth, op. cit.,
I, 259, note 3. She is always called the daughter of Gogrvan or Gogrvan
Gawr in Welsh (“Ocrvan” in the triad cited above being merely a
variant of that name). Loth cites from Myvyrian Archaeology, p. 863,
col. 1, a Welsh proverb, which says of her that “she was bad when
she was small, but worse, when she grew up.” The name means
“white phantom” or ,,white fairy”.

** One of the most interesting evidences in regard to the cur-
rency of Arthurian traditions in Wales occurs in the Code of Gwent


Google.


Origin of the Lays and Romances 45


A much more important branch of Welsh literature for our
present purpose are the prose tales called the Mabinogion, so well-
known to the present generation through the reprints of Lady
Charlotte Guest’s translation, which appeared originally in 1838
and which is now almost an English classic.16 The Welsh word
mabinogion in the manuscripts of the collection is the plural of
mabinogt, 1? which in turn seems to be a term applied to the tales


(South Wales). Cp. Aneurin Owen’s Ancient Laws and Institutes
of Wales, I, 678, (London, 1841). There it is said: “When the
queen shall wish a song in her chamber, the bard will sing the song
about Camlan [i. e. Arthur’s last battle], bnt in a low voice, for fear
lest it may cause trouble in the hall” [i. ©. for fear lest the song may
provoke quarrels in the hall]. The earliest MS. of the code dates
from shortly before 1200, but Howel Dda, who is supposed to have
compiled it in its original form, ruled in South Wales in the first
half of the tenth century.

*° For scientific study, however, the French translation by
J. Loth, Les Mabinogion, 2 vols. (second edition, Paris, 1913) is the
only one to be recommended.

*? This interpretation of the word, however, seems to have ori-
ginated in a scribal error. The proper meaning of mabinogion (plural
of mabinog, and not of mabinogi) is really disciples, and this is the
meaning given it in the Iolo MSS., p. 211. So, according to the most
careful discussion of the sense of mabinogi and mabinogion, viz.,
J. Loth’s Contributions al Etude des Romans de la Table Ronde,
pp. 30ff. (Paris, 1912) and Les Mabinogion’, I, 11 ff. (Paris, 1913).
Elsewhere in the Red Book, the four branches, Pwyll, Branwen,
Manawyddan, Math, are spoken of as forming one Mabinogi, and
this is, no doubt, correct.

J. Rhys, The Text of the Red Book Mabinogion, p. VIII (1887),
interpreted mabinog (mebinog) as “a literary apprentice’, one who
aspired to be a bard, and the still obscurer word, mabinogi, as the
literary baggage of such a bardic apprentice. So, too, H. Zimmer,
Géttingische Gelehrte Anzeigen tor June 10, 1890, pp. 513f. and
J. Loth in the passages cited above. These scholars reject speci-
fically the old interpretation of the word mabinogi, to which Lady
Charlotte Guest gave currency, viz. “a tale for children”. On the
other hand, in The White Book Mabinogion, Welsh Tales & Ro-
mances reproduced from the Penarth Manuscripts, p. XXVI (Pwll-
heli, 1907 — published really in 1909, it would seem, since the
preface is dated in that year), J. G. Evans takes mabinogion as the
plural of mabinogi and denies that mabinog meant “literary apprentice”’
46 ‘Evolution of Arthurian Romance


that a mabinog or apprentice in the art of storytelling practised
reciting. This term applies properly only to four tales in the
collection that goes under the name of Mabinogion —'* namely,
“Pwyll, Prince of Dyfed”, ‘“Branwen, Daughter of Llyr’’, ““Ma-
nawyddan, son of Llyr” and ‘‘Math, son of Mathonwy”’ — none
of which contain Arthurian material. Nevertheless, the collection
thus miscalled does contain some tales in which Arthur and other
characters of his cycle appear. Three of these tales are, undoub-
tedly derived from French romances — either the extant romances
of Chrétien (as the present writer believes) or lost French ver-
sions of the same stories.1® The tales in question are Owen or
The Lady of the Fountain, corresponding to Chrétien’s Yvain
(Chevalier au Lion), Peredur ab Evrawc, corresponding to the same
writer’s Perceval (Conte del Graal), Geraint or Geraint and Enid,
corresponding to his Hrec (Hrec et Enide).

The French origin of the three Welsh tales just named is
indicated unmistakably by their coherent structure and by the
character of the life which they reflect and which in social spirit,


or “was a technical term belonging to the bardic system”. In his
view, “any narrative that treats of early life is a mabinogi”. He
cites in proof the title, Mabinogi Jesu Crist (as Rhys, Arthurian
Legends, p. 2, note 2, indeed, had already done), which is a Welsh
version of the Gospel of pseudo-Matthew, called Liber de ortu beatae
Mariae et Infantia Salvatoris. (This Welsh version was edited by
Miss Mary Williams, Revue Celtique, XXXII, 184 ff., in 1912). Evans's
interpretation of mabinogi is adopted by Miss Williams in her Peredur
essay, p. IV, note 3 (1909) and by W. J. Gruffydd in his paper, “The
Mabinogion”, Transactions of the Honourable Society of Cymm-
rodorion, Session 1912—1913, pp. 39f. J. Loth, Contributions,
pp. 30f., has argued convincingly, however, that the sense which Evans
ascribes to mabinogi did not belong to the word in its earlier history,
but was a later (fourteenth century) development. For a review of
the publication and discussion of the Mabinogion down to 1902, see
Alfred Nutt’s note, pp. 323 ff. of the edition of Lady Charlotte Guest's
translation of these tales published by his firm in that year.

*® This was pointed out by Zimmer, Géttingische Gelehrte An-
zeigen for June 10, 1890, pp. 511ff. Even J. Loth had failed to
make the distinction in the first edition (1887) of his above-cited
translation.

*® For a full treatment of this question, cp. Part IV, below.
Origin of the Lays and Romances 47


domestic custom, the. usages of war — indeed, in every respect
— was that of twelfth century France, as depicted by Chrétien
and the other French poets. Here, moreover, instead of the pre-
cise localization of the genuine Welsh stories, which makes it
possible even at the present day to follow with substantial exact-
ness the movements of their heroes in Wales, everything is vague
and shadowy.” On the other hand, there are two tales in the col-
lection that represent genuine Welsh tradition about Arthur. One
of these is without suspicion of contamination from French lite-
rature — namely, Kulhwch and Olwen; and the other, the Dream
of Rhonabwy, although from allusions which it contains to Geof-
frey’s Historia it could not have been composed before the se-
cond half of the twelfth century, does not seem contaminated in
any important respect. These stories are touched with much of
the natural magic which ever since Matthew Arnold’s famous
essay we have associated with the Celtic genius, but, despite great
beauty of detail, which illustrates the wild fancy and vivid sense
of color that are features of the Celtic endowment, in reading them
one cannot but be reminded of the proverbial saying that “A.
Kymro [ i. e. Welshman] has imagination enough for fifty poets
without judgment enough for one.” As in most Celtic stories,
from the early Irish sagas down to the tales which J. F. Campbell
collected in the nineteenth century in the Western Highlands of
Scotland, the main impression left on the reader is one of dif-
fuseness and incoherence. Let us glance rapidly at the narrative
of Kulhwch and Olwen* for the light which it may throw on the
subject of the relation of the Arthurian romances to the Welsh
tales. Of all the ancient Welsh stories that have survived it is best
suited to that purpose. Here we have a genuine, uncontaminated
Welsh tale which we may compare with the French romances and
thus gain a measure of the possible influence of the Welsh stories


*° In The Mabinogion, pp. 347 ff. (London, 1902) A. Nutt has
commented on some of these features of the three tales. He remarks
that, as in the French biographical romances, in these tales‘ the centre
of interest is less the incident than the hero whose personality is the
chief, if not the sole, connecting link’’,

a Loth, Mabinogion*, I, 243 ft.
48 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


on the latter. Like the other tales of the Red Book of Hergest,
the fourteenth century manuscript which has preserved to us the
so-called Mabinogion, Kulhwch and Olwen was probably written
down about the end of the twelfth zentury — so shortly after the
period in which the Arthurian romances in French appear to have
begun — but it was manifestly older than this and had in all like-
lihood been current in substantially the same form for at least
a century before.2? It is possible that Foerster is right in con-
tending that the interest in Arthur inspired by the French ro-
mances was the cause of the writing down of this tale, but it shows
no trace of their influence, so, even if this is true, the circumstance
is immaterial. |

The hero, Kulhwch, is a cousin of Arthur’s. He has fallen
in love with Olwen, daughter of Yspaddaden Penkawr, merely
from report, for he had never seen her. At his father’s instigation
he sets out for Arthur’s court to ask him to cut his hair — that
is, according to Welsh custom, to adopt him as his godson —
and to assist him in winning the hand of his unseen lady-love.
The journey is described with the most brilliant play of fancy.
Take, for instance, the description of the dogs that. accompanied
the young prince: “Before him were two brindled, white-breasted
greyhounds, having strong collars of rubies about their necks,
reaching from the shoulder to the ear. And the one that was on the
left side bounded across to the right side and the one on the right
to the left, and like two sea-swallows they sported around him.”
And similarly it is said of the steed that “he cast up four sods
with his four hoofs, like four swallows in the air, about his head,
now above, now below. About him was a four-cornered cloth of
purple, and an apple of gold was at each corner, and every one
of the apples was of the value of an hundred kine upon his shoes,
and upon his stirrups from his knee to the tip of his toe. And
the blade of grass bent not beneath him, so light was his courser’s
tread as he journeyed towards the gate of Arthur’s Palace.”


** Loth, ibid., p. 40, dates the first redaction of the tale in the
second half of the eleventh century or beginning of the twelfth —
so, too, Revue Celtique, XXXII, 436 (1911), after full discussion of
the evidence.
Origin of the Lays and Romances 49


. He demands. an interview with the king, but Glewlwyd Ga-
vaelvawr, the porter who guards Arthur’s gate on New Year’s
Day — the day of the prince’s arrival — will not admit him
within the precincts of the palace, where the king is engaged
in revelry — but he promises him suitable entertainment out-
side. “A lady shall smooth thy couch, and shall lull thee with
songs; and early to-morrow morning, when the gate is open for
the multitude that came hither today, for thee shall it be opened
first, and thou mayest sit in the place that thou shalt choose in
Arthur’s hall.’”’ The young man, however, insists on admission
and threatens, if his request is not granted, that he will set up
three deadly shouts which will be heard throughout Great Britain
and Ireland and which will render the women of the palace barren
from that day on. The porter, then, informs Arthur of his arri-
val and lauds in extravagant terms his appearance, so that con-
trary to Kay’s advice the king admits the stranger, who rides into
the hall on horseback in true mediaeval style. The young prince
then asks for a boon, accompanying his petition with threats.
Just as in the French romances, Arthur pledges himself to make
this don, before he has even learned what the stranger is going
to demand, provided only that he does not ask for his ship, his
mantle, his sword, Caledvwlch (i. e. Excalibur), his lance, his
shield, his dagger and his wife. Kulhwch then demands the assis-
tance of Arthur and his warriors in obtaining Olwen as his bride.
He enumerates these warriors in a list six or seven pages long,
which doubtless in the course of tradition underwent expansion
from time to time, like the catalogue of the ships in The Iliad
or the lists of peoples and princes in the Anglo-Saxon Widsith.
The most familiar characters among them are Kay (Kai) and
Bedivere. But it is a different Kay from the butt of the French
romances, who is always the first to undertake every adventure
announced at Arthur’s court and is always ignominiously over-
thrown. Not only is he a valiant warrior here as throughout Welsh
tradition, but, like everyone else in this fantastic tale, he has mar-
vellous qualities: He had “this peculiarity that his breath lasted
nine nights and nine days under water, and he could exist nine
nights and nine days without sleep. A wound from Kay’s sword
Hefperia, Ergdngungsreihe: 8. 4
50 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


no phiysician could heal. Very subtle was Kay. When it pleased
him, he could render himself as tall as the highest tree in the
forest. And he had another peculiarity — so great was the heat
of his nature, that, when it rained hardest, whatever he carried
remained dry for a handbreadth above and a handbreadth below
his hand; and when his companions were coldest, it was to them
as fuel with which to light their fires.”


Arthur is bound by his promise and sends forth messengers
to every land within his dominions to seek for Olwen. For a year
the search is vain and Kulhwch begins to reproach the king with
the failure. Arthur now goes forth in person to remove the dis-
honor of an unfulfilled promise and he is accompanied by the
young prince and a band of his followers, including a guide who
was ‘‘as good a guide in a land he had never seen as he was in
his own.” They come to a beautiful castle, which proves to be
that of Olwen’s father. Near it is a flock of sheep which seemed
endless and which was guarded by a mastiff, whose fiery breath
was as devastating as that of a dragon. They go to the herdsman’s
house, and the herdsman’s daughter runs out with joy to meet
them and tries to throw her arms about Kay’s neck. The uncanny
mastiff, however, had probably made Kay suspicious, so that
he had provided himself with a billet, and when she endeavored
to embrace him, he thrust forward the log instead. It was lucky
that he did so, for she squeezed it so hard that it became a twis-
ted coil. ‘Oh woman,” exclaimed Kay reproachfully, “if thou
hadst paueeree me thus, none could ever again have set their affec-
tions on me.’

By the assistance of this maiden they have an interview with
Olwen, whose beauty is charmingly described, and Kulhwch ob-
tains from her a promise of marriage, if he will fulfill the con-
ditions which her father imposes. The father cannot see his fu-
ture son-in-law until the latter has raised his eyebrows which have
fallen over his eyes -~ these eyebrows being usually supported.
by forks. On the fourth day the father, after the manner of the
fairy-4ales, announces all sorts of extravagant conditions for the
achievement of his daughter’s hand. The lover is, of course, not
deterred and insists that they will all prove easy. The crowning
Origin of the Lays and ‘Romances 51


condition, however, is stated as follows: “‘Throughout the world
there is not a comb or scissors with which I can arrange my hair,

on account of its rankness, except the comb and scissors that are

between the two ears of Twrch Trwyth, the son of Prince Tared.

He will not give them of his own free will, and thou wilt not be

able to compel him. This Twrch Trwyth turns out to be a mar-

vellous wild boar — doubtless a parallel to the classical Mino-
taur —** with one parent a man and the other a beast — the same

that we have heard of already in Nennius — the Tortain of the

Conte del Graal.

In the tale of Kulhwch and Olwen, as in Ne ennius, Arthur’ 8
dog, Caval or Cabal, also takes part in the chase of the boar. In
order to catch Twrch Trwyth, still other extravagant conditions
are stated. Suffice it to say, however, that in the end, by the help
of Arthur and his hosts, the young prince overcomes all difficulties
and wins the hand of his bride, although at the expense of her
father’s life, whose fate it was that he should die a violent death,
as soon as all the above-mentioned conditions had been fulfilled.*


** Cp. G. Paris, Romania, XXVIII, 217, note.

* J. Rhys, Celtic Folklore, Il, 521 (Oxford, 1901), identifies
Twrch Trwyth with “Orc treith” in Cormac’s Irish Glossary. The
latter means “King’s Boar’. The hunting of Twrch Trwyth is des-
cribed so exactly in Kulhwch and Olwen that it is possible to trace
its course (in essentials) on a modern map of Wales. Cp. Rhys, tbid.,
pp. 509ff. On the local coloring of the Mabinogion and the local
legends which they embody, see too, E. Anwyl, “The Four Branches
of the Mabinogi”, Zs. f. celt. Ph., I, 277ff. (1897). His “Notes on
Kulhwch and Olwen’” in the Revue Celtique, XXXIV, 132 ff. (1913)
are purely textual in character.

*° As regards the relations of the French romances to Welsh
literature it is desirable to note that F. Lot has cited some names
in the French romances as of specifically Welsh origin: Thus, in Ro-
mania, XXIV, 322, he points out that Lis in the name Chateau de
Ins (first continuation to Chrétien’s Perceval and elsewhere) is really
Welsh Liys = castle, and ibid., p. 326, he explains the personal name
Gorvain Cadrut (in Meraugis and other romances) as a combination
of Welsh Gwrvan and Cadrod (Cadrawd). For Welsh din, dinas
(= fortified place), in the names Dinas, Dinan (Béroul’s Tristan)
cp, Lot, Romania, XXIV, 337, but cp., also, the glossary. to Bédier’s
edition of Béroul under Lidan. So, too, with reference. to Dinas-

4*
52 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


We have taken now a hasty survey of mediaeval Welsh lite-
rature, as far as it bears on our subject, and we have only to
add that the literature of the Bretons of which, as was said above,
nothing has come down to us from this period did not probably
differ from it in essentials. Especially in the matter that most
concerns us, the form of epic narrative, there is no reason to doubt
that with the Bretons as with the other branches of the Celtic
race this was the prose tale and not narrative in verse, as was the
case with the Germanic tribes or the Greeks and the Italian races.
So, for instance, the Irish epic consists of the famous prose sagas
concerning Conchobar, Cuchullin, and the rest; and the only branch
of the Germanic race which shows, by way of exception, a highly
developed prose epic is that which at a comparatively early period
underwent Irish influence — namely, the Norsemen.?* It will
be necessary in the following to remember this peculiarity of the
Celtic literatures.??

1. The Lays.

We have seen, then, what is the form of the narrative lite-
rature of the Celtic races, as it is actually preserved. Let us turn
now to the consideration of a more or less hypothetical genre of
this literature, about which Arthurian controversy has waged most
bitterly, since it has been regarded as most closely connect-
ed with the origin of the Arthurian romances. I refer to
the Celtic dats. The difficulty is that we have French lais
from the twelfth century down, like those of Marie de France
— lais that are often said to be based on lais bretons — but we
have no such pieces in extant Celtic literature, and leaving aside


diron (Dinatiron) of the Roman de Trove (son of Priam), as against
Lot, Romania, XXX, 195 (1901), G. Baist, Romanische Forschungen,
XXIX, 319f. (1910), sees here the influence of Dinas, supposed name
of the penitent thief, who was crucified with Christ. But this is not probable.

*° Cp. Andreas Heusler, “Die Anfinge der islandischen Saga”
in the Abhandlungen of the Berlin Academy, Philos.-Historische Klasse,
Jahrgang 1913, no. 9. He concludes that the Norse prose saga-form was
derived from the Irish, although we cannot point to specific borrowings.

**? Zimmer, reviewing G. Paris’s treatise on the Arthurian ro-
mances in verse (Histoire littéraire de la France, vol. 30) in the
Géttingische G. A. for Oct. 1, 1890, was the first scholar to lay
stress on this in Arthurian discussion.
Origin of the Lays and Romances 53


for the moment the word, Breton, the very meaning of the word,
lat, is the subject of debate.?* Suffice it here to say that the most
probable etymology so far suggested®® identifies it with the Irish
loid or laid — which seems to mean “‘song’’ — and so, no doubt,
las meant “song.” |

Before discussing, however, this question of the lais, it will
be well to indicate briefly the character at least of the French
poems so designated by giving an outline of one of them. We
may remark, in passing, that they are all in octosyllabic couplets,
but vary greatly in length. I will select for the purpose the first
in the collection of Marie de France, and one of the longest, na-
mely, Guigemar, a poem of 886 lines. Whatever theory we may
hold as to the origin of the story, it is evident that in Marie’s
version it has been adapted to the conditions of twelfth century
feudal society: | |

Guigemar®® is the son of the lord of Liun (Leon) in Brit-
tany and he serves his apprenticeship in knighthood at the court
of Hoilas (Hoel), king of that country. After he is dubbed knight,
he takes part in a military expedition in Flanders, and distingui-
shes himself in the highest degree. He has one fault, however: he
is wholly insensible to love. After a time he goes home to his
parents and whilst there engages in the chase. On one occasion,
being separated from his companions, he sees a beautiful white
doe which he shoots at. The arrow wounds the animal mortally, .


** The history of the discussion of the word is given in Karl
Warnke’s second edition of the Lais of Marie de France, p. vi.

*° Proposed by H. d’Arbois de Jubainville. Cp. Romania, VILL,
422 ff. (1879). :

*° The text stands first in Warnke’s edition. The fullest dis-
cussion of the name is H. Zimmer’s Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt., XI’,
7ff. (1891). Zimmer identifies it — correctly, no doubt — with the
Breton, Gutlhomar. On the other hand, though granting that the
tale is Breton, J. Loth maintains, Annales de Bretagne, XI, 479
(1895—6), that the name, Guigemar, can just as well be Cornish.
It occurs, indeed, as Wihumar in Domesday Book.

Variant forms of this name, viz. Guigamor (Guiagamar), Guiomar
(Guionmar), appear elsewhere in Arthurian texts. On this subject,
cp., besides Zimmer, op. cit., E. Freymond, in the same journal, XVII’,
pp. 17 ff. (1895), and W. Hertz, Spielmannsbuch’, p. 382.
54 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


but, strange to say, rebounds and wounds Guigemar also severely
in the thigh, so that he has to descend from his horse. To his
astonishment, the dying doe speaks to: him and predicts that he
will never recover, save through a lady whom he will love and who
will love him in return, but this mutual passion will cause them
unheard-of sorrow. Guigemar gets rid of his servant by sending
him after the other huntsmen and he, himself, strikes through
the forest until he arrives at the seashore. He sees there a beauti-
fully appointed ship with no human being about it. He lays
himself down in a magnificent bed in the ship, with the intention
of resting, but before he is aware, the ship is out on the high sea,
and it moves on until about evening he finds himself before an
ancient city, which was the capital of the land. The lord of the
city was an old man with a young wife whom he kept shut up
in a castle, accessible by only one entrance and that from the sea.
Her only companion were a niece and an old priest who was a
eunuch. Now, the day of Guigemar’s arrival the lady and her
damsel were walking in the enclosed garden which was attached
to the castle and they saw the strange boat approaching. When
the boat has reached the castle, the damsel enters it, observes the
wounded knight and returns to tell her mistress. They both go
down now, Guigemar awakes and tells his story, and they take
him to the damsel’s room and keep him there. Soon his wound
ceases to pain him, but he is pierced to the quick by the arrows
of love. The damsel perceives that her lady and the stranger love
each other and she exhorts the latter to disclose his love. This
he does and the two live in happiness for a year and a half. But
the lady has all along the feeling that their amour will be detected
and that they will be doomed to separation. So she makes a knot
in the shirt of. her lover and compels him to promise that, if
they are ever separated, he will love no woman who cannot un-
tie this knot. He, on his part, gives her a girdle and requires of her
a similar promise: She is never to love any man who cannot
undo it.


The fears of the lady at last come true. That very day a
chamberlain discovers her intrigue and informs his master. Gui-
gemar, when caught, tells his story to the husband and puts on so
Origin of the Lays and Romances 55


bold a front that he is finally allowed to embark again in his
boat. He reaches home again, but he remains melancholy and,
among other things, refuses to entertain the idea of marriage,
vowing always that he will wed no woman, unless she is able to
untie the knot. Ladies come from all sides, but none are able to
fulfill the condition.

~ In the meanwhile the lady of the castle is as full of sorrow
as Guigemar, and this continues for two years. She resolves at
last to drown herself in the sea at the point from which her lover
had set forth. She goes to the spot and finds the boat there, but
the thought comes over her that Guigemar perhaps is drowned
and she falls into the boat in a swoon. The boat takes her to
Brittany, to the castle of a lord, named Meriaduc, who soon falls
in love with her. She rejects him, however, alleging as an excuse
her vow about the girdle. This leads him to tell her of the strange
knight in this land who has made a similar vow about the knot
in his shirt. The news that her lover is so near causes her to swoon.
After this one knight after another tries to unloose the girdle,
but without: success. Finally Meriadue proclaims a tournament
and summons Guigemar to fight on his side. He comes — he
and his lady recognize each other, but hold back — then Meriaduc
exhorts her to try the knot in Guigemar’s shirt. She unties it at
once. Her lover now learns that no one as yet has undone the
girdle and he demands her of Meriaduc, who refuses. Thereupon
Giiigemar and the assembled knights declare themselves against
Meriaduc. They besiege and capture his castle — they put to
death Meriaduc and the garrison — and finally the two lovers
are united for good and all. :


This, then, is a specimen of the French Jais. Even in such
an abstract as this not all of the wild interest of the story is lost,
but one must read the original to catch the charm of its naiveté,
which effaces completely the boundaries between fairyland and
actual life, and of the simple, direct story of passion, which,
neither hasting nor lingering, goes straight to the mark. If one
were asked to name the books which represent best the romantic
charm of the Middle Ages, the wisest answer, perhaps, would be
the lais® of Marie de France and Gottfried of Strassburg’s Tristan.


a
56 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


Of this admirable poetess, whose naive grace cast its spell over
Goethe in his old age, we know little more than her name, her
nationality, and her works. We may safely affirm, however, that
the unnamed king to whom she dedicates her lays in her pro-
logue was Henry II of England (1154—1189). The designation,
“de France,’’ seems to show, moreover, that she was of royal
blood.?? Indeed, she has been plausibly identified’? with an ille-
gitimate half-sister of Henry II’s, on the paternal side, who was
abbess ci’ Shaftesbury from aa early as 1181 and was still alive
as late as 1215.

Let us return now, however, to the question of the origin of
the French lais. |

Apart from other considerations, convincing testimony to the
fact that stories concerning Arthur and his followers were current
among the Normans both in England and on the Continent about
the middle of the twelfth century is supplied by various passages


*' The little that we can gather about Marie de France from
her poems is best summarized by Miss Edith Rickert: Marie de France:
Seven of her Lays done into English, pp. 137 ff., (New York, 1901).
Emil Winkler in his Marie de France, Sitzungsberichte of the Vienna
Academy, Philosoph.-Hist. Klasse, 188 Band, 3 Abhandlung (1918),
endeavors to identify her with Marie de Champagne, patroness of
Chrétien de Troyes. On this improbable theory, however, see Giulio
Bertoni, “Maria di Francia”, Nuova Antologia for Sept. 1, 1920,
pp. 18ff. Scholars differ as to whether her dialect is pure French
or Franco-Norman. It seems most probable that she was from Nor-
mandy or from the part of the Isle de France that borders on Nor-
mandy. Cp. T. A. Jenkins’s edition of her L’Hspurgatoire Seint
Patriz, pp. 21 ff. (Philadelphia, 1894) for a discussion of her language
and for previous literature on the subject — also, Bertoni, loc. cit.

** Cp. Marguerite de France, daughter of Louis VII of France
and wife of Prince Henry of England, Henry II’s oldest son — Blanche
de France, daughter of Louis IX, king of France and wife of the In-
fanta of Castile — and many other royal personages in later history.
Elise Richter, Zs. f. rom. Ph. XL 728 ff. (in her review of Winkler),
disputes, unconvincingly, that the designation was limited to royal
personages.

** By John Charles Fox, “Marie de France” English Histo-
rical Review, XXV, 303 ff. (1910) and “Mary, Abbess of Shaftes-
bury”, tbid., XXVI, 317 ff. (1911).
Origin of the Lays and Romances 57


in Wace’s Brut, a work which, as we have seen, was finished in
1155. First the famous passage (11. 9994ff.) which contains the
earliest recorded mention of the Round Table:

Por les nobles barons qu'il ot

- Dont cascuns mieldre estre quidot.. .

Fist Artus la Roonde Table,

Dont Breton dient mainte fable.

Illoc seoient li vassal

Tuit chievalment et tot ingal...

Nus d’als ne se pooient vanter

Qu’il seist plus halt de son per.


And then again (11. 10082ff.):
En cele grant pais que jo di,
Ne sai se vos l’aves oi,
Furent les merveilles provees
Et les aventures trovees
Qui d’Artu sont tant racontees
Que a fable sunt atornees:
Ne tot menconge ne tot voir
Ne tot folie ne tot savoir;
Tant ont li conteor conte
Et li fableor tant fable
Pour lor contes ambeleter
Que tout ont feit fables sanbler.


Among the followers of Arthur who perished in his last battle
Wace includes (11. 13675f.):


cil de la Table Roonde
Dont tex los fu par tot le monde”).


What was the form now of these Celtic stories — the term,
Breton, we shall see, is somewhat ambiguous — to which Wace
alludes?%5 In his treatise on the metrical romances,?* mentioned

** “Those of the Reund Table, of whom there was such praise
throughout the world.”


*° Besides the two passages just quoted, cp. too, Wace, 11.
10401 ff. and 11. 10555f. (reference to the Round Table). G. Huet,
Moyen Age, XIX, 234f. (1916), “Notes d’histoire littéraire. I. Le
témoignage de Wace sur les fables arthuriennes’, remarks that the
terms, “merveiller” and “aventures”, correspond exactly to the con-
tents of the French Arthurian romances and prove the existence of
such tales among the Celts before Chrétien and independently of
Geoffrey.
58 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


above, Gaston Paris interprets them as embracing both lais of the
French kind (short narrative poems) and informal prose tales
told by professional storytellers who haunted castle and inn. The
existence of the prose tales is beyond dispute, as is made clear
enough by the passages which Paris himself cites; it is only a
question of the lats. That these, whatever their character, were
set to music is manifest from passages in the French lais — as
when it is said at the end of Guigemar:

De cest cunte qu’oi avez

Fu Guigemar li lais trovez

Que hum dit en harpe e en rote

Bone en est a oir la note.

It is evident still further that the instruments to which they
were usually sung were the Celtic rote — a rude kind of violin —
and the harp, but especially the former. As we have already seen,
however, there is no epic narrative in verse in extant Welsh or
Irish literature and there is no reason to believe that the Bretons
differed from their Celtic kinsmen of the British Isles in this
matter; so what do the writers of the French lais mean by their
citation of lais Bretons in connection with their own poems ?38
It would seem most probable that the Celtic lays referred to were
simply lyrical pieces set to music concerning the characters who
are told of in the Jais of Marie de France and others. In singing


*° Histoire littéraire de la France. XXX, 7ff. (1888).

°? Op. cit., pp. 9ff., from Thomas’s Tristan, from Chrétien’s
Erec, from the continuation of his Perceval by Wauchier de Denain
(Gaucher de Dourdan), and from still others.

** It was natural that Gaston Paris, who had no , firsthand know-
ledge of Celtic literature, should have mistaken the force of these
allusions and assumed that they referred to narrative poems in a
Celtic language of the same character as the French Jats themselves.
But, on the whole, the assumption seems unjustified. As Warnke has
pointed out, pp. XXVIff., Marie de France, for instance, does not say
that she is translating or paraphrasing a Jat Bretun: she says that
she is following the cuntes or tales from which the lais too, it seems,
sprang: So, for example, near the beginning of her collection she uses
the following words: “The tales which I know to be true, concerning
which the Britons have made the lays, I will relate to you quite
briefly. “
Origin of the Lays and Romances 59


such a piece, the singer would find it necessary to recite in: prose
the story to which the: poem related. This would be the case es-
pecially, of course, if the Breton singer were singing before
French-speaking audiences who did not know the legends of his
race. There is, in all probability, then, no reason for trying to
distinguish between epical and. lyrical lais, as has sometimes been
done. There were, we may assume, as a matter of fact, only lyri-
cal lats in the Celtic language and the term was extended by
Marie de France and her fellows to the short narrative poems
in French which they composed; but this poetical genre had really
nothing to correspond to it in the Celtic and was their own inde-
pendent invention. In French literature, besides, the word, lai,
continued often to designate brief lyrical pieces (chansons) as we
have just assumed that it did in the Celtic. Indeed, las in the
sense of tale (conte) was never very popular in France and passed
out of use altogether by the end of the thirteenth « or first quarter
of the fourteenth century.

Granting that the French lays shady tales that came to
their authors from Celtic sources — and this is certainly true of
some of them, at least — it remains for us to inquire from what
division of the Celts did the French poets derive these tales. Was
it fron: the Celts of Great Britain or of Brittany (Armorica)?
The answer to the question turns on the meaning of the term,
Breton, which qualifies the word, lai, in the references of Marie
de France and others to their sources. That the term, in some
cases, is equivalent to Armorican is plain. For example, the names
of two of Marie’s lays — Bisclavret (=Werewolf) and Laustic
(= Nightingale) — are somewhat distorted Breton words and could
not come from the Welsh.*° Furthermore, the name, Guigemar,

** In only five of her lays does Marie use Ja? as a synonym
of conte. Cp. Foulet, Zs. f. rom. Ph., XXIX, 303f. He traces there
her hesitating adoption of the term in this sense. He points out,
p.-311, its very limited use in the anonymous lays. In Italian lav
meant lament. Cp. O. M. Johnston, Studj Medieval, II, 554 ff. (1907).

*° This was first pointed out by Zimmer in the Gdttingische
Gelehrte Anzeigen for Oct. 1, 1890, pp. 800f. The article is of the
first importance with reference to the origin of the lays. So, too, is


the same writer’s “Beitrige zur Namenforschung in den altfranzisischen
Arthurepen”, Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt., XI", 1ff. (1891).
60 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


occurs in numerous historical documents: in Brittany from the
early eleventh century down and not in Wales.*! In the case of
still other lays — Equitan, Lanval, Les Dous Amanz, Elidue —
geographical allusions connect them definitely with Brittany.
These observations afford irrefragable proof that in the particular
cases the word, Breton (Bretun), is synonomous with Armorican.
Indeed, a comprehensive inquiry into the subject has shown that,
in the general usage of the Middle Ages, the terms Bretagne,
Breton, and their Latin equivalents*® were employed only of con-
temporary Brittany and its inhabitants and language, or, retro-
spectively, of Great Britain before and during the period of the
Anglo-Saxon conquest and of the ancient Celtic population that
inhabited it.¢4 Consequently, when Marie de France and her con-
temporéries refer to lais Bretons as their sources, they have Brit-
tany in mind, and their own lays are, accordingly, based on Breton
stories, as far as they are of Celtic origin at all. It is true that
Marie and her fellows sometimes localize the plots of their lays
in Great Britain. For example, Chievrefueil (Honeysuckle), in
which Tristan sends down stream to Iseult messages carved on
pieces of wood, is connected with Tintagel (in Cornwall); in Yonec
{and in L’Hspine, under the influence of Yonec)*> Caerleon (in


-—— ae


“" Cp. Zimmer’s last named article, pp. 1ff.
“* Cp. Zimmer, Gétt. G. A., for October 1, 1890, pp. 797 ff.
** Brito, Brittanicus, Britannia.


“* These are the conclusions of Brugger’s article, “Uber die Be-
deutung von Bretagne, Breton in mittelalterlichen Texten”, Zs. /f.
fre. Spr. u. [itt., XX", T9ff. (1898). One has to except Britannia,
used ag a name for Great Britain in learned writings. Still further,
as Lot, Romama, XXIV, 508ff. (1895), and in his reply to Brugger,
entitled “La Patrie des lais bretons’, ibid., xxviii, 1ff. (1899), has
shown, these archaic terms, Britones, lingua Britannica, Britannia
are, also, occasionally applied to contemporary Wales, its people and
its language, respectively, in the Latin writings of Welshmen, (Geoffrey
of Monmouth, Giraldus Cambrensis, etc.). For a full bibliography of
the controversy over the meaning of Breton, etc., see Miss Hopkins’s
dissertation, pp. 114ff. Brugger, like Zimmer, is an advocate of the
Armorican origin of the stories told in the French lays.


*° Cp. Foulet, Zs. f. rom. Ph., XXIX., 36.
Origin of the Lays and Romances 61


Wales) and St. Aaron’s church in that city are mentioned.“ But
such localizations were merely innovations of the French poets,
under the all-pervading influence of Geoffrey or Wace.*

Again, two of Marie’s lays bear alternative titles, English and
French, for the poetess says of Chéevrefueil that the French call
it by that name, but that the English call it Gotelef ( Honeysuckle),
and of Laiistic that the French call it Russignol, but the anges
Nihtegale (Nightingale). 48

G. Paris drew* from this latter circumstance the far-reaching
inference that even before the Norman Conquest Welsh musicians
had spread among the Anglo-Saxons a knowledge of the stories
with which the lays deal. But in this matter, also, as it turns out,
we have merely another mark of Wace’s influence — an imitation
of his trick of giving names in different languages,®° as, for in-


*° In his articles, “De la provenance des lais dits bretons”,
Romania, XXIV, 513 ff. (1895) and “La patrie des lais bretons”,
ibid., XXVIII, 321 ff. (1899), Lot tried to establish a Welsh or Cornish
origin for some of the lays, such as Yonec, Chievrefeuil, L’Espine,
Le Cor.
*- 4? (his is Brugger’s suggestion. Cp. his last-cited article, pp.147 ff.
As he points out, this influence is patent in the case of Marie’s Milun,
where she says that her hero was known “in Ireland and in Norway
and Guhtlande [i. e. the island of Gotland in the Baltic], in Loengres
[i. e. Logres, name for England in the romances] and in Albania
[i. e. Scotland)”. This enumeration was taken indisputably from Geoffrey’s
list of Arthur’s conquests, Book IX, ch. 10, or, possibly, Wace’s diffuse
paraphrase of the same, 11. 9900ff. Especially significant is the
occurrence of the Baltic island in both lists.

** Through a slip, G. Paris, Hist. Litt., XXX, 7, cited, also,
Bisclavret as an example, for Marie says that the Normans called this
lay Garulf (Garual). But this has nothing to do with English
origins.

*° Loc. cit., and, before this, in Romania, XIV, 604 ff.

2 So Lucien Foulet, “Bnglish Words in the Lais of Marie de
France”, MLN, XX, 109 tt. (1905). He points out the example here
cited — also, another in the episode of Hengist’s treachery towards
Vortigern (11. 7409 ff.), where Wace explains (11. 7473 ff.) that the
English call the knives which Hengist’s men used sexes (= Anglo-
Saxon searas), the French costiaz. Foulet points out still other
mannerisms of Wace which Marie imitates. — The trick just discussed
62 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


stance, wheh in speaking of the famous dolmens or prehistoric
temples at Stonehenge, on Salisbury Plains, in Englarid, he says
(11. 8383ff.): “The Britons in the British language call. them
‘Karole as gaians [ i. e. Giants’ Dance or Round }; in English they
are called Senhange[i. e. Stonehenge |; in French Prerres Pandues
[i. e. Scattered Stones ].”” We have here an exact parallel to the
Laustic of Marie de France, where the title of the poem is given
first in Breton, and next in French and English.
_‘Although.Marie, then, derived the materials for some of her
ays from Breton sources, there is no ground for supposing that
she, herself, ever came into personal contact with Bretons.*! In
any event, she was certainly ignorant of the Breton language —
otherwise she would not have distorted Breton bleiz lauaret (i. e.


is not confined to Wace and Marie. It is found in other mediaeval
writers. Cp. Foulet, Zs. f. rom. Ph., XXXII, 275f. (1908).

Before Foulet, Warnke, in his second edition of Marie’s lays,
p. XXI (1900), and Bédier, edition of Thomas's Tristan, Il, 127ft.
(1905), had both offered unsatisfactory explanations of the alternative
titles of the above-mentioned lays: Warnke suggests that, writing in
England after the Norman Conquest, Marie provided her poems with
the alternative titles to suit either a French or English audience as
the case might be. Similarly, Bédier — only he ascribes the double
naming to Breton jongleurs in England. For criticism of Bédier's
suggestion, cp. Foulet, loc cuit. |

' °* So L. Foulet, in his article, “Marie de France et les lais
bretons”, Zs. f. rom. Ph., XXIX, 319ff. (1905). Jbid., 315ff., he
shows from Guigemar, 11, 22ff. (compared with corresponding ex-
pressions in her F'ables, which was, of. course, certainly based on a
written source), that she used written sources — doubtless, French. He
has proved, too, “Thomas and Marie in their relation to the conteurs”’,
MLN, XXIII, 205 ff. (1908), that her occasional appeals to an oral
source is “a meaningless mannerism”. In his “Marie de France et la
légende de Tristan”, Zs. f. rom. Ph., XXXII, 274, note 4 (1908),
the same scholar remarks pertinently: “Je ne trouve dans Marie aucun
texte of elle nous affirme avoir entendu /a méme personne, ou le
méme groupe de personnes, chanter la ‘note’ et raconter le conte qu'elle
se propose de nous répéter en vers francais — aucun texte ot elle nous
affirme avoir entendu un Breton chanter ou raconter, quoique se soit... .
Ainsi le conteur Breton n’apparait nulle part chez Marie. Les musi-
ciens qui faisaient en harpe et en rote le lai de Guigemar étaient-
ils bretons? C’est possible, voila tout ce qu’on peut dire.”
Origin of the Lays and Romances 63


talking wolf} into Bisclavret — the name of her werewolf-hero —
or have failed to see that the LZ of Latistic — the title of another
one of her lays — was merely the French article prefixed to
_ Aostic, the Breton word for ‘‘nightingale.’’5? It is evident, there-
fore, that she was entirely dependent on intermediate written ver-
sions in French for her knowledge of these Breton stories. And
what was true of Marie was, no doubt, true of the other authors
of French lays. |
Even in Marie’s collection of lays there are some which have
no real connection with Brittany. Thus, she, herself, tells us that
the incident on which her lay, Les Dous Amanz (= The Two
Lovers), is based occurred in Normandy. When she adds that the
Bretons made it the subject of a lay, one begins to suspect that
the term lat Breton is already becoming conventionalized®? and
may be applied to any short narrative poem of the kind which
Marie had been composing on genuine Breton themes. One may
say somewhat the same thing of Le Fraisne (= The Ash) —
a tale with no distinctively Breton features, which the poetess
localizes in Brittany, but which is found in variant forms in every
part of the world. Above all, it has been immortalized by Chaucer
in his Patient Griselda (Clerk’s Tale).5* What we have suspec-
ted here in the case of these two lays by Marie is true, beyond
question, of the lays of later authors in this genre: the term
became a purely conventional one with the meaning just indicated


** Cp. Zimmer, G. G. A. for Oct. 10, 1890, pp. 800f. G. Cohn,
Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt., XXIV*, 3 (1902), suggests that the fusion
of the article with the noun in Laustic may have been the work of
a scribe, but the equating of the word with simple russignol and
mhtegale (without articles) at the beginning of the lay shows that
the suggestion is groundless.

8 F, Lot, Romania, XXIV, 527f. (1895), makes this observation
with regard to this lay and Le Fraisne. Ibid. ., p. 525, however, he
cites the fact that in L’Hspine an Irishman is said to have sung a
lay (Aelis), as proof that the Irish took part in the propagation of
lays, but the Irish had long before figured in the romances — especially
since the appearance of the Z’ristan poems — so we doubtless have
in this instance, too, a purely conventional use of the term, las.

- ** With this story in Le Fraisne is combined the widespread
popular notion that twins are always the offspring of different: fathers.
64 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


and the Celtic coloring in such pcems is, if not invariably, cer-
tainly more often than not, purely factitious.°5

A main factor in rendering the use of the term, lai Breton,
a popular literary artifice was Thomas’s poem on Tristan, com-
posed about 1170.5¢ Here, probably under the influence of
Marie de France, that writer makes his British hero an accomplish-
ed harper who charms audiences with his lays, and so it was
the example of Tristan, the most popular figure in the literature
of the time, that led subsequent poets to represent their charac-
ters as singing lais bretons, or even to designate their works by
that title as in the case of the French versions of Havelok and
Horn, which have, of course, no connection with Brittany.

Marie is the only author of genuine narrative lays®? whose
name has been preserved. We have, however, besides the collec-
tion which is unquestionably her work, a number of anonymous
lays*® of the same character, one or two of which may be also
from her pen. Some of these pieces deal with the mattére de
Bretagne and have much the same charm of ,,faerie‘’ — the charm
of wild and delicate fancy — that we have noted in Marie’s re-
cognized works. So in the story of Guingamor (probably Marie’s),
where, after enjoying the love of a fay in the Otherworld for
a hundred years, that passed like three days, the hero is allow-
ed to return to his native land, but by disobeying the command
of his mistress not to partake of mortal food, whilst there, loses
both his apparent gift of immortal youth and the power to return
to her — or, again, in T'ydorel, where a king, the son of a water-


°° In the opinion of the present writer, this has been clearly
established by L. Foulet in his “Marie de France et les lais bretons”’,
Zs. f. rom. Ph., XXIX, 19ff., 293ff. (1905) and his subsequent ar-
ticles on the dais bretons in the same journal, vols. XXX and XXXII.

°° Cp., especially, Foulet, ,Marie de France et la légende de
Tristan”, Zs. f. rom. Ph., XXXII, 161ff., 257ff. (1908).

°7 Le Cor by Robert Biket (Bigquet) in verses of six syllables,
last edited by H. Dérner (StraBburg diss., 1907), is a fabliau, and
Ignaure by Renaut, also, does not belong properly to the genre.
We know nothing of these authors, save their names.

** For these lays and the critical literature relating to them
see Part IV, below.
Origin of the Lays and Romances — 65


sprite and a mortal mother, on being taunted once with not being,
human, since, in consequence of his supernatural origin, he never
sleeps, learns with mortification the true secret of his birth from
his mother and plunges into his father’s lake, never to be heard
of again.

There is something suspicious in the fact that out of the
seven anonymous. lays that deal with the matiére de Bretagne
three constitute variants of themes which Marie has treated.59
The choice of themes in such cases was, doubtless, determined by
her example, and, as a matter of fact, these lays, in phrasing and
other matters, also, betray her influence — so distinctly, indeed,
that. the question has been raised as to whether the authors of the
pieces in question drew at all on Celtic tradition. This skeptic-
ism has included — and, justly, it would seem — even the
beautiful Franklin’s Tale of the Canterbury Tales in which a wo-
man’s honor is saved by the generosity of her lover, after she had
placed herself in his power by promising him her favors, in case
he performed a seemingly impossible task, which, however, he
actually performs.°° Nevertheless, T'ydorel, at least — to say


°° Melion is like Bisclavret; Graelent and Desiré are like
Lanval. For the literature of these lays, cp. Part. V, below. Zimmer,
Zs. f. fre. Spr. u. Litt., XT", 1ff., has shown that the name Grae-
lent is identical with Gradlon mur, name of a hero in early Ar-
morican saga. Nevertheless, to my mind, Foulet, op. cit., XXIX, 19ff.,
has made out so strong a case for his thesis that Graelent is essen-
tially a combination of Marie’s Lanval and Eliduc that I hesitate to
accept it as embodying an independent Celtic tradition.

°° Chaucer describes it as a “Breton” lay, but cp. the article,
“Le prologue du Franklin’s Tale et les lais Bretons”, Zs. f. rom. Ph.,
XXX, 698 ff. (1906), by Foulet, who argued that the term is here con-
ventional. On the other hand, the conclusions of Pio Rajna, “Le
origini della novella narrata dal Frankeleyn nei Canterbury Tales
del Chaucer”, Romania, XXXII, 204 ff. (1903) — viz., that this tale is
derived from Boccaccio’s Decameron, X,5 — are unconvincing. But
one need not agree therefore with W. H. Schofield, “Chaucer’s Fraak-
lin’s Tale’, PMLA, XVI, 405ff. (1901), that Chaucer’s source was a
genuine Breton folk-tale. J.S. P. Tatlock has latterly, “The Scene
of the Franklin’s Tale Visited”, Publications of the Chaucer Society
(1914), even tried to determine the part of the coast of Brittany where
the story is laid.

Aefperia, Ergdnzungsreihe: 8. 5
66 _ Evolution of Arthurian Romance


nothing of Guingamor, which is probably Marie’s composition —
appears to the present writer to possess the natural magic of
Celtic fancy. |

There is no convincing evidence that before Marie de France
narrative lays existed at all in French literature. She, was doubt-
less, the creator of the genre® and her genius seems to have
dominated it during the brief vogue which it enjoyed.®


*? This is Foulet’s conclusion, Zs. f. rom. Ph., XXIX. 56, Apart
from the fact that Le Cor by Robert Biket is really a fabliau (cp.
already Brugger, Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt., XX’, 140), there is no
valid ground for dating this poem earlier than Marie. Cp. the dis-
cussion of the subject by Foulet, op. cit., p. 55, note 1. As the same
scholar observes, pp. 302f., the lais bretons which are first mentioned
in the fabliau, Richeut (usually dated 1159, although it was in reality
probably composed considerably later. Cp. Foulet, ,,Le poéme de
Richeut et le roman de Renard”, Romania, XLU, 321ff.), and to which
we have allusions in Chrétien, the Roman de Troie, Horn, etc., are
all lyrical, not narrative, and it was only by degrees that Marie,
herself, came to use the word in the new sense. — For views at
variance with the one here adopted, cp. Warnke’s Introduction and
the literature there cited — also, H. Dérner’s edition of Le Cor, cited
above, and Ezio Levi, “I lais brettoni e la leggenda di Tristano,”
Studj romanzi editi a cura di E. Monaci, XIV, 1183—246 (Rome,
1917). The only original point which Levi tries to make is that he
finds in canzoni of the Countess of Dia (who died porbably in 1193)
and Guittone d’Arezzo echoes of the words “Isolt ma drue, Isolt ma
vie’ in the Tristan Jat (Thomas’s Tristan). He assumes that these
canzoni were too early to be influenced by Marie. The dates of
both, as a matter of fact, are still uncertain. Above all, however, the
similarity is so general as to have no value.

°* Interesting early testimony to the popularity of the lais is
supplied by Gautier d’Arras’s [lle et Galeron, 11. 928ff., composed
about 1167, or perhaps somewhat later. Cp. E. S. Sheldon, MPh.,
XVI, 383ff. There, with reference to the fluctuations of love, it
is said.

Mes s’autrement n’alast l’amors, ~
Li lais ne fust pas si en cours,
Nel prisaissent tot li baron.


Equally emphatic is the testimony on this subject in Denis Pyramus’s
La vie St. Edmund le rei, 11. 35 ff. (ed. F. L. Ravenel, Philadelphia,
1906) — quoted by Warnke’, p. XXXVI. Denis’s poem dates, it
would seem, from the last decade of the twelfth century.
Origin of the Lays and Romances 67


2. The Romances.


We have been dealing so far with the lays, but the problem
of the origin of the romances** — more especially the question of
their relation to Celtic tradition — is essentially the same, not-
withstanding the position which has sometimes been taken that
it is different. The fact, however, that most of the lays do not
mention Arthur and his knights does not alter the case; for the
most distinctive features of these romances still remain of the
same general character as in the case of the lays. Take, for in-
stance, the magic fountain at the beginning of Chrétien’s Yvain,
whose waters, 1f dropped on the neighboring stone, raise the storm,
whereupon a strange knight rushes forth to encounter the offender,
or the search of Lancelot for Guinevere in the land from which no
one returns in the same writer’s Lancelot, or Perceval’s adven-
tures at Arthur’s court in the Conte del Graal. We move in the
same world of romance and marvel in each genre®* — only, in


** On the development of the meaning of the word, “romance”, cp.,
especially, P. Voelker, “Die Bedeutungsentwickelung des Wortes Roman”,
Zs. f. rom. Ph., X, 485ff. (1887). It (OFr. “romanz’’) was used first in
the sense of “a book in the vernacular’ (earliest example noted is in
Samson de Nanteuil’s Dits Salamon — in the forties of the twelfth
century) — but only of translations from the Latin. Wace, Roman
de Rou, Part III, 11. 5331f. (H. Andresen’s edition), was the first
writer, as far as we know, to drop this restriction. In the second
half of the twelfth century, the term is applied to what we call “ro-
mances”’, but is, also, employed of chronicles, and continues to be em-
ployed of such works down into the fourteenth century. Nevertheless,
the meaning “fictitious narrative’ predominates from the thirteenth
century on.

W. Meyer-Liibke, Zs. f. fre. Spr. u. Litt., XLIV", pp. 131f,
(1916) draws attention to Chrétien’s contrasted use of conte (short
narrative) and romanz in Cliges, 11. 22f. But the poet does not
consistently maintain this distinction. Cp. the titles of his romances:
Conte de la Charette, Conte del Graal.

** It has been maintained by certain Arthurian scholars — espe-
cially by G. Paris, Histoire littéraire de la France, XXX, 9 (1888),
E. Brugger, Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt., XX*, 151 (1898) and with
unessential differences, J. L. Weston, Legend of Sir Lancelot du
Lac, pp. 20, 66 ff. (1901) — that the romances were, in the first in-
stance, made up of a combination of lays. ‘The theory is similar to

5*
68 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


the case of the romances, the Arthurization is not limited to a few
superficial details as in the Arthurized lays, but is thorough-going.
Similarly, the adaptation of these motifs to the conditions of
feudal society is even more drastic in the case of the romances.
| Now, in view of what has been said about the lays there can be
no reasonable doubt that Brittany was one source of whatever
is Celtic in the romances of Chretien and his followers. One may
go further and assert that the historical conditions render this.
part of the Celtic territory a far more likely source of that element
in the romances than Great Britain could ever be. The emigration
.to Armorica of the Britons who fled from Great Britain under
the pressure of Anglo-Saxon invasion was in progress during the
fifth and sixth centuries — so from this early period they were
in constant contact with their neighbors in Gaul. Especially close:
were their relations with Normandy. Indeed, from the first part
of the tenth century the Bretons were vassals of the Norman duke
and intermarriages between the reigning houses of the two states
testify to the intimacy of the intercourse which existed between
them. By the tenth century the portion of Brittany which was
closest to Normandy was thoroughly assimilated to Norman-French
civilization and there was a considerable zone in which, to a large
extent, the population was bilingual. Under these conditions, of


that which Paris maintained — e.g., in his Histoire Poétique de
Charlemagne*, pp. 11f., 69 ff. (Paris, 1905) — with regard to the
origin of the chansons de geste. These, too, he thought, sprang from
the combination of shorter pieces (cantilenae) — often, to be sure,
completely transformed. We have here, of course, the familiar theory
of epic origins which was first applied to the Homeric poems in the
latter part of the eighteenth century (the so-called Wolfian theory)
and afterwards to the mediaeval epics. This theory, as applied to the
latter, however, — to say nothing of the Greek — has latterly become
so generally discredited that there is no need of our discussing here
its application to the romances. Cp. Bédier’s Les Légendes Epiques,
with reference to the chansons de geste. For supposed influence
of the Greek romances on the Arthurian romances —- especially, in
structural matters — through the intermediation of the Crusaders,
cp. W. J. Courthope, “The Connexion between Ancient and Modern
Romance”, Proceedings of the British Academy for 1911—1912,
pp. 245ff. The theory, however, has no sound basis.
Origin of the Lays and Romances 69


course, it was easy for the legends of the Bretons to penetrate
into Normandy and the rest of France.®

How was it, on the other hand, with the insular Celts — the
inhabitants of Wales and Cornwall and Scotland? We have seen
already that the reasons advanced by Gaston Paris for supposing
that even before the Norman Conquest Celtic tales were in cir-
culation among the Anglo-Saxons are not sound. Moreover, in
extant Anglo-Saxon literature there is no trace of such stories.
We may say, in general, that the long and bitter hostility which
prevailed between the two peoples was not favorable to the exchange
of the materials of literature. In the main, the same thing is true
of the relations that existed between the new Continental invaders
and the old Celtic population of Great Britain in the decades that
immediately followed the Norman Conquest. The Normans had
utterly humiliated the hated Saxons, but the feeling of the Celts
towards the conquerors was at first not so different from that which
they had entertained towards their old enemies as might have
been expected, for they found themselves engaged almost at once
in a desperate struggle with the same foe. Nevertheless, during
the reign of Henry I South Wales was thoroughly subdued to
Norman rule, and early in the twelfth century the conditions for
peaceful intercourse between victors and vanquished were establish-
ed.66 Moreover, within such Celtic areas, there was one es-
pecial circumstance that doubtless facilitated the transmission of
insular Celtic materials to the French-speaking invaders — na-
mely, the part played by the Bretons in the conquest of England.*
Except the Normans, themselves, no other people had so large
a share in this enterprise or in the spoils that resulted from it.
There is abundant documentary evidence of the gifts of land which


*° In. this connection it is significant that the names of the well-
known Arthurian characters occur much oftener in the mediaeval do-
cuments of Brittany than of Wales. On this subject, cp. Franz Piitz’s
important article, “Zur Geschichte der Entwicklung der Artursage”,
Zs. f. fre. Spr. u. Intt., XIV", 161ff. (1892).

°° Cp. J. E. Lloyd’s History of Wales from the Earliest Times
to the Edwardian Conquest, II, 433ff. (London, 1911).

°? So Zimmer, Gétt. G. A. for Oct. 1, 1890, pp. 789 ff. The sugge-
stion has found general acceptance.
70 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


they received in different parts of the conquered country, including
Celtic Cornwall. Especially large were the holdings of the Breton
prince, Alan Fergant,** in Yorkshire. But wherever there were
large Norman garrisons, as in South Wales, there can be no doubt
as to the presence of bilingual Bretons among them. Now, as
we know from Giraldus Cambrensis, about the year 1200, say,
the language of the Bretons was still so near to that of their
Welsh and Cornish kinsmen that there was no difficulty in members
of these different branches of the Celtic race understanding each
other. So here was a ready channel for the diffusion of Welsh
stories among the Normans and thence among the French. Since
we have no direct testimony on the subject, the matter must re-
main more or less in the realm of conjecture, but the romances, them-
selves, furnish, to some degree, reasons for supposing that such a
diffusion did take place, and it is accordingly highly probable
that the Bretons did play some such role as we have indicated.

The problem of the relations of the romances to Celtic tra-
dition — more particularly to Celtic insular tradition — would
be simple, indeed, if we accepted, with some critics, the theory
that the three Welsh tales, Owen and Lumet (or The Lady of the
Fountain), Peredur ab Evrawc, and Geraint and Enid — all in-
cluded in the Mabinogion — which deal with the same themes as
Chretien’s Yvain, Perceval and Erec, respectively, were not mere
adaptations of the latter, but went back independently to common
Welsh sources. The differences, however, in style and construc-
tion between the three Welsh tales just named and the unquestion-
ably native tales in the Mabinogion, such as Kulhwch and Olwen
or Branwen, Daughter of Llyr, are too plain to deny. Instead
of the incoherence and ineffectual rambling of the latter, we have
here organization and order. Moreover, as far as he appears, Arthur
in the three tales is the rot fainéant of the French romances, not
the active hero of Welsh saga. These various differences, are,
indeed, so manifest that it was obviously impossible to accept the
above-mentioned hypothesis in an unqualified form. Consequently,


°° Zimmer, however, was mistaken in representing this prince
as taking part in the Norman Conquest of England. Cp. J. Loth,
Annales de Bretagne, XI, 479 (1895—6).
Origin of the Lays and Romances 71


nearly all scholars who have studied the problem have agreed that
the three tales were influenced by French originals, whether such
originals were the poems of Chrétien still extant, or those of some
other writer, now lost.*® There seems really, however, no need
of calling into existence imaginary French sources: Chretien will
suffice. For, although in the Welsh tales the narrative is more
condensed than in the corresponding romances of Chrétien, the
two concur in their incidents throughout, and, save for one exception
(in The Lady of the Fountain), in the order of these incidents.
Such divergences as we observe in comparing the two sets of narra-
tives are, for the most part, not difficult to explain. The differ-
ences between Welsh and feudal French society at the end of the
twelfth century were enormous — in respect to custom, culture,
intellectual outlook — everything, indeed — and a Welsh adap-
tation of a French poem would, of course, inevitably, reflect these
differences. In these three Welsh ,tales of the Mabinogion, then,
we have, no doubt, the three above-mentioned poems of Chrétien
adapted, in part, to the conditions of contemporary Welsh society
and transmuted by that riotous fancy of the Celt which has never
had its equal — by some professional story-teller, we may say,
then, of twelfth or thirteenth century Wales, the representative
of a rude civilisation, to whose mind the marvellous was as familiar
as the real. After all, however, it is questionable whether the
transmutation in these cases is so great as that which was suffered
by the Tale of Gamelyn, as it passed through the hands of Lodge
and Shakespeare, becoming, in succession, the Euphuistic novel,
Rosalynd, and the loveliest of pastoral dramas, As You Lake It,
or — to select an Arthurian example, — as that which befell
Malory’s account of Arthur’s last phase in Tennyson’s Guine-
vere.?0


** For recent writers who adopt the latter view, cp. Part IV,
below.

*° As far as change of incident goes, there is, obviously, no
comparison — the modern writers are so much more drastic. But the
contrast in respect to sentiment is, in reality, equally striking.

For an admirable statement of the case for Chrétien as the source
of the three Welsh tales, cp. P. A. Becker, Literaturblatt fiir ger-
manische und romanische Philologie, XXXIV, 19ff. VJan., 1913).
72 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


We have reviewed already above the scanty testimony of the
chroniclers with respect to the existence of Arthurian traditions
in Great Britain, and we have seen, moreover, that the sources
of the extant lays were all continental. The question of these
insular traditions will again arise when, in subsequent chapters,
we endeavor to trace the history of the development of the legends
concerning Merlin, Lancelot, Tristan, and the Holy Grail. With
regard to these legends, we shall see that only for those that
relate to Merlin and Tristan can it be claimed with certitude that
they originated in Great Britain and that, even in the case of the
former, the connection with Celtic popular tradition is of the slight-
est kind. Is there, now, any other evidence which would suggest
that widespread traditions concerning Arthur and his companions
were in circulation in Great Britain, or, indeed, in the British
Isles — for we shall include Ireland in our examination — tra-
ditions which the authors of the Arthurian romances might draw
upon directly or which, if not originally connected with the cha-
racters in question, have been actually applied to them by the
romancers? The chief evidence that bears upon our inquiry would
appear to be as follows:

1. Arthurian localizations. |

Many localities in Great Britain bear Arthurian names —
especially in those parts of the island where the Celtic element
is strongest — that is to say, in Wales, Cornwall, and Somerset,
and also in Scotland and Northern England.”! It is to this cir-
cumstance that Tennyson refers in the well-known lines in the
Epilogue to his Idylls of the King, when he speaks of


That Peredur is derived from Chrétien’s Perceval and its continuations
is now very generally conceded. Cp. Part. Ul, Peredur section, below.
With regard to the two remaining tales, cp. Part IV, where a full
history of the Mabinogion controversy is given and the evidence in the
case examined.

“Full collections on the subject are given in J. S. Stuart-
Glennie’s Arthurian Localities — published as an introduction to
Part II (1869) of the E. E. T. S. edition of the Middle English prose
Merlin (Original Series, no. 36). For Cornwall see, besides, W. H. |
Dickinson’s King Arthur in Cornwall (London, 1900). Unfortunately,
both writers are wholly uncritical.
Origin of the Lays and Romances 73


“that gray king whose name, a ghost,
Streams like a cloud, man-shaped, from mountain peak,
And cleaves to cairn and cromlech still.”

‘Thus, ‘“Arthur’s Round Table” is a term applied to enclo-
sures of one sort or another in various parts of Great Britain, —
for instance, to what is really the remains of a Roman amphi-
theatre at Caerleon-on-Usk in Wales — to a space surrounded
by trenches on a hill at Cadbury in Somersetshire, and so on.
This same Cadbury is identified locally with the Camelot of the
French romances, the capital of Arthur’s kingdom. In Cornwall,
besides Tintagel, where the hero was born, and Camelford, where
he fought his last battle with Mordred, we have King Arthur’s
Bed — a group of.rocky hills — King Arthur’s Cups and Saucers,
rock basins in the slate of a promontory along the coast. But the
localizations are especially numerous in Southern Scotland.7
Every visitor to Edinburgh will remember the hill called Arthur’s
Seat which rises to the south of the city, but the same. name is
met with elsewhere in the south of Scotland. Further north at
Meigle is Guinevere’s grave — the queen, according to local tra-
dition, having been tied to wild horses and torn to pieces as a
punishment for ‘marital infidelity. These are only a few well-
known examples which might be increased almost indefinitely.

It is'frequently taken for granted that this widespread Ar-
thurian nomenclature furnishes indisputable proof of an equally
widespread diffusion of early Arthurian traditions in Great Bri-
tain, those traditions being embodied, as it is conjectured, in fan-
tastic tales of the same general character as the Welsh Kulhwch
and Olwen. But the validity of this assumption depends entirely
on the antiquity of the localizations, and, in default of a critical
work on the subject, no one can affirm that such localizations


2 On the basis of these frequent localizations, Skene, Four
Ancient Books of Wales, I, 60, and Stuart-Glennie, p. LXI, have
placed the scene of Arthur’s last battle in Scotland at Camelon, on
the south bank of the river, Carron, where there are remains of an
old Roman town. W. H. Dickinson, pp. 82f., also argues at length in
favor of this view. All the conditions of sixth century Britain, however,
point to the South as the scene of this last battle, if, indeed, it is
not purely legendary. .
74 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


were not really suggested, in the majority of instances, by the
chronicles and romances. They would occur particularly in the
regions named above — partly, because it was known that the
severest conflict between the Celts and-the Anglo-Saxon invaders
did take place in just those regions, and, partly, because people
of Celtic descent would naturally feel the greatest interest in con-
necting with objects in their own territory the names of these
mythical characters of their race whom the chroniclers and ro-
mancers had made world-famous. It is significant that the parts
of Great Britain where the localizations in question are most nume-
rous of all — viz., Northern England and Southern Scotland —
were also just those parts where Arthurian romance as a literary
‘genre took deepest root. It was here (in Northern England), for
example, that the finest of the English romances, Sir Gawain and
the Green Knight and the alliterative Morte Arthure, were written,
and the last of the species that was composed on British soil was
a Scottish romance, Lancelot of the Laik. It will be observed,
then, that the evidence of these place-names is inconclusive.”

2. 'Fraditions concerning Arthur’s death GQ journey to Avalon)
and expected return.

In spite of their enthusiastic patriotism, native Welsh autho-
rities are agreed that Arthur was a late-comer in the traditions
of Wales.74 Moreover, one of the most eminent of Celtic scholars


"* Zimmer, however, maintains, Gétt. G. A. for June 10, 1890,
pp. 525f., that the localization of Arthur’s capital at Carlisle (Carduel),
which occurs often in the French romances, is a genuine tradition
inherited from an early period.

“ The testimony of the native Welsh atithorttias on this sub-
ject is virtually unanimous. Cp., for instance, Thomas Stephens, Zhe
Interature of the Kymry, pp. 400ff. (second ed., London, 1876). He
regards (p. 406) Arthur as an Armorican creation. E. Anwyl, Zs.
f. celt. Ph., I, 293 (1897). declares that “in the legends of Gwynedd
[Northwest Wales] and Dyfed [Southwest Wales] he [Arthur] had no
place whatever”, and W. J. Gruffydd in his paper “The Mabinogion”,
Transactions of the Honorable Society of Cymmrodorion, Session
of 1912—1913 (London, 1914), says (p. 31) that to Cornwall and
Devon “must be given the credit of cradling the superb mythology of
Arthur’, and (pp. 32f.) that “whether he appears in the well-ordered
tales of Chrétien de Troyes or in the chronicles of Geoffrey of Mon-
Origin of the Lays and Romances 75


on the Continent, the late Professor Zimmer, even went so far as to
deny that there was any popular tradition at all among the Welsh
concerning Arthur’s voyage to Avalon (the Celtic Elysium) and
expected return.:”> According to the German scholar, this was
a purely Armorican (Breton) conception and became known to
the Welsh only through the Bretons — after the appearance of
Geoffrey's Historia — whose passionate attachment to the idea
of the espoir breton (hope of the Britons), as it was called, is


mouth and in others or in Malory, or, above all, in Welsh literature
he is clearly no dweller in Wales or in the Gogledd” [i. e., the old
Celtic territory in Northwest England and Southern Scotland]. Gruffydd
avers (p. 32) that even in Kulhwch and Olwen Arthur is “no neces-
sary part of the romance’, and with reference to the same tale,
J. Loth, Revue Celtique, XXXIV, 379f. (1913), observes that, if Arthur
plays a preponderant part in a Welsh story, this is a sign of late date.

Gruffydd, op. cit., p. 35, asserts that Arthur’s tables, mounds, etc.,
in Wales are all of late origin. The little that is found concerning
Arthur in Welsh literature, he thinks, came in through Powis. The
Anglo-Saxon victory at Deorham (in 577) cut off henceforth the Celts
of Wales from those in Devon and Cornwall. Gruffydd suggests that
this event prevented the Welsh from absorbing the Arthurian traditions
which their Southern brethren had created.

It seems significant that South Wales — the part of Wales
nearest’ Cornwall —— should, among all divisions of Wales, best pre-
serve the tradition of Arthur and his last battle (Camlan). Cp. F. Lot’s
note,. “La bataille de Camlan’, Romania, XXX, 16ff. (1901). As
Lot says, the people of Cornwall localized Camelford (twelve miles
east of Bodmin) as the scene of the battle and the river, Camel, as
the Cambula. In the Welsh Mabinogion and Triads we find also
the Cornish localization of Arthur’s residence at Kelliwic, which Lot,
ibid., pp. 13£., identifies with Bodmin (capital of Cornwall).

** In his article, “Bretonische Elemente in der Arthursage des
Gottfried von Monmouth”, Zs. f. fre. Spr. u. Litt., XI", 231 ff. (1891)
— especially, pp. 238ff. In this same article Zimmer tried to draw
a distinction between a historical Arthurian tradition in Great Britain
(cp. Nennius) and a romantic tradition developed by the inhabitants
of Brittany in the course of the generations which followed their
separation from the actual scenes of his struggle and triumphs. But
the distinction is a fanciful one and has found no favor with scholars.
The popular imagination could have been just as active in full sight
of Badon Hill or on the field of Arthur’s last battle as in far-away
Brittany.
76 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


well attested by contemporaries, such as Wace7* and Alanus de
Insulis.77 The latter, for example, in his commentary on Geof-
frey’s Prophecies of Merlin (Book VII, of the Historia) avers
that any one who in Brittany disputed the superstition concer-
ning Arthur’s return would be cursed and stoned. Geoffrey, him-
self, indeed, has only a brief phrase concerning the matter: illinc
ad sananda vulnera sua in insulam Avallonis advectus (XI, 2).
But, interest in the subject having been awakened by this state-
ment, according to Zimmer’s view, the Welsh later on drew a fuller
account from the Bretons, by way, doubtless, of the French chro-
niclers and romancers.

As a matter of fact, the evidence of Welsh belief in this
most famous of the conceptions that relate to Arthur is surprising-
ly meagre. Nennius, for instance, does not mention it, nor is
it mentioned in the Mabinogion. In fact, only two texts have
been cited that seem to furnish any evidence as to the currency
of these conceptions in Wales: 1. a description of Wales in French
octosyllabic verse which dates from the middle of the twelfth cen-
tury and which is attached to Gaimar’s chronicle in certain MSS.
of that work. Describing the Norman invasion of Wales after the
Conquest of England, the writer says that the Welsh recovered
much of the ground which the invaders had taken from them and
that they averred that they would recover it all in time through
Arthur. 2. A Welsh poem of about the same date in the Black
Book of Caermarthen. Here it is said in an enumeration of tombs:


A tomb for March, a tomb for Gwythyr,

A tomb for Gwgan of the red sword.

A tomb for Arthur would be foolish.
That is to say, of course, because he was still alive’ .


"© Brut, 11. 13683ff., quoted in part, p. 57, above. Wace,
with Geoffrey, VII, 3, in mind, says that, according to Merlin, Arthur’s
end would be doubtful.

“’ For the words of Alanus in his Prophetia Anglicana cp.
San Marte, Sagen von Merlin, p. 55 (Halle, 1853), and Zimmer, op.
cit., p. 240. They were written during the reign (1154—1189) of
Henry II.

*® By F. Lot, Romania, XXVIII, 16f. (1899).

** W. J. Gruffydd, who maintains, as we have seen above (p. 74
note), that Arthur was an alien to genuine Welsh tradition, suggests,
Origin of the Lays and Romances 717


Does not Giraldus Cambrensis, however, the famous Welsh
ecclesiastic of the late twelfth and early thirteenth centuries, tes-
tify to a Welsh tradition of Arthur’s expected return in the well-
known passage of his Speculum Ecclesiae (II, 9)8 which de-


p. 35 of the T’ransactions of the Honorable Society of the Cymm-
rodorion, Session, 1912—1913 (London, 1914), that the real meaning
of the last line is: “His exploits were not performed in Welsh terri-
tory; his grave was unknown, simply because he. was not buried in
Wales.” But even if Gruffydd’s general theory about Arthur and
Wales is correct, Lot’s interpretation of the line strikes me as pre-
ferable.

Arthur’s last battle (Camlann) is mentioned often in Welsh texts.
See Index to Loth’s Mabinogion under Camlann. The text above,
however, is the only one in the Welsh language that even hints at
the conception of Arthur’s translation to Avalon, and there are none
in Irish — for Irish literature is virtually entirely ignorant of Arthur.
In my edition of the Mort Artu, pp. 300f., I have summarized and
discussed the suggestions that have been made as to Irish parallels
to the story of Arthur: Death of Cuchullin (cp. Eleanor Hull, The
Cuchullin Saga, pp. XXVIIIff., London, 1898), the legend of Mongan
(cp. A. Nutt, Zhe Voyage of Bran, Il, 23, London, 1897), and the
legend of Finn (cp. A. Nutt, Revue Celtique, XII, 190). There is no
real similarity, however, in any of the cases — least of all, in regard
to the end of the respective heroes. J. F. Campbell. Popular Tales
of the West Highlands, IV, 240ff. (London, 1893) was better in-
spired, when he cited as a parallel the Gaelic legend of Diarmaid
and Grainne, a cognate, as we shall see below, of the Tristan-Iseult
story. The parallel is closer, if we take (with Geoffrey) Mordred
as the adulterer, instead of Lancelot, as Campbell does. Here, as in
the stories of Tristan and Iseult and Arthur and Guinevere, we have
the faithless wife who commits adultery with her husband’s nephew.
On the other hand, the legend in question does not end with an Other-
world voyage. Altogether, there is probably no historical connection
between the stories.

The idea that only three men survived Arthur’s last battle is
known to Welsh literature. Cp. the triad in Loth’s Mabinogion’, I,
290, and Kulhwch and Olwen, op. cit., I, 270. For a discussion
of these passages see Bruce, Mort Artu, pp. 295f. and on Arthur’s
mythical end, in general, cp. pp. 298ff. Cp., too, Miss Paton, op. cit.,
pp. 25 ff.

°° Giraldus, Joc. cit., erroneously states that it was in Henry
I’s reign, but Henry died in 1189. It occurred really in the reign
of Richard I. Cp. J. S. Brewer’s edition of Giraldus’s works for the
78 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


scribes the pretended exhumation of Arthur and Guinevere at Glas-
tonbury in 1191? To increase the importance of their monastery,
which, according to their impudent assertions, was founded by
King Arthur, the monks concocted this solemn farce of the ex-
humation, an account of which Giraldus received from an eye-
witness. The bodies were found buried sixteen feet deep in the
ground and when a monk seized a yellow lock of Guinevere’s
hair, it 1s said to have vanished away. The Welsh writer con-
trasts with the evidence of Arthur’s real death which this affair
supplied the absurd tales which are propagated by fabulos: Bri-
tones et eorum cantatores; for the latter were accustomed to relate,
he says, how a certain fantastic goddess, Morganis — Dea quaedam
phantastica—took Arthur to Avalon to be healed of his wounds and
how, when they are cured, he will return to reign over the Britons.
Giraldus comments still further on the likeness of this belief to
that of the Jews in the coming of the Messiah.
Everything here turns on the disputed meaning of Britones.
Is Gitaldus referring to Armoricans or Welshmen? Despite con-
tentiotis to the contrary,*! Welsh writers in the Middle Ages do
— though not often, use this term of contemporary
Welghmen, as well as of the whole race of Britons combined —
beth, gontinental and insular.8? Consequently, the passage is open
to varying constructions and throws no decisive light on the sub-


Rolls Series, IV, 48 ff. (London, 1873). A few sentences which are
unintelligible in the Latin text, owing to mutilation of the unique MS.
of the Speculum, have been preserved in the Welsh version of Giral-
dus’s account edited by Timothy Lewis and J. D. Bruce, “The pre-
tended exhumation of Arthur and Guinevere,” Revue Celtique, XXXII,
432 ff. (1912). The inscription on the cross over the tomb in Giral-
dus, p. 50, speaks of Guinevere as Arthur’s second wife. In a Welsh
triad, according to Rhys, Arthurian Legend, pp. 35 ff., he is said to
have had three wives, all named Gwenhwyvar (Guinevere). Nowhere
else in Arthurian literature, however, is he given more than one wife
and, besides, as we have seen above, p. 44, note 14, Loth does not
translate the Welsh in the same manner as Rhys. According to his
translation, the triad does not speak of Arthur’s three wives, but of
the three principal ladies at his court.
a _ Zimmer, Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt., XI', 241ff. (1890).
* Op. Lot’ s articles cited p. 60, ae 44, " above.
Origin of the Lays and Romances 79


ject of our inquiry. The form of Morgan’s name in Giraldus,
Morganis (instead of Morgana) seems determined, it is true, by
the French nominative form, Morgains,®* but even this detail
cannot be taken as settling the whole question; for, in forming
the Latin name, Giraldus might well have been influenced by the
most popular works in which the character had appeared (the
French romances) even though he knew, also, from Welsh sources
of Arthur’s exitus dubius.*

(Morgan® and Avalon® being, of course, inseparable from


** Cp. Brugger, op. cit., XX‘, 100 (1898). Ibid., pp. 97 ft,
he presents the strongest argument that has been offered for the in-
terpretation of Britones as Armoricans in this passage.

** “Doubtful exit” — i.e. from life.

*° For the name which, according to J. Rhys, Arthurian Legends,
348f., must have been Morgen (as actually in Geoffrey's Vita Mer-
lini) in mediaeval Welsh, cp. L. A. Paton, Studies in the Fairy
Mythology of Arthurian Romance, pp. 9ff.: Radcliffe College Mono-
graphs, no. 13 (Boston, 1903), and J. D. Bruce, MLN, XXVI, 67'
note 16, where the opinions of the leading Celticists on the subject
are assembled — in the latter, also, similar observations on the common
Welsh man’s name, Morgan. Miss Paton, loc. cit., proposed to iden-
tify Morgan with Morrigan, an Irish battle-goddess, but this unlikely
suggestion has won no adherents. — Rhys, op. cit., p. 22, interprets
Welsh Morgen as etymologically identical with Muirgen, meaning
“sea-born”, which actually occurs as a woman’s name in Irish.

Morgan (Morgen) is first mentioned in Geoffrey's Vita Merlim,
11. 918 ff. (composed probably in 1149) — and here as the person
who is to heal Arthur in the Isle of Apples (Celtic Elysium). She
is next mentioned in the Roman de Trove, 1. 8024 (Constans’ edition,
I, 434), — composed about 1160 — as a fairy who hated Hector,
because he did not return her love. The name here, it is true, is
in most MSS. disguised by mutilation, as we have seen above, p. 33,
note 73, that it was also in Layamon. Chrétien, in his H’rec, 1.1957, com-
posed about 1165), mentions her as the mistress of Guigomar, lord
of Avalon, and, 11. 4216ff., as Arthur's sister and as highly skilled
in healing. The two passages combined betray a knowledge of the
part which she played in the story of Arthur’s end. The poet, him-
self, however, doubtless, invented the idea that she was Arthur's
sister, which was afterwards adopted, among others, by Robert de
Boron in his Merlin. To be sure, it must be confessed that as early
as about 1170, in the Draco Normannicus (a Latin metrical para-
phrase of Geoffrey's Historia), the author (Etienne, a monk of Bec,
80 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


the myth of Arthur’s end, the problem of their origin is simply
a part of the general problem of the origin of that myth.


it seems), also, makes Morgan (Morgana) Arthur’s sister. Cp. Fletcher’s
Arthurian Material, pp. 145f. This is more likely, however, to be
due to Chrétien’s influence, direct or indirect, than to a misunder-
standing of the bearing of the word, sorores (Morgan and her fairy
companions), in the Vita Merlim, 1. 919, as Fletcher surmises.

Miss Paton’s hypothesis, pp. 29, 33, that the conception of Ar-
thur’s translation to Avalon (in company with Morgan) is merely a
fairy-mistress story transformed has no support whatever in the in-
numerable Arthurian texts. Cp. Bruce, Mort Artu, p. 300.

Miss Paton, op. cit., has followed Morgan through the romances
and her collection of material on this character and on the fairy
mythology of the Arthurian romances in general is invaluable, but her
work suffers from the fundamental error of assuming virtually always
that the romancers in what they say concerning the great fairy are
drawing on a body of popular tradition concerning her. As a matter
of fact, their draughts on tradition are infinitesimal — they drew
on their.imaginations, instead.

In the course (p. 326) of his article “Morgue la Fee et Morgan
Tud”, Romama, XXVIII, 321ff. (1899), F. Lot suggests that Geoffrey
based his famous description of Arthur’s end on an Irish tale, which
probably reached him in a Welsh version. The grounds of the sug-
gestion, however, are insufficient. |

The name, “Morgan Tud”, occurs only in the Welsh “Geraint and
Enid” (Loth, Mabinogion®, Il 143, 174) — as the name ofa wonderful
male physician. Zimmer, Foerster’s edition of Chrétien’s Hrec, pp. XX VIIit.,
argued that this otherwise unknown person was a blundering creation
of the Welsh writer, which was due to his ignorance of the fairy-
queen (Morgue, Morgain) of his French original (Chrétien’s Hrec). For
a refutation of this hypothesis, cp. Miss Paton, op. cit., pp. 259ft.,
and J. Loth, Contributions 4 l'étude des romans de la Table Ronde
(section entitled, Morgan Tut), pp. 51ff. (Paris, 1912). For a re-
futation of the opposite theory, according to which the change of
Morgan’s sex was due to a misunderstanding on the part of Chrétien
of what was originally a Welsh source, see Miss Paton, loc. cit. This
latter theory was proposed by J. Loth, Revue Celtique, XIII, 496f.
(1892) and defended by F. Lot in his article just named. Miss Paton,
herself, pp. 263ff., urged that Morgan Tud of the Welsh text was
merely a corruption of the Old Welsh proper name, Morgetiud (and
variants) — modern Meredith. This seems to me the most probable
explanation of all, but subsequently, Loth, Contributions, pp. 56ff.,
has connected the Welsh Tut (Tud) with Old Irish tuéath, which
Origin of the Lays and Romances 81


In the face of the scanty and, for the most part, ambiguous
evidence, one is compelled to fall back on general considerations
in order to reach a final decision in the case. Looking at the
question from this point of view, we are forced to conclude that
the above-mentioned conception must have already prevailed among
the Bretons before their exodus from Great Britain; for there
would seem to be no reason why such a conception should have
sprung up among them, after they had left the land with which
Arthur’s glory was associated, and, besides, we know that their
kinsmen of Cornwall, who remained behind, were, at the begin-
ning of the twelfth century, cherishing the faith in the hero’s


sometimes means “magician”. He supposes that this was translated
by an Anglo-Norman Morgain le Fe or le Fed” (fée being masculine
in the Norman dialect) and that Chrétien misconstrued this as feminine.
Cp. too Loth’s recent article, Revue Celtique, (1920). To the present
writer, however, all of this is unconvincing. Geoffrey of Monmouth,
Benoit de St. Maure and the author of Layamon’s original, not to look
for others, all knew of Morgan as a supernatural female and there
is no need of hazardous speculations, therefore, to explain how Chrétien
conceived of her similarly.


°° For a summary of discussions concerning Avalon (Avallon)
or Avallach and the literature of the subject, see W. E. Meade’s Se-
lections from Morte Darthur, pp. 316f. (1897) and Bruce, Mort
Artu, p. 273. Zimmer, Zs. f. fre. Spr. u. Litt., XI", 238¢f.
(1890) and Brugger, ibid., XX VII", 98ff. (1898) contended that Avalon,
like everything relating to Arthur’s translation, was unknown to the
Welsh. On this subject, see still further pp. 74ff., above. Lot in his
“Glastonbury et Avalon”, Romania, XXVII, 553ff. (1897) attacked
Zimmer’s thesis, but, himself, advanced the improbable view that Avalon
was originally the name of a man (or god) and not of a place and
that the latter conception is due to French misunderstandings of the
original Celtic form of the name, Avalloc. — F.M. Warren points
out in “The Island of Avalon”, MLN, XIV, 93f. (1899) that Avalon
is already known to the author of Le Couronnement de Louis, who,
11. 1796, 1827, uses the expression, “tot l’or d’Avalon”, as a hyper-
bole for riches. This poem was written in the Isle de France about
the middle of the twelfth century. Warren regards it as earlier than
Wace’s Brut. This cannot be determined definitely, but the phrase
at least shows no influence from the Brut.

For the identification of Avalon with Glastonbury, cp. Part H,
below.


Fefperia, Ergdnsungsrethe; 8. 6
82 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


return with equal fervor — a faith which, of course, they must
have inherited from their ancestors of something like six cen-
turies before. On the other hand, Arthur was certainly, also, a
character in Welsh saga in the first part of the ninth century (when
Nennius compiled his chronicle), near the end of the tenth (when
the Annales Cambriae were compiled), and, again, round about
1100 (when Kwdhwch and Olwen was composed). There are even
numerous allusions, as we have seen,8? in Welsh texts to his last
battle, although none to his voyage to Avalon and expected return,
save in the one obscure line which has been given above. It seems
strange, indeed, that, having been adopted, as we know from the
sources just indicated, as one of their national heroes by this
branch of the Celts, also — although, perhaps, with less ardor
and universality than was the case with his nearest kinsmen
(the Celts of Devon and Cornwall and Brittany) — the conception
of his apotheosis should have made no impression on them. Never-
theless, in view of the evidence that confronts us, we can only
conclude that the two passages cited above (one French and one
Welsh) do not express a general Welsh faith. The two writers
concerned doubtless knew of the “hope of the Britons’ that pre-
vailed in Brittany and in the old Celtic territory of Southwest
England and adopted it for the Welsh, although in Wales it was
no part of general popular tradition.®8

The source, then, of the fine description of Arthur’s trans-
lation to Avalon in Geoffrey of Monmouth’s Vita Merlini, of
which we shall hear more anon, was, no doubt, also Armorican.®


3. The Origin of the Round Table and Some
Other Questions of Celtic Origins.


1. The Round Table: (a) According to Wace’s Brut (11.
9994ff.)9° the Round Table was instituted to prevent quarrels


** Cp. p. 77, note 79 above. |

*° As far as the French writer is concerned, he may have simply
invented the incident, or, if this is not so, the Welshmen, referred to,
may not have spoken in all seriousness.

°° It is to be remembered that, apart from general knowledge
of Breton matters, Geoffrey had special sources of information on this
subject, if his father was a Breton, as seems most likely.

*° Quoted below, in the chapter on Merlin.
Origin of the Lays and Romances 83


in regard to precedence among Arthur’s barons. Now we hear of
similar brawls at the royal board in the Irish sagas®! — for
example, at Conchobar’s table in Emain Macha, according to the
Tale of MacDatho’s Pig, and at Bricriu’s, according to Bri-
criu’s Feast.*® The following is an incident of this character
which took place at Bricriu’s table. He prepared a great feast
for Conchobar, the renowned king of Irish saga, and the nobles
of Ulster. Knowing that he would not be allowed to share in
the feast because of his evil tongue, he caused to be built for him-
self a little chamber or balcony from which he could see all that
went on. True to his character, he determines to stir up strife
among his guests, and when they begin to arrive, he urges each
secretly to demand at the banquet “the hero’s portion’’, as it
is called in the Irish sagas — that is, the biggest portion, which
was supposed to go to the worthiest warrior at the table. In this way
he approaches successively Loegaire, Conall and Cuchulinn, the
last-named being, so to speak, the Achilles of the Old Irish epic.
The feast commences and Bricriu retires. Soon, however, the cha-
rioteers of the three champions get up and each demands the
hero’s portion for his master. A dispute arises over this, and arms
begin to clash, but it is agreed after a while to divide the portion
equally among the three claimants and to refer to King Auilill of
Connaught the decision as to who is the greatest champion. Quiet is
restored for the time being, but the dispute again breaks out and
Ailill is urged to render his decision. To test the warriors’ abi-
lities he puts them through a series of adventures against strange


°* Zimmer first called attention to these Irish parallels to the
Round Table, in the Géttingische G. A. for June 10, 1890, pp. 518 ff.
He says, too, p. 518, note 1, of the Pentecost festivals with which the
Arthurian romances so often begin: “Die Maiversammlungen der Ar-
thursage sind durchaus im keltischen Altertum begriindet’”’. He cites
the May festivals held at Tara, according to Irish saga, to which the
overlord of Ireland summoned all his men. Cp. on the subject of this
note, also, Brown, “The Round Table before Wace”, pp. 193ff., in-
cluding notes.

** D’Arbois de Jubainville, Cours de littérature celtique, V, 66 ff.

** Ibid., pp. 120ff. The Irish title is Fled Bricrend. Bricriu
means ‘Poison Tongue”.

6*
84 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


monsters. Cuchullin fares best in these trials, but Aulill, who is
apparently afraid of offending the rest, gives each one privately
a goblet as a token of superiority. Cuchulinn’s, however, is of gold,
whereas the others are of inferior metals. So when subsequently
at a feast the old dispute over precedence begins anew and each
presents his goblet, much bitterness is produced. The claimants
are again sent forth now on a fresh series of adventures to test
their worthiness, but at this point the MS. breaks off.

(b) Like these episodes of the Irish sagas is the account which
Layamon gives (11. 22786ff.) of how the Round Table came to
be instituted.** At a great feast on Yule-day which Arthur gave,
says Layamon, a sanguinary quarrel sprang up among the guests,
“because each, on account of his high lineage, wished to be with-
in” (whatever that may mean). Several had lost their lives be-
fore the king succeeded in quelling it. Shortly after, when the
king was in Cornwall, a smith there offered to make him a table at
which 1600 and more people might sit, ‘‘all around about so that
none be left out without and within, man against man’. More-
over, the king could carry it about with him anywhere. In four
weeks’ time the work was completed and thereafter all was peace
and fraternity at Arthur’s feasts.

This passage has nothing to correspond to it in the extant
text of Wace’s Brut, but, in view of the Irish parallels, must be
accepted as undoubtedly derived ultimately from Celtic tradition.
It has been taken® as a proof that Layamon drew directly from


** The similarity was pointed out by A. C. L. Brown, “The Round
Table before Wace’, Harvard Studies and Notes in Philology and
Interature, VI, 183ff. (1900).

°° By A. C. L. Brown, op. cit., and “Welsh Traditions in Laya-
mon’s Brut’, MPh., I, 95ff. (1903). In his review of Brown’s “Round
Table before Wace”, in Romania, XXIX, 634 (1900), G. Paris, however,
differs from Brown, inasmuch as he supposes that the Welsh traditions
in question reached Layamon not directly, but through the English.
This is, of course, a corollary of Paris’s very questionable theory con-
cerning the Anglo-Norman origin of the Arthurian romances.

In the Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt., XXIX*, 247, note 11 (1905),
Brugger has attacked, in particular, Brown’s assumption that Layamon
derived his story of the Round Table from Wales. He points out very
aptly that in no writings of Welsh authorship (Mabinogion, Giraldus
Origin of the Lays and Romances 85


the oral traditions of his neighbors, the Welsh. We have seen,
however, that the English writer was, in all probability, wholly
dependent on a French source (an expansion of Wace) for his
so-called additions, so that the inference is unwarranted and we
are left in the same state of doubt as to the Welsh or Armorican
provenance of this incident as of the incidents of the Arthurian
romances generally — with the usual balance of probabilities, how-
ever, in favour of the latter.


(c) It has also been proposed to derive the Round Table
from some Celtic feast, like the Beltane or May-day feasts of the
Highlands of Scotland — a spring festival which descends no
doubt from pagan times. According to an account of such a feast
at Callender, recorded in the nineteenth century, the boys in that
neighborhood on May-day cut a table in the green sod by digging
around it a trench of sufficient circumference to hold the entire


Cambrensis etc.) is the Round Table mentioned. He suggests (pp. 245 ff.)
that the name “Round Table” arose in Armorica and that Wace pro-
bably invented the idea that it was made round in order to forestall
quarrels as to precedence. On the other hand, according to Layamon
(or his source), who was modifying Wace, the purpose was to put an
end to such quarrels. Like Ten Brink and Mott, Brugger believes,
as against Brown, that the story about the Round Table which is told
in Layamon originally was not connected with Arthur at all. This
may well be so, bnt I see no reason to imagine that this connection
was first made by the author of the expanded Wace (Layamon’s French
original) rather than in the sources (probably Armorican by origin) on
which he drew. Similarly with the idea, which we find in Wace,
that quarrels over precedence caused a round table to be constructed.

In this same article, p. 246, note 9, Brngger speaks of a simi-
larity between the Round Table and the table of the Last Supper in
the Gospels, which, he says, is not purely accidental, for the latter,
too, is “ein Uberrest altheidnischen Opferbrauches”. But wherever
any such similarity exists, it is under the influence of the Grail ro-
mances. The Grail Table was, of course, modeled by Robert de Boron
directly after the table of the Last Supper.

°° By Lewis F. Mott, “The Round Table’, PMLA, XX, 231ff.
(1905). Brugger, Zs. f. fre. Spr. u. Litt., XXIX*, 238ff. (1906),
in reviewing this article, expresses substantial approval of its results.
I agree, however, with F. Lot, Htude sur le Lancelot en prose,
p. 245, note 5, in rejecting it.
86 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


company. Then after making a fire in the circle and cooking and
eating certain prescribed things they put bits of cake into a bonnet
and blindfolded draw them out. Whoever draws a certain black
bit is to be sacrificed to Baal to induce him to render productive
the year which has just begun. The sacrifice is now a joke, but,
originally an actual human sacrifice was, very likely, involved
in the ceremony.

| There is a far cry, however, from this custom observed in
a limited district of the Highlands to the Round Table of Ar
thurian romance — even in its most fantastic form, that of Laya-
mon’s Brut. Besides, it is a serious weakness of the theory that
the part which disputes over precedence play in accounting for the
form of the table is unjustifiably treated as an afterthought.

(d) Miss J. L. Weston’ connects the Round Table with
some hypothetical turning table of Celtic tradition of mythical
significance. The only evidence for the Round Table as such a
turning table — if evidence it can be called — is a single line
in Béroul’s Tristan, 1. 3384 (end of the twelfth century), where,
in replying to a messenger of Iseult’s who is inquiring about the
king, a shepherd says:

“Sire”, fait il, “il sit au dois.
Ja verroiz la Table Reonde,
Qui tornoie come le monde:
Sa mesnie sit anviron.”’

From the eighth century Irish text called The Voyage of
Maelduin down, we have turning castles in Celtic tradition; but
no mention 1s made of equally marvelous turning tables in this
same tradition. Béroul’s words may possibly refer to the vicissi-
tudes of life to which the company gathered about the board,
like the rest of the world, are subject, or, if construed literally,
they may express a passing fancy of this particular poet — but,
whatever the meaning of this obscure line may be, it does not
justify us in jumping with Miss Weston to the conclusion that
the Round Table is connected with some supposed solar ritual.

Whatever we may think of the theories just presented, there


*? See her article “A hitherto unconsidered aspect of the Round
Table”, in the Mélanges offerts a M. Maurice Wilmotte (Paris, 1910).
Origin of the Lays and Romances 87


is hardly room for doubt that Arthur’s Round Table belongs to the
paraphernalia which attached itself to him in Celtic tradition. We
cannot regard the legends relating to it as a mere development out
of the old stories concerning Charlemagne and his twelve peers,
as has been suggested. The Irish parallels, moreover, render it
probable that the conception obtained, also, among the insular
Celts,°® as we know from Wace that it did among the Bretons.
Perhaps, after all, in seeking for an explanation of this most
famous of tables and the customs which were connected with it,
we need go no further than the account which is given of Celtic
feasts by the Greek philosopher and traveller, Posidonius, who
lived in the first century before Christ, his observations being
made probably in Southern Gaul. He tells us that at their feasts
the Celts sit in a circle and that the bravest sits in the middle
like the leader of a chorus. Moreover, primitive Celtic houses
were often circular. It is quite possible that these actual customs
may have determined the shape of the celebrated table of romance.


2. Excalibur (Caliburnus in Geoffrey’s Historia, IX, 4),
which is Arthur’s sword in Geoffrey and commonly in the ro-
mances,!° is certainly identical with the sword Caladbolg of the
Irish prose epic Tain bo Cualnge (The Cattle-Raid of Cooley),
which is there the property of Fergus, the fugitive ruler of Ulster.
It is said to have become of the size of the rainbow, whenever any


°° Zimmer, Gétt. G. A., for June 10, 1890, p. 525, denies this.

°° Quoted by A. C. L. Brown, “The Round Table before Wace”,
Pe 195, note 3, from Carl Miiller, Fragmenta Historica Graecorum,

, 260 (Paris, 1849).

°° In the relatively late Vulgate Merlin-continuation Arthur
presents it to young Gawain. Cp. Sommer, Vulgate Version of the
Arthurian Romances, II, 253.

*°" The identification was first made by Zimmer, Gétt. G. A.,
for June 10, 1890, pp. 516f. For Caladbolg, cp. Miss Winifred Faraday’s
translation of the Irish epic: The Cattle-Raid of Cualnge, London
(Grimm Library, no. 16), 1904. Loth maintains, Revue Celtique,
XIII, 495, that French Calibor (= Caladbolg) is drawn from a
written Welsh form. See, too, F. Lot, Romania, XXV, 1f, who
contends that Geoffrey’s Caliburnus does not sada come from
the Breton.
88 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


one struck with it. Fergus cuts off the tops of three hills with
this sword. Moreover, like Excalibur, it was made in fairy-land.


3. Miscellaneous Celtic folk-tale motifs, such as are found,
for example, in the Tristan romances.!° With regard to such
motifs, it should be premised that even in instances where insular
records appear to offer parallels to incidents in Arthurian ro-
mance, it may be that the same stories were current in Brittany
and transmitted thence to the French writers — only the com-
plete absence of all Breton records from the Middle Ages leaves
us without the means of control. We may select for notice here,
particularly: (a) the motif of the Turning Castle mentioned above,
which is found in La Mule sans Frein, 11. 440ff., the Middle
High German Diu ‘Krone, 11. 12951ff., and other romances, both
metrical and prose, and is, likewise, familiar to Irish saga, Voyage
of Maelduin, etc.;1°3 (b) the motif of the Beheading Game:1%
A strange visitor turns up at court and offers to submit himself
to decapitation at the hands of a knight, provided that at the
expiration of a given period the knight will, in turn, subject him-
self to the same test of courage. The knight naturally accepts
this as a very easy test, but to his surprise the stranger picks
up his head after decapitation and at the appointed time is ready
to return the blow. This incident is found in several romances —
earliest, perhaps, in the so-called Livre de Caradoc (Livre de
‘Karados),1 which is an interpolation in the first continuation
of Chrétien’s Perceval. It is even better known, however, through
the Middle English romance, Sir Gawain and the Green ‘Knight,


108 Cp. especially Gertrude Schoepperle: Tristan and Isolt, II,
267ff. (Frankfort and London, 1913).

98 Cp. Gideon Huet, “Le chateau tournant dans la Suite du
Merlin’, Romania, XL, 235ff. (1911). Cp., too, W. E. Sypherd,
Studies in Chaucer's House of Fame, pp. 114ff. (Publications of
the Chaucer Society, London, 1907), where numerous Celtic examples
of Whirling Houses are given, but, also, some from other sources.

** On this motif both in the romances and in folk-tales, cp.
G. L. Kittredge, A Study of Gawain and the Green Knight, pp.
9 ff., 147ff. (Cambridge, Mass., 1916).

108 Cp. Potvin’s Perceval li Gallois, I, 117—-221. For the
episode in question, cp. ibid., pp. 125ff.
Origin of the Lays and Romances 89


which certainly goes back substantially to a lost French original.
But we have this same incident also in the Irish saga, named
above, Bricriu’s Feast,!% of which a manuscript from circa 1100
has been preserved, but which is itself much older. One of the
tests of courage which the three champions Loegaire, Conall, and
Cuchullin, have to undergo in that tale is an adventure of this
nature with the giant Uath Mac Imomain (Fright, Son of Great
Fear). Cuchulinn, however, alone is equal to the test. When the
giant has been decapitated, he clasps his head to his breast and
jumps into the lake. The next day he returns and when Cuchulinn
exhibits no fear even when stretched out and ready to receive the
fatal. blow, his enemy spares him, at the seme time, declaring
him to be the first of Irish warriors.

4. The individual episode in the romances the insular Celtic
— apparently Scotch — origin of which appears best assured is
one that also occurs in the Livre de Caradoc,! just mentioned —
viz. the episode of Carados (Caradoc, Karados) and the serpent,
which occurs also as a Gaelic tale1°* and was still in oral circu-


06 Cp. George Henderson, Fled Bricrend, pp. 116ff. (London,
1899). Kittredge, op. cit., pp. 10ff., gives an analysis of the episode.

°7 Potvin, op. cit., II, 191ff. Secondary to this version is the
one in the Roman de Renart le Contrefait. See Miss C. A. Harper,
MLN, XIU, 422f.

108 Cp. J. F. Campbell’s Popular Tales of the West Highlands,
IV, Introdnction, pp. XCVf. Campbell took it down from a travelling
tinker. ‘The Queen of Scotland’, no. 301 in Child’s collection of
ballads, is, also, a variant of this Carados story.

It was Miss C. A. Harper, “Carados and the Serpent”, XIII, 417 ff.
(1898), who first observed the resemblance of the episode in the
Livre de Caradoc (Karados) to the Highland tale. She discusses
there the relations of all the four versions which I have named.

G. Paris, “Caradoc et le Serpent”, Romania, XXVIII, 214ff.
(1899), following up Miss Harper’s study, pointed out that this story
was also a part of Welsh tradition in the Middle Ages, for a know-
ledge of it is implied in a Welsh triad (Loth, Mabinogion’, II, 284f.)
on three famous chaste young women of Britain. Here the heroine
is called, to be sure, not Guwinor (in variant forms), as in the Livre
de Karados, but Tegan Euron (Eurvron), i. e. Tegan of the Golden
Breast. Assuming that Caradoc Brechbras belonged to Armorican
tradition, Paris concluded that the tale reached Wales from Brittany.
90 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


lation in the nineteenth century in the Highlands of Scotland.
The essential features of the story as we find it in the French
are as follows:

Carados (Caradoc) is the son of the enchanter Eliaures and
of Queen Ysaune who has been unfaithful to her husband. After
he has grown up, he learns from his true father the secret of his
birth, but he is indignant when he hears the story and repeats
it to the king, whom he has hitherto supposed to be his father.
The king then shuts Ysaune up in a tower, but her lover still
manages to visit her, until they are detected by their son, who
again informs on them. Ysaune appeals to Eliaures, who offers
to punish Carados in this way: He will create a horrible serpent
and shut him up in her cupboard. When Carados visits her, she
is to send him there immediately for her mirror. As soon as he
puts in his hand, the serpent will wind about his arm. His flesh
will then waste away and in two years he will die. The mother
agrees to this and carries out her part in the plot. The serpent
winds about the arm of Carados and his mother Ysaune then tells
him that he has got what he deserves and that the best thing for
him to do is to go forth and repent of his sins during the two
years of life left to him. Carados takes the advice and goes into
an abbey. Here he is discovered after a long search by his friend
Cador of Cornwall, who wishes to kill the serpent, but cannot,
since his friend’s life is bound up with that of the creature. Cador,
however, induces Carados to go with him to Ysaune’s tower, to
see if something cannot be done for him, and, owing to his repro-
aches, she consults with her paramour, who prescribes the follow-
ing procedure by which the unhappy Carados may be released
from the serpent: Only a beautiful, well-born maiden who loves
Carados loyally can effect the release. This maiden must pre-
pare two caldrons and fill one with milk and the other with the
sourest wine she can find. She must get into the caldron of milk
The story, however, he believed, was ultimately Irish and had nothing
to do with Caradoc. In “Caradoc et Saint Paterne”, Romania, XXVIII,
568 ff. (1899), however, F. Lot shows that Caradoc was really a hero
of the Britons of Strathclyde and Cumberland, that the tale in question


was Scotch, not Irish in origin, and passed into Wales by way of
Northwest England, not Brittany.
Origin of the Lays and Romances 91


and Carados must get into the caldron of wine. Then she must
show her breast over the edge of the caldron and pray to God to
cure Carados immediately. The serpent, disliking the wine and
tempted by the sweet milk, will then leave Carados and seize her
breast. On going home, Cador learns that his own sister loves
Carados, and when she hears of the condition of his release, she
agrees to sacrifice herself for her lover. Cador, however, is
to try to kill the serpent as he passes from the one to
the other. The serpent, however, actually seizes hold of the girl,
and Cador, to accomplish the release, has to cut off a part of the
breast to which it has attached itself. He then kills it between
the caldrons and Carados marries the girl. Later on, after a number
of strange adventures, Carados obtains from a knight named Alar-
din del Lac a shield-buckle which has a wonderful power of heal-
ing wounds. If a knight has lost half of his nose, a touch of
this buckle will make a golden nose just like the one he had before.
So with any other part of the body. Carados takes the buckle
home and touches his wife’s breast with it. She is at once cured,
but henceforth has a golden breast. She is, later on, the only
lady at Arthur’s court who can stand the test of chastity.

One may mention in conclusion that in this story Carados’s
arm was said to have always remained smaller after this experience
with the serpent, so that he was known henceforth as Carados
Brisie Braz (Carados with the broken arm) or Briebraz (short-
armed). This rests on a curious misunderstanding of the Celtic
epithet of the hero — namely, Breichbras (breich-arm, bras-
strong), which really means virtually just the opposite of what
the French romancers (including the author of the Livre de Cara-
doc), being misled by the similarity to words of their own language,
imagined.,109

10° It is a delicate question, however, whether F. Lot, op. cit.,
pp. 222ff., is justified in assnming that the retention of B as the
initial sound of this epithet proves that the French authors used written
sources, the 6’s in their language, as he declares, being pronounced
like a v from the eighth century on, so that, if only heard, the French
would have written down v, 6. Confusion in catching the spoken name
is too common to admit of a confident decision in this case. (Op.


too, W. Meyer-Liibke, Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt., XLIV’, 164, on the
subject.
92 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


5. Arthur himeelf is virtually unknown to mediaeval Irish lite-
rature of purely native origin,'!° but, as will have been observed


729 In his article, ‘Eine verschollene Artursage”, pp. 63 ff. of the
Festschrift fir Ernst Windisch (1914), Kuno Meyer calls attention
to an Aigidecht Artiir (= Entertainment of Arthur) in a list of
Irish sagas in the Book of Leinster (twelfth century). Meyer conjectures
on the analogy of the Middle Irish ballad, Find and the Phantoms
(Book of Leinster), that the lost saga described how Arthur, whilst
hunting a boar, came to a haunted house and had strange adventures
with the spirits there.

In the Revue Celtique, X, 185ff. (1889), Max Nettlau published
from Stowe MS. 992 (Br. Museum) some excerpts from an Irish ro-
mance concerning the Holy Grail — so, too, F. N. Robinson, Zs. f.
celt. Ph., IV, 381ff. (1903) fragments from a MS. in the Franciscan
library at Dublin. In both cases, however, the Irish is not original,
but based on the Old French prose romance, Queste del Saint Graal.

R. A. Stewart Macalister has published from MS. Egerton, 128
(B. M.), dated 1748, The Story of the Crop-Eared Dog and The
Story of Eagle-Boy (Irish Texts Society, London, 1908). He entitles
them Two Irish Arthurian Romances, and, as a matter of fact, King
Arthur appears in both, and the principal character in the first bears
the name of Sir Galahad. Nevertheless, Miss Weston, Polk-Lore, XX,
361ff. (1909), very properly questions their right to be called Ar-
thurian. The stories belong to the “Wonder-Voyage” type of tale, as
their editor, himself, remarks, and the mere adoption of Arthurian
names does not render them Arthurian. A.C. L. Brown, MPh., IX,
120 ff. (1911) has expressed an opinion similar to Miss Weston’s. The
first of the two stories is probably based on a French original, the
second certainly. Cp. T. P. Cross, MPh., X, 229, note 1 (1913).

In his “Arthurian Motifs in Ghadelic Literature”, Miscellany
presented to Kuno Meyer, edited by Osborn Bergen and Carl Mar-
strander, pp. 18ff. (Halle, 1912), George Henderson calls attention
to another “Wonder Voyage” tale of which Lancelot and Galahad are
the heroes, preserved in Rawlinson MS. B. 512 (Bodleian Library).
This, however, is as little Arthurian as the two stories published by
Macalister. Henderson observes that, apart from fragments about the
Grail, Arthurian motifs may be traced in 1. Kachdoaidh An Ama-
dain Mhoir (Tale of the Great Fool). 2. Am Brat (The Cloak).
3. Am Bron Binn (The Melodious Sorrow). These are, however,
all late and manifestly derived from the French romances. No. 3 is
a Gaelic ballad which Henderson, himself, took down at Dalibrog,
South Uist, in 1892, from oral recitation. The King of Britain dreams
of a fair lady and falls in love with his vision of her. Gallomhai
Origin of the Lays and Romances 93


from the preceding pages, this is not true of many of the motifs
that occur in the Arthurian romances. We have seen above that
mediaeval Breton literature is practically non-existent and that the
bulk of extant works of the imagination in Welsh for the same
period is not very large. On the other hand, an enormous quan-
tity of Irish folk-tales and sagas has been preserved to us in MSS.
of the eleventh and following centuries and of this body of narra-
tive literature much was actually composed at a still earlier date.
These sagas, etc., reflect, moreover, a more primitive state of
society than the extant literature of any other branch of the
European races, and hence they offer a store of material for the
folk-lorist which is without parallel, as far as the Occident is con-
cerned. Under these circumstances, it is natural that students of
the romances who approach the subject from the folk-lorist’s point
of view should so frequently seek in Irish tradition the origin
of the tales that make up the plots of the French romances. In
cases where the theory of Irish origins is justified, it would seem
most probable that the stories in question reached France by way
of Wales and England. Nevertheless, difficult as navigation be-
tween Ireland and France might seem to be under mediaeval con-
ditions, direct intercourse between the two countries was not un-
known in the Middle Ages, and the late Professor Zimmer has
even striven to prove that the usual trade-route between Ireland
and the Continent in those centuries was across the sea from the
Irish coast to the mouth of the Loire.1!! Inasmuch as all records


(Gawain) traverses the sea for weeks to find her. A “big man” (i. e.
giant) keeps her captive in a tower. In collusion with Gawain, she
lulls him to sleep with her harp. Gawain then cuts off the giant’s
head and they escape. In general, it should be said that Henderson
was ignorant of Arthurian discussions and his observations on the sub-
ject are utterly confused and without value.

‘2. For evidence regarding the intercourse between the Celts of
Treland and those of Great Britain by which the traditions of the
former might have been diffused among the latter, cp. T. P. Cross,
Revue Celtique, XXXI, 421ff. (1910), where the earlier literature of
the subject is given in the notes. For direct communication between
Ireland and Gaul (France) cp. H. Zimmer, Uber direkte Handels-
verbindungen Westgalliens mit Irland in Altertum und friihen
Mittelalter in the Sitaungsberichte, Philos.-Hist. Klasse, of the Berlin
er


94 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


of the sagas current in Brittany during the period under discus-
sion have perished, we cannot say whether, after all, these same
motifs and incidents which we find in the Irish sagas may not
have been familiar also to the Bretons, and so have passed di-


' rectly from them into France. Besides, the ancestors of the Bre-


tons were brothers of the ancestors of the Welsh and so even
where such tales are, indeed, Irish by origin, they may have been
brought over from Ireland to Great Britain before the emigration
to Armorica began. Waiving, however, these considerations, the
debt of the French romances to Irish sources, in any event, seems
to the present writer to have been greatly exaggerated. But it
is best to let the reader judge for himself by putting before him
the materials in a typical case — viz., the outlines, respectively,
of a French romance, Chrétien’s Yvain, and of an Irish saga,
Serglige Conculaind (Cuchulinn’s Sick Bed) — a version of the
fairy-mistress theme — which, in some variant form, is supposed
to be the source of this same romance:!!?


Academy of Sciences for 1905, pp. 363ff., 430ff., 543ff., 582 ff. —
for 1910, pp. 1031ff. See, too, this scholar’s Auf welchem Wege
kamen die Gotdelen vom Kontinent nach Irland? in the Abhand-
lungen of the same Academy for 1912 — especially, pp. 55ff. As
against D’Arbois de Jubainville, Rhys, etc., Zimmer (approved by
Kuno Meyer) argues that the Gaels in their original settlement of Ire-
land did not reach that island by way of Great Britain, but direct
from West Gaul, and, moreover, that down to the English conquest
of Ireland (late twelfth century) the main intellectual as well as trade
relations of Ireland were with West Gaul and not with Great Britain.
The argument, on the whole, seems plausible but, as J. Vendryes has
remarked in his review of the paper (Rev. Celt.), Zimmer does not
sufficiently consider the archaeological evidence.

_**3 This is the thesis of A. C. L. Brown in his Iwain, a Study
in the Origins of Arthurian Romance: Harvard Studies and Notes
mm Philology and Literature, vol. 8 (1903). Cp., too, his articles,
“The Knight of the Lion”, PMLA, XX, 673 ff. (1905) and “Chrétien’s
‘Yvain’”, MPh., IX, 109ff. (1911). In these articles Brown brings
together from various Irish sagas parallels — frequently far-fetched,
as it seems to me — to all the principal features of the Yvain — a
parallel to one detail from one saga, a parallel to another detail from
another saga, and so on. He concludes that all the motley incidents
of the French poem are derived from a single Celtic mdrchen.
Origin of the Lays and Romances 95


In Yvain the hero, incited by the report of another knight,
Calogrenant, tries the adventure of the fountain in the Forest
of Broceliande: If one pours water from this fountain on a stone
nearby, a terrible storm arises which is followed by a calm.
A knight then comes forth and jousts with the offender. On the
way to the fountain Yvain (Ivain, Iwain), like Calogrenant, passes
a flock of fierce fighting bulls guarded by a giant herdsman —
a black creature with a head larger than that of a horse. He
goes through the fountain adventure, but, unlike his predecessor,
overthrows the knight and wounds him mortally. Yvain pursues
his wounded adversary into the latter’s castle. He finds himself
caught between two iron gates, but he is recognized by Lunete,
a damsel who attends the lady of the castle and who had once
been befriended by him at King Arthur’s court. This girl gives
him a magic ring which will render the holder invisible at will.
By the use of this talisman Yvain witnesses in safety the funeral
of the knight he has slain and falls in love with the latter’s widow,
Laudine. Immediately afterwards he begins the courtship of the
widow and with the help of the damsel gains her consent. He
now becomes the lord of the castle and defender of the fountain.


I have given the two stories according to Brown’s own analysis,
with only slight compression here and there, so that whatever resem-
blance there may exist between the two loses nothing in my outlines.
In his review, MLN, XIX, 80ff., (1904) of Brown’s [wain, — which he
describes as “more especially a contribution to the history of Celtic
mythology than a monograph on the romance of Crestien de Troyes”
— Nitze dissents from the author’s hypothesis that the French poet
was following “a clearly defined conte’. Similarly, E. Windisch, Das
keltische Britannien bis zu Kaiser Arthur, p. 181 (Leipzig, 1912).
— Already Axel Ahlstrém, Mélanges de philologie romane dédiés
a Carl Wahlund, p. 302 (Macon, 1896), expresses the opinion that
Chrétien’s sources for the Yvain, besides contes and popular legends
(such as he supposes, gave rise to Marie’s /ais), embraced, also, “de petits
romans en prose’ on the same subjects. But Chrétien knew only
French (no Celtic), and there was no French prose so early as this.

In his Sage vom heiligen Gral, pp. 138 ff. (Halle, 1898) Wechssler
argues that there were already romances of chivalry among the Celts,
but the works which he cites to prove this are, in reality, French,
e.g., Chrétien's Perceval, the lays, Milun and Doon — and just
how far they contain Celtic elements is a debated question.
96 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


In his new capacity, Yvain barely avoids an encounter with Arthur,
but when. the king departs, his wife gives Yvain permission to
accompany him and to be absent for a year. He overstays his
time, is reproached for it, goes mad in consequence, but is finally
cured by an ointment of Morgan le Fay’s. There are all sorts
of disconnected adventures that follow upon this. He succors a
lion who is fighting with a serpent and the lion henceforth follows
him. With the beast’s assistance he rescues Lunete, who is con-
demned to be burned to death on the false accusation of a wicked
seneschal. In the midst of this affair, however, he combats a
giant who is besieging a castle and threatening to kill the sons
of the owner or carry off his daughter. Next he has an indecisive
encounter with Gawain, without recognizing his identity, in the
affair of two sisters, who are disputing over an inheritance. But
this adventure is interrupted likewise by another in which the
hero does away with an evil custom that requires thirty girls
of the Isle of Maidens to be annually delivered over to two mon-
sters. Lastly, Yvain returns to the fountain and stirs up a storm
there. Lunete discovers who he is and brings about a reconciliation
with Laudine.

Let us turn now to Cuchulinn’s Sick Bed: 148

Cuchulinn tries to kill two strange birds linked by a golden
chain that appear at a lake in Ulster. Being unsuccessful, he sits
down against an upright stone and falls asleep. In his sleep he
sees two women, one clad in green, the other in red, who come up
to him, laugh and keep striking him until he is almost dead. (As
it turns out this is the fairy, Fand, and her sister.) He was carried
into a house, where he lay till the end of a year without speaking
to anyone. Then, as he lay in the bed, a man mysteriously ap-
peared, who sang verses promising him health and strength, if
he would accept the invitation of the daughters of Aed Abrat,
one of whom, named Fand, wished to marry Cuchulinn. The
man departed after that and they knew not whence he came or


**8 In connection with this tale, I will call the reader’s attention
to an interesting account of the Irish ili (professional story-tellers)
and of the way in which Irish tales were handed down, which
A. C. L. Brown gives, MPh., IX, 121 ff. (1911).
Origin of the Lays and Romances 97


whither he went. Cuchulinn rose up and spoke and went back
to the upright stone where he saw again the woman in the green
cloak. From her he learned that Fand, deserted by her husband
Manannan mac Lir (a Celtic divinity), had fallen in love with
him. Her own name is Liban. She is sister to Fand and wife to
Labraid, who has sent her to ask Cuchulinn for one day’s assistance
against Labraid’s enemies, promising in return to give him F'and
to wife.

Cuchulinn sent his charioteer, Loeg, to see the mysterious
land from Which she came. Liban and he went till they came
to the place where Fand was waiting for them. Then, it is said,
Liban took hold of Loeg by the shoulder. ““O Loeg’’, said Fand,
“thou wilt not come out alive today, unless a woman protect
thee!” “‘I have not been much accustomed to woman’s pro-
tection’? was Loeg’s reply. Then they came to the water’s edge,
where they entered a boat of bronze and crossed over to an is-
land. Loeg saw Labraid and his palace and, returning, told his
story to Cuchulinn and everyone else.

Again Liban came to invite Cuchulinn to Mag Mell. She
sang to him in praise of the place where Labraid dwelt — evi-
dently fairy-land.144 “I will not go at a woman’s invitation,”


*** Otherworld journeys are frequent in Celtic literature. For
an account of them cp. The Voyage of Bran, 2 vols. (London,
1895—1897), by A Nutt and K. Meyer, A. C. L. Brown’s Lwain, 27 ff.
(Boston, 1903), Josef Baudis, “The Mabinogion”, F'olk-Lore, XXVII,
31 ff. (1916) — particularly, pp. 35ff. There seems to have been no
distinction in the minds of the Celts between their “Land of the Dead”’
and their Elysium. So, lately, Baudis, loc. cit., who, I believe, is
right. Hence we include both in the term “Otherworld”. For
a discussion of the whole subject, cp. J. A. MacCulloch, The Religion
of the Ancient Celts, pp. 362 ff. (Edinburgh, 1911), whose conclusions
are different. MacCulloch (pp. 374) disputes the view held by D’Arbois
de Jubainville, Baudis, etc., that the two Otherworlds were not dis-
tinguished. He deduces (p. 370) the idea of the Celtic Elysium from
some early myth of a Golden Age. The literature concerning the
descriptions of the Celtic Otherworld is given by T. P. Cross, Revue
Celtique, XXXI, 461, note 3 (1910). In “Two Otherworld Stories”,
MLN, XXXII, 280ff. (1917) John C. Hodges has compared with Celtic
conceptions of the Otherworld two stories from the Arabian Nights,

Hejperia, Ergdnzungsreihe: 8. 7
98 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


he declares; but he again consents to send his charioteer. Fand
admonishes the latter that Cuchulinn must come with speed, for
the battle is appointed for that day. Loeg returns with Fand
and describes at even greater length the fairy palace of Labraid
and the beauty of a woman there, who is, doubtless, Fand her-
self. Cuchulinn is now persuaded, mounts his chariot, and ac-
companies Loeg and Fand to Mag Mell. At early dawn he trans-
fixes with his spear one of Labraid’s chief enemies, as he was
washing himself at a well. After that he slew still another and
won a victory for Labraid. In return he received Fand, with
whom he lived for a month. When he departed, she said to him:
“I will meet thee in whatever place thou shalt appoint for me
to come.”’

After Cuchulinn returned home, he revealed to his wife, Emer,
the appointed place of meeting. The jealous queen lay in wait
with knives to murder Fand. Cuchulinn rescued her, but when
Manannan mac Lir heard of it, he suddenly appeared, visible
to Fand alone. When she saw her husband, the sea-god, coming
over the sea, she forsook her mortal lover and went away with
him. When Cuchulinn perceived that she had gone, he sprang
three leaps upward and three leaps to the right of Luacra, so
that he was for a long time without drink and without food among
the mountains and “tis there that he slept every night upon the
road of Midluacra —”’ that is to say, he ran mad.

Emer persuaded Conchobar to send “poets and people of wis-
dom and druids of the Ulstermen’”’ to heal Cuchulinn, but “he
sought to murder the people of wisdom”. However, they sang


(viz., The Porter and the Three Ladies of Baghdad and The Man
Who Never Laughed during the Rest of his Days. Burton, I,
151ff., VI, 160 ff., respectively), which seem to parallel the Celtic more
closely than any others in that collection. In the Arabian tales the
mortal, not the fairy mistress, takes the initiative. For the literature of
the Fairy Mistress theme in Celtic cp. (besides Brown’s Iwain) Cross,
MPh., XII, 598, note 1, 594, note 2. For a contemporary Breton
ballad on the fairy mistress theme, taken down by J. Loth, cp. “Le
Comte et la Fee’, Annales de Bretagne, XXVII, 199ff. (1911) —
also, a Welsh tale noted by G. Dottin, ‘Notes sur le Folklore Gallois,
ibid., XXII, 462 ff. (1907—8).
Origin of the Lays and Romances 99


their druidical charms over him till they captured his feet and
hands and till he recovered a little of his senses. He asked for
a drink then. They gave him a drink of forgetfulness. As he
drank the drink, there was no recollection to him of Fand nor
of anything that he had done. Manannan shook his cloak bet-
ween Cuchulinn and Fand, so that they should never meet again.

Most readers, we believe, will agree with us, that it would
be impossible for the French poet to extract from such a story
the plot of Yvain, as we have recounted it above. Except that
in each the lover runs mad, on losing his mistress, the two stories
have virtually nothing in common. In the Yvain, besides. the
loss is only temporary. |


en nt ee ee
Chapter III.
Chrétien de Troyes and his Successors.


We have now come to Chrétien de Troyes, who, even if he
had predecessors, gave, as we may safely assert, a new value,
and probably a new character, to the poems relating to Arthur
and his knights. The fact that all poems devoted especially to
Arthurian subjects before Chrétien — granting that such existed
— have disappeared, shows that, on the whole, they could not have
been marked by any great literary excellence.1

We know nothing positively of the life of the poet. The
designation, “de Troyes”, which he uses in the Hrec, seems to
prove that he was a native of Troyes in the province of Cham-
pagne, and that he was a herald has been conjectured? on the


* This is, of course, contrary to Brugger’s view, Zs. f. frz.
Spr. u. Litt., XXXI*, 143f. that all the finer Arthurian romances
have perished and that we possess only the productions of a period
of decadence. |

* By G. Paris, Journal des Savants for June, 1902, pp. 295f.
== pp. 251f. of the reprint in the G. Paris-Mélanges (Paris, 1910).

Owing to the logic-chopping debates between Fenice and Thessala
in Cliges (ll. 83085 ff. and 4409 ff.) and Laudine and Lunete in Yvain
(11. 1589ff.), M. Wilmotte has suggested, p. 167 of the Bulletin de
la Classe des Lettres, etc., for 1890 of the Académie Royale de
Belgique that Chrétien was a jurist; but his scholastic training would
sufficiently account for the character of the passages in question. Cp.
the same scholar on Chrétien, Le Moyen Age, for 1914, pp. 102 ff.
For various speculations concerning Chrétien’s life and a very thorough
sifting of such speculations see especially, G. Paris, loc. cit., pp. 293ff.
and Foerster, Chrétien Worterbuch, 22 ff., 39 ff.

Paris, Mélanges, I, 260, conjectures — and W. Meyer-Liibke,
Zs. f. fre. Spr. u. Litt., XLIV’*, 162, expresses his approval of the
conjecture — that Chrétien visited England. The evidence to that
effect is: 1. that in his Cliges, 11. 4579ff., the poet makes the in-
significant English town, Wallingford (Galinguefort), the scene of one
Chretien de Troyes and his Successors 101


basis of the Lancelot (11. 5591ff.), where the herald recognizes
Lancelot, who has come incognito to a tournament, and cries out:
Or est venuz qui aunera (i. e., the conqueror has come). Chrétien
adds that this was the first time the expression had been used:


Nostre maistre en fu li hira
Qui a dire le nos aprist,
Car il premierement le dist.

In any event, his translations from Ovid prove that he had
the usual scholastic education of the time and even render it pro-
bable that he shared the renewed ardor with which the study of
the classics, and, particularly, Ovid, was pursued in learned circles
toward the middle of the twelfth century. In a well-known pas-
sage at the beginning of Cligés the poet enumerates his works
up to that date (about 1168): Erec and Enide, a poem on King
Marc and Iseult, and translations of Ovid’s Ars Amandi (L’ Art
d’ Amors) and Remedia Amoris (Les Comandemenz Ovide), with
two other pieces which appear to be derived from the same writer’s


Metamorphoses.®


of Arthur’s tourneys, as it had actually been the meeting-place of
Henry II and his barons. 2. that he gives, Cliges, 11. 276ff., a rather
vivid description of sea-sickness. These matters are supposed to have
been drawn from his personal experience. Obviously, however, the
inference is not imperative. Cp., contra, Foerster, Chrétien Wdrter-
buch, Introduction, pp. 40f.
* The Cliges begins as follows:

Cil qui fist d’Erec et d’Enide

Et les Comandemanz Ovide

Et l’Art d’Amors an romanz mist

Et le Mors de |’Espaule fist,

Del roi Mare et d'Iseut la blonde,

Et de la Hupe et de ]’Aronde

Et del Rossignol la Muance,

Un novel conte recomance

D’un vaslet qui an Grece fu

Del lignage le roi Artu.
It is generally agreed that considerations of rhyme, not fact, dictated
the order in which these works are enumerated. Only Meyer-Liibke,
Zs. f. fre. Spr. u. Litt., XLIV’, 129 ff. objects.

Le Mors d’Espaule has been taken to be a version of the

classical legend concerning Pelops’s shoulder wich was devoured by
102 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


If we accept the Philomena episode of the Ovide Moralisé
as one of these pieces, our author would be identical with
the enigmatical Crestiiens li Gois, the author of that work, but
this is more or less doubtful. From the omission of the hero’s
name in the allusion, G. Paris argued® that Chrétien’s poem con-
cerning Marc and Iseult was episodical in its nature and not
a genuine Tristan romance. The inference seems hardly justi-
fied, but, in any event, the work has completely disappeared. Of
the extant romances, Hrec (about 1168) is the first, and Cliges
(about 1170) the second. Next come his three latest romances,
with the following approximate dates:* Lancelot, 1172, Yvain,


Ceres. This legend receives only a passing mention in Ovid — though
accessible, doubtless, to Chrétien in Hyginus, Fable 83 — and be-
sides, Mors (bite) does not necessarily imply devouring. On these
grounds, G. Paris, Mélanges, I, 248, objected to the above-mentioned
identification of the story and suggested a Celtic origin. Nevertheless,
the identification is, most likely, correct. The poem dealing with the
muance (transformation) of the three birds was, of course, the story
of Tereus, Procne and Philomela in the Metamorphoses. It is possible
that both L’ Art d’Amors and the Comandemenz Ovide refer to the
Ars Amandi. — For Ovid’s influence on Chrétien see F. E. Guyer's
exhaustive study, “The Influence of Ovid on Crestien de Troyes”,
RR, XU, 97ff., 216ff. (1921). I regret that the article appeared too
late for me to cite it in detail. It throws new light on many con-
ceptions in Chrétien’s poems — especially on those that relate to love.

In his “Zum Text des Erec”, Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt., XXXVI’,
97f. (1911), G. Cohen has tried to show that the above lines of the
Erec are spurious, but his argument is futile. As far as I know, no
one has expressed approval of this suggestion, save W. Meyer-Liibke,
“Crestien von Troyes Erec und Enide”, ibid., XLIV'’, 136. On the
subject of the above lines, cp., too, Foerster, Cliges*, pp. VI ff. (Halle, 1910).

“So G. Paris, loc. cit., and C: De Boer in his edition of the
Philomena (Paris, 1909); but for an argument contra, cp. Foerster,
op. cit., p. VU, note 2.

* Op. cit., pp. 254 fff.

* So G. Paris, op. cit., pp. 262ff. He dates the Erec about
1168. For discussions of the respective dates of Chrétien’s romances,
except Perceval, see Foerster’s introductions to these romances in his
editions. His maturest opinions on the dates of all (including the
Perceval) will be found pp. 33 ff. of the Introduction to his Chrétien
Worterbuch. Tbid., p. 39, he expresses the opinion that Chrétien's
Chrétien de Troyes and his Successors 103


11738, Perceval, 1175. The Perceval remains a fragment. This
was the last of the poet’s works, its composition being broken off,
it seems, by his death. We leave aside Guillaume d’ Angleterre,
since, even if it is Chrétien’s,? the poem does not belong to the
genre of Arthurian romance. |

It is significant that at the very beginning of his career
Chrétien should have been occupying himself with Ovid and with
a subject which lay so close to the Arthurian cycle — namely,
the story of Iseult. With the exception of the Cliges, whose con-
nection with Arthur is wholly artificial, all ‘the writings of our
poet from the Hrec down relate to the matiére de Bretagne and
they all, without exception, betray the influence of Ovid. It would
appear that the course of his development was as follows: He
first becomes interested in the love-poetry of Ovid (it may be
in his school-days), then he is attracted by the theme of Tristan,
which he knew through oral tradition, or, possibly, some earlier
French poem on the subject. With a poem of some kind on this
hero he makes his first essay in the matiére de Bretagne. If we
had this Tristan poem, we should probably find that in the ana-
lysis of love-moods the influence of Ovid and of the French ro-
mances of antiquity was already traceable in it. The charm of
the Celtic stories has laid its hold on the author and in all of his
succeeding works, with the single exception of the Cliges, he draws
incidents from this source, though by no means exclusively. Since
Geoffrey and Wace, however, the authority of Arthur is great,


production began slightly before 1160 and ended not so very long
after 1170. He dates Chiges about 1164 (p. 38) and accepts the
Erec as earlier, though he suggests no definite date for the latter.
The Lancelot and Yvain he places (p. 33) between 1164 and 1173,
the latter being the later. Perceval he dates not much later than
Yvain. Paris and Foerster agree as to the order in which Chrétien's
Arthurian works were written and we may indeed regard the question
as settled. See further on the date 1170 as the upper limit of the
date of the Yvain M. Mérner: “Le ‘terminus a quo’ du Chevalter
au Lion’, Archivium Romanicum, Il, 95f. (Geneva, 1919).

* Cp. Introduction to Foerster’s edition (Halle, 1911) for dis-
cussion of the question of its authorship. Foerster upholds the as-
cription to Chrétien.
104 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


and under the influence of these works a new standard of refine-
ment is already, to a certain degree, associated with his court.
Chrétien avails himself of this prestige, which had more or less
historical validity in the eyes of his contemporaries, since per-
haps the majority of them accepted as historical truth Geoffrey’s
pictures of Arthur’s glories, and makes Arthur’s court the star-
ting-point of the adventures of all his heroes. This conception,
it is safe to say, was his own invention — only the setting and,
in part, the incidents are Celtic. The ideas which his romances
embody are those of his own time and country, and even the in-
cidents he has adapted in thorough-going fashion to the con-
ditions of French feudal society in the second half of the twelfth
century. A comparison has often been made between Tennyson
and Chrétien, as regards their attitude towards their originals,
and it is, in many respects, just. The French poet probably ad-
hered less closely to a single original for each poem than Tenny-
son did — although, on the other hand, in the matter of incident,
he, no doubt, drew less from his own invention than the English
poet. Both, however, are alike in making the stories of an earlier
time the vehicle of the ideals and sentiment of their own age.
Chrétien’s principal importance, then, lies in the fact that he is
the chief literary exponent of the feudal society of his age. Just
as the Song of Roland and the cycle of William of Orange reflect
the feudal life of the early twelfth century, so Chrétien’s ro-
mances reflect more perfectly than any other works the life of
the aristocratic classes in the later twelfth century.

Now, before illustrating somewhat more in detail by reference
to the specific works the observations we have just made with
regard to Chretien’s development and his shaping of the Arthu-
rian theme, we should recall briefly what were the distinctive
ideals of this society: Chrétien himself during the period of his
literary activity was connected mainly with the court of Marie,
Countess of Champagne, whose father was Louis VII of France
and whose mother was Eleanor of Poitiers, the latter (the Eleanor
of Shakespeare’s King John) being successively the wife of Louis
VII of France and Henry II of England. At a later period he
found a patron in Philip of Alsace, Count of Flanders. The dif-
Chretien de Troyes and his Successors 105


ference between the ideals of the society of such a court as Marie’s
in the second half of the twelfth century and those of the earlier’
time represented by the chansons de geste is connected, above all,
with the improved position of women. This accords with the gene-
ral advance of civilization from the unrestricted reign of physical
force in the earlier Middle Ages and is manifest even in the
political arrangements of the time, since women were now permitted
to inherit the great fiefs. The centre from which this move-
ment radiated was the south of France — the land of Eleanor of
Poitiers and the land where all ideas of social and intellectual
liberty had so far received their highest development. The love
lyrics of Provence show the growing idealization of woman, and
the conception of the amour courtois 1s the product of this ideali-
zation.

The starting-point of this idealization, to be sure, was earthy
enough in its nature — for it was, first of all, the motive of self-
advancement that prompted these Provencal singers — the trou-
badours, as they are called — to confer a poetic exaltatgon on the
wives and daughters of the great barons of the South, and where
panegyric passed, apparently, into love-poetry, the love was, in
the vast majority of instances, a pure fiction,® just as in the
case of the amorous effusions with which the Elizabethan poets
were accustomed. to tickle the vanity of their Virgin Queen. But
the very unreality of the theme of the troubadours, who, as a rule,
were separated by a social gulf from the objects of their pretended
adoration, drove these poets within themselves to an idealization
of the persons addressed.2 For the poet who found himself in


® On the origins of the amour courtois (Middle High German
Minne) cp. E. Wechssler’s “Frauendienst und Vassalitat”, Zs. f. fre.
Spr. u. Litt., XXIV", 158ff., and, above all, his Das Kulturproblem
des Minnesangs: Band I, Minnesang und Christentum, Halle, 1909
— also K. Heyl: Die Theorie der Minne in den dltesten Minne-
romanen Frankreichs: Marburger Beitrdége zur romanischen Philo-
logie, IV (Marburg, 1911), and T. F. Crane, Italian Social Customs
in the Sixteenth Century and ther influence on the literatures of
Europe, ch. 1 (New Haven, 1920).

° Cp. Wechssler’s book, pp. 219ff. As appears from this same
work, there were other Christian elements that helped to shape the
106 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


this attitude of inward contemplation the doors were thrown wide
open to the spirit of mysticism which was at that time coloring
contemporary thought in all its higher forms and which, through
St. Bernard of Clairvaux and his fellows, in the same century,
had already imparted a new life to the Church. Thus woman
who had been, in the beginning of the Provencal lyric, merely the
object of a rhetorical lip-service, became in the course of its devel-
opment the object of a cult, which varied in genuineness according
to the spiritual capacity of the individual singer. As all stu-
dents of literature know, this half mystic and half philosophical
conception of woman and love passed from Provence into Italy
and after being still further developed there by Guido Guini-
celli and other Italian poets, attained immortal expression in
Dante’s idealization of Beatrice Portinari in the Vita Nuova and
Divina Commedia. For the great mass of noblemen and noble
ladies, as well as writers, however, these conceptions remained,
no doubt, merely a convention which they adopted for the sake
of fashion or amusement, but. they, at least, pretended to take
them seriously, and so from about the middle of the twelfth cen-
tury the duties of the lover towards his mistress amount to a com-
plicated code!® — a code which was perhaps not very strictly
conformed to in real life, but which at least expressed an ideal.

Chrétien’s patroness, Marie de Champagne, as is evident from


conception of the amour courtois — the worship of saints, the doctrine
of Charitas, the methods of scholastic philosophy — but mysticism
was much the most powerful single influence. Contrary, however, to
the view which has been often expressed, Wechssler points out, pp.
434 ff., that the worship of the Virgin Mary (mariolatry) was a con-
sequence, not a cause, of the cult of woman that was developed in
Provence. It does not arise until about the end of the twelfth century.

© Cp. especially, the one embodied in Andreas Capellanus’s De
Amore Libri Tres, edited by E. Trojel (Copenhagen, 1892). Andreas
was for a time, at least, in the service of Marie de Champagne, and
composed his treatise apparently before 1196.

It is improbable that there were ever any serious “courts of love”
(to decide points that might arise in the relations of lovers). On the
whole subject, cp. W. A. Neilson, “The Origins and Sources of the
Courts of Love”, Harvard Studies and Notes in Philology and Lite-
rature, VI (Boston, 1899) and Crane, op. cit., ch. 1.
Chrétien de Troyes and his Successors 107


the poet’s own statement in his Lancelot, played an important
part in the development of the literary tradition relating to these
things and his work is the very highest expression of such ideals.
In contrast with the chansons de geste, pictures of courtesy and
refinement of manners, still more than in the romances of anti-
quity, constitute one of the main sources of interest of the narra-
tive and much space is given to the functions, the feasts and
festivities, where these traits are exhibited or developed. Even
fighting appears in a more civilized aspect. The tourney, with
its formal regulations, takes the place of the rude combats of the
chansons de geste and the somewhat similar descriptions in the
romances of antiquity, and the valor of the knight is now mainly
employed in the succor of distressed women. The whole modern
conception of the relation of the sexes finds here its beginnings.
An advance towards these conceptions, to be sure, had already.
been made in the romances of antiquity, and there can be little
doubt that both in respect to form and sentiment these works —
particularly the Thébes and the Eneas1! — were the true pre-
cursors and, in a large measure, the models of Chrétien’s romances.


** Both were probably composed in the fifties of the twelfth
century. On the relative date of the Hneas see, last, Faral, pp. 169 fi.
There are the beginnings of a spirit of courtesy in the fragmentary
Latin poem, Ruodlieb, (edited by F. Seiler as Der dilteste Roman
des Mittelalters, Halle, 1882), which has usually been regarded as
of German origin (near Tegernsee) and dated about 1030, but which
M. Wilmotte, “Rodlieb, notre premier roman courtois’, Romania, XLIV,
373 ff. (1916—1917), now assigns to Northeastern Gaul (valley of the
Meuse, between Liege and Namur) and the early twelfth century. The
author is not so much interested in combats as in the manners, diver-
sions, decorations, etc., of aristocratic society. Wilmotte sees in all
this an early independent development in the North in the direction
of the romances of antiquity and Chrétien. Wechssler, Sage vom
heiligen Gral, p. 139 (Halle, 1898) and Problem des Minnesangs,
p- 30 (Halle, 1911) had already mentioned Ruodlieb in this connection,
but had distinguished between the pictures of courtly life here and
the special ideal of courtesy which we find in the romances and which
he derives, I believe, justly from Southern France. In any event,
there is no evidence that the Ruodiveb exercised any influence on
subsequent poetry.
108 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


It is important to recollect these distinctive traits of French
feudal society in the latter part of the twelfth century when we
come to consider the element of originality in Chretien’s works —
when we come to determine what is Celtic in incident or manners
in his poems and what is possibly of his own invention or at
any rate of non-Celtic origin in these works. A greater contrast
with the position and character of woman as depicted in these
romances than that which is furnished by the Celtic sagas could
hardly be imagined.!2 In the latter we have a conception of
woman which is inferior not only to that of the Arthurian ro-
mances, but to that of the sagas of any other branch of the Indo-
European races, even the earliest in date. The Irish heroines have
strength and stature, but the abundant examples which Professor
Zimmer has adduced from the Cuchulinn sagas amply justify the
term gemein (“‘low-down’’) with which he stigmatizes these women.
Indeed, the exploits of some of the most famous of them, like
Medbh, wife of King Auilill of Connaught, do not bear repetition
in modern polite society.

Let us turn now to Chrétien’s romances themselves. Of the
romances which have come down to us the earliest is Hrec. The
Welsh tale of Geraint and Enid, which corresponds to Chrétien’s


** Alfred Nutt, The influence of Celtic on Mediaeval Romance
(London, 1904), and! others, to be sure, have tried to establish the
existence of chivalrous feeling towards the weaker sex in these sagas —,
for instance, in that of Deirdre, the great heroine of Irish legend —, but,
as it appears to me, without success. I will refer the reader for the
proof of the contrary to the remarkable paper by the late Professor
Zimmer, published after his death in the Sitzwngsberichte der kénig-
lichen preuffischen Akademie der Wissenschaften. Philosophisch-
Historische Classe, 1911, IX, 174 ff. entitled Der Kulturhistorische
Hintergrund in der altirischen Heldensage.

** J. Vendryes, Revue Celtique, XXXII, 232 ff. (1911) in his
review of Zimmer’s paper, has tried, to be sure, to show that the in-
ferences of the German scholar are unjust. J. Loth, too, has objected,
ibid., XXXIII, 260, note (1912), that we might as well judge the manners
and morals of the women of early Greece from the conduct of the
Homeric goddesses. But there is no such vulgar abandon in the case
of these goddesses.
Chretien de Troyes and his Successors 109.


poem, is, doubtless, derived directly from the latter!* and not
vice versa, but evidence of Celtic elements in the Erec, itself,
are not lacking. To begin with, the name Hrec is Celtic, being an
alteration of Breton Weroc.5 The same seems true of some of
the other principal names in the poem: Eurain, Mabonagrain, etc.
Take, moreover, the episode (11. 5461ff.) known as the Joie de
la Cour:'* There is an enchanted garden next to the palace of
King Eurain. It is enclosed with a wall of air, which is, never-
theless, just as effective as a wall of iron, so that no one can enter
it save by the will of the possessor. To overcome this enchantment
now is the task of Erec. Stakes with human heads crowning them
at the entrance of the garden confirm the warnings which the
hero has received from Eurain and his companions against under-
taking the adventure. In the garden under a sycamore he comes
upon a beautiful girl reclining on a silver couch; but just at this
moment the girl’s lover appears — Mabonagrain, a giant knight —
and threatens him. A combat follows in which Erec, of course,
vanquishes his opponent and thereby dispels the enchantment of
the garden. It turns out that Mabonagrain had promised his dam-
sel that he would never leave the garden until he had been van-
quished in combat.

Now Celtic parallels seem to establish the Celtic origin of
the episode.1? Similarly, the custom of hunting the white stag

*“ Cp. Part. IV, below.

** Cp. G. Paris, Romania, XX, 166, note 1 (1881), and J. Loth,
Revue Celtique, XII, 482 ff. (1892), who prove that Zimmer’s deri-
vation, Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt., XII? 26ff., is wrong.

** F. Lot, Romania, XXIV, 321ff. (1895). Evrain is a mistake
for Huuain (i. e. Owen). Mabonograin is a combination of Mabon
and Evrain — names of two magicians in the Bel Inconnu. Cp.,
too, E. Philipot, “Un episode d’Erec et Enide, la Joie de la Cour”,
Romania, XXV, 258ff. (1896) and W. H. Schofield, Studies in the
Iibeaus Desconus, pp. 124 ff.

** Cp. the examples of “druidic mist’ (walls of air from which
there is no exit) cited from Celtic stories by Miss Paton, Fairy Mytho-
logy, p. 84, note 3. Foerster, Hrec*, p. XXIII (Halle, 1909), on the
other hand, maintains that we have here merely a variant of the
marchenmotiv diffused all over the continent of Europe of the deliverance
of a maiden held in captivity by a giant. According to Foerster,
Chrétien again used this motif in the Yvain.
110 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


at the beginning of the romance reminds one irresistibly of the
marvellous white doe in Guigemar, which, as we have seen, is,
no doubt, of Celtic origin. On the other hand, the principal motif
of the poem, the Verliegen (to use a convenient German term)
of the hero — that is, the way in which, through uxoriousness,
Erec neglects deeds of valor and gives himself up to love, so that
his decline in knightly prowess becomes a matter of general re-
proach, and, at length, of sorrow, even to the young wife herself —
bears on its face the marks of its French origin. Spurred by the
grief of his wife, the hero, though angry at the implied reproach,
arouses himself from his sloth and redeems his reputation, just
as a young French knight of the twelfth century doubtless would
have done, when touched in the point of honour. The wife en-
dures patiently the tribulations to which his wounded vanity sub-
jects her and in the end her love triumphs — a motsf that recalls
the Patient Griselda of Chaucer’s Clerk’s Tale. There is nothing
Celtic in the conception, and, considering that it is intimately
interwoven with another motif that is manifestly French — namely,
that of Verliegen — there seems to be no reason for ascribing to
it a Celtic origin. The same is true of the sparrow-hawk incident
in the earlier part of the romance, in which the bird 1s the prize
of beauty which each knight endeavors to win for his lady —
also, of the kiss of the most beautiful girl at Arthur’s court,
which is to reward success in the chase of the white stag. These
incidents exhaust the motifs of the romance, for the combats with
robbers and chance knights, like Guivret le Petit, of which there
are many, have no significance.

If the above outline of the sources of Erec et Enide is correct,
the poem owes little, after all, to Celtic models. It is merely the
Arthurian setting, the nomenclature, the Jove de la Cour episode,
and a detail here and there that we may ascribe to this origin,
The novelty consists in the happy selection of incidents, in the
elegance of style, in the idealized pictures of chivalry, with its
refinement of manners and its courage enlisted in the service of
beauty. But just as the direction of Shakespeare’s art at the
beginning of his career is determined in a considerable measure
by Marlowe and Lyly, so Chrétien, too, has had his precursors —
Chrétien de Troyes and his Successors 111


in the authors of the romances on subjects of classical antiquity,
as we have already said, the Roman d’ Alexandre, Roman de
Thébes, Eneas, Roman de Troie. The dates of these works are not
fixed precisely, but there can be no reasonable doubt that the
composition of the last three fell within the ten or fifteen years
preceding the composition of Hrec. In this group of romances
we already have the effort to depict the new ideals of courtesy
and chivalry, so that Eneas and Dido, Achilles and Polyxena, are
twelfth century knights and ladies. One can observe the influence
of these works on Chrétien even in matters of phrasing and tech-
nique,!8 and besides, the length of his romances was, no doubt,
approximately determined by the example of the Thebes and Eneas.
But since, in questions of art, sentiment, form, and style are even
more important than subject-matter, it is, after all, the debt of the
French poet to these predecessors rather than his meagre and un-
_ certain borrowings from Celtic tradition that needs to be emphasi-
zed. The full force of these models — the romances of antiquity —
did not make itself felt, however, in the EHrec. As far as the
refinements of life are concerned — rich and brilliant externals,
careful etiquette and polished manners — these are already given
prominence in Chrétien’s first extant romance; but he has not
yet accepted love as the all-dominating factor in human life, in
the spirit of the amour courtois, which had already touched the
Eneas and Trove, in particular. In his subsequent romances this
fashionable conception of the relations of the sexes — doubtless
through the influence of his patroness — was destined to impose


** This has been convincingly set forth by M. Wilmotte, L’évo-
lution du roman francais aux environs de 1150, Brussels, 1908,
and F. M. Warren, “Some Features of Style in Early French Narrative
Poetry’, MPh., II, 179ff. (1905), 513 ff. (1906). IV, 655 ff. (1907).

For the general influence of the romances of antiquity on sub-
sequent literature, including Chrétien, see, besides Foerster’s Chrétien
Worterbuch, pp. 33ff., and Faral’s oft-quoted book, the following
Gottingen dissertations: R. Witte: Der Einfluf von Benoits Roman
de Trove auf die altfranzésische Literatur (1904), A. DreBler, Der
Einfluf des altfranzésischen Eneasromanes auf die altfranzésische
Literatur (1907) and G. Otto, Der Einfluf des Roman de Thebes
auf dte altfranzésische Literatur (1909).
112 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


itself upon the different love-stories that he dealt with, until in
the Perceval he set his hero a new aim, and sexual passion, now
subordinate in his scheme, strips itself again of ephemeral con-
ventions.19

Let us examine now the manner in which Chrétien composed
his romances.?°

The plan and the main idea of each romance are his own.
He makes up his narrative by combining motifs which he derived
from earlier sources, in-some instances, using episodes drawn from
such sources to embellish or lengthen out the story which is the
basis of his work. One may question whether a single fundamen-
tal idea®! runs through the whole of the Hrec or the Yvain or
the Perceval, but otherwise the above is, probably, an accurate
statement of the manner in which these works were composed.


*9 Myrrha Borodine (now Mme. Lot-Borodine) in her important
study, La femme et l'amour au XIle siécle d’aprés les poémes de
Chrétien de Troyes, (Paris, 1909) distinguishes three stages in Chrétien's
development in his treatment of love: 1. Hrec: the ideal of active
knighthood (Videal chevaleresque) is stronger than love. 2. Cliges,
Lancelot, Yvain: love is the sovereign power. 3. Perceval: the re-
ligious ideal is stronger than-love. If one~remembers ‘that . Chrétien’s
religious feeling had no great depth, these divisions may be accepted
as valid.

Foerster, Chrétien WB, p. 55*, has observed that the Hrec
resembles the chansons de geste not only in the view of woman’s
subordination to man, but in literary technique and in its outbreak
against the contewrs — moreover, that it contains a number of allusions
to various heroes of these works.

*° The views on this subject: which I adopt in this place are,
in the main, those of W. Foerster, Yvain, pp. XXIff. (Halle, 1913).

** Grundidee is Foerster’s word. He regards Chrétien’s ro-
mances as Thesenromane. . Cp. Chrétien Wérterbuch, pp. 43°* ff.
Foerster, moreover, minimizes, perhaps, even more than is due the
Celtic element in the poet’s works. To be sure, in my opinion, there
is no reason to believe that this element was at all large. For an
argument — in the main, correct — to the effect that Chrétien’s
object in composing his romances was to interest by his narrative,
not to illustrate a thesis, see W. Kiichler, ,,Uber den sentimentalen Ge-
halt der Haupthandlung in Crestien’s Hrec und Ivain’, Zs. f. rom.
Ph., XL, 83 ff. (1919).
Chrétien de Troyes and his Successors 113


That this was the mode of their composition, indeed, seems
clear from the next of the series — namely, the Cliges, for here
the principal element in the story is a familiar one and we can
observe how the poet has united it with other material in order
to secure the requisite length for his work. To elucidate his method,
it will be necessary to outline briefly the narrative of the ro-
mance. The poem falls into two unequal divisions: 1. The story
of the hero’s parents. 2. The hero’s own story. It contains 6784
lines, of which 2382 are given to the story of the parents, the
remainder to the hero’s, except about 300 lines, which serve as
a connecting link between the two. As said above, it is generally
agreed that no part of this romance has any genuine connection
with the matiére de Bretagne and the Arthurian affiliation which
Chretien gives it is of the most artificial kind. First as to the
story of the parents: The father, Alexander, is a prince of Con-
stantinople, who, on account of Arthur’s fame, journeys to Bri-
tain to receive from the great king the order of knighthood. Ar-
thur goes to Brittany and leaves Count Engres regent of his king-
dom. On the voyage he is accompanied by Alexander and his niece,
Soredamors, who fall in love with one another, but fear to declare
their mutual passion. But Engres, like Mordred in Geoffrey of
Monmouth, from whom he is evidently imitated,?? endeavors to
seize the kingdom in Arthur’s absence, so that Arthur is compelled
to return. He besieges the faithless Engres at Windsor. Finally,
it 1s Alexander who by a ruse gains possession of the castle for
the king. In the meanwhile, he had often been thrown with his
lady-love in the court-circle of Guinevere, who guesses the secret
of the lovers. She brings about the long-delayed declaration, and
they marry. Cliges, the hero of the story, is the fruit of their
union. This ends the first division of the poem, and next comes
the connecting link.

During the absence of Alexander from Constantinople his


** Cp. Bruce’s edition of the Mort Artu, p. 287 (Halle, 1910).
Cp. also, Annette B. Hopkins, The Influence of Wace on the Ar-
thurian Romances of Crestien de Troies, p. 35 (University of
Chicago dissertation, 1913). Curiously, Chrétien does not mention
Mordred directly in any of his works.


Hefperia, Erganzungsreihe: 8. 8
114 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


father, the emperor, has died and a younger son, Alis, has as-
cended the throne, having received false intelligence of his brother’s
death. The latter now comes to Constantinople and makes a com-
pact with Alis by which Alis is to retain the imperial title, but
he is to be the real ruler. Moreover, Alis agrees not to marry,
so that Cliges may inherit the throne. Before his death Cliges’s
father urges his son to test his knighthood at Arthur’s court by
encounters with the best knights there — especially Gawain. Both
father and mother die. Now follows the second and main division
of the poem.

Alis breaks his promise and carries off by force as his bride
Fenice,2= the daughter of the German emperor, who had been
engaged to a Saxon prince. But Fenice and Cliges fall in love
with one another. Fenice appeals for aid to her nurse, Thessala,
who saves her from the consummation of her marriage with Alis
by giving the husband a magic drink that deludes him into belie-
ving that he has consummated it, when he has not. On the way
home Cliges confirms his hold on his lady-love’s affections by
defending her from the Saxon prince who tries to recover his
betrothed.

The hero now carries out his promise to his father by going’
to Arthur’s court and measuring himself there in tourneys with
the greatest knights.24 He distinguishes himself, but love in time
drives him back to Constantinople. Here the lovers again avail
themselves of Thessala’s magic arts, and it is agreed that, to elude
her husband, Fenice is to take a magic potion which will throw
her into a death-like trance. According to their anticipations, she
is carried out as dead to her grave. Certain skilled physicians
from Salerno see through the deceit, but they are slain and the
girl is buried. Her lover evades the watch and brings Fenice into


** This name is, doubtless, Greek Phoinike, although, G. Cohen,
Zs. f. fre. Spr. u. Litt., XXV", 146, derives it from Macedonian
Pherenike (= Berenike). The Greek names in the romance are
classical, rather than Byzantine in origin. Cp. Krumbacher’s com-
munication to Foerster in the latter’s Cliges*, p. XXXVI.

** We have here in the tournament, lasting four days, a variant
of the widespread “three days’ tournament motif”,
Chrétien de Troyes and his Successors 115


a tower, where she is restored to life by her nurse: Here they
live for months tagether. A new trouble, however, awaits them, for
they are detected by a young knight, named Bertram. Nevertheless,
they escape to Arthur’s court, and after a time, on the death of jAlig,
they return to Constantinople and reign there for the rest of their
lives.

The kernel of this romance is the love-affair of Cliges and
Fenice, including the deceits which it involves to defeat the con-
summation of the latter’s marriage with the uncle of Cliges and
to bring about the union of the lovers. All the rest is secondary
and, for the most part, as is obvious, added merely to give variety
to the poem. Now we have here in this main story merely an adap-
tation of the oriental motif of the wife who feigns death in order
to deceive her husband for the sake of her lover.2® In what is,
perhaps, the earliest of its known forms, the Solomon and Marcolf
tale, it is the wife of Solomon who practises the deceit. Though
not of identical origin, the story is similar to that which is fa-
miliar to all the world in Shakespeare’s Romeo and Juliet.

At the beginning of his romance Chrétien tells us that he
derived his story from a book which belonged to the library of
the church of Saint-Pierre de Beauvais. An allusion in the poem
itself shows that he was acquainted with the Solomon and Marcolf
tale, but his version of the motif bears so close a resemblance to
that which is preserved in the thirteenth century prose conti-
nuation of the Seven Sages, called Marque de Rome, that one may
reasonably conclude that the tale which he found in the above-
mentioned book had virtually this form.2¢ The deluding of Alis
by Thessala’s magic drink, however, has no parallel in the oriental


*° Cp. Foerster, Introd. to small Cliges (second ed.), XXXII ff. and
G. Paris, Mélanges, 309 ff.

7° So Foerster, Cliges*, pp. XXXIIff. (as in his previous editions)
and G. Paris Mélanges, p. 312. W. Golther, Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt.,
XII *, 7 (1891) and ibid., XXIV", 7ff. (1902), expresses the opinion
that the passage in the Marque de Rome is derived from Cliges and
not vice versa, but see on this subject Foerster, Cliges’, p. XXXIV
(1910). Besides, in his Tristan und Isolde, p. 213 (Leipzig, 1907)
Golther seems to have retracted his earlier opinion.

8*
116 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


tale. In this we have a motif imported from another source?*?* —
namely, from the old chanson de geste, the Enfances Guillaume,
where the delusion is the effect of sorcery. That the magic drink
should be substituted for the sorcery of the old poem is plainly.
due to the influence of the Tristan story, which was occupying
at this time so large a place in Chrétien’s mind. |


It has been pointed out by Professor Foerster and others”


"7 Op. G. Paris, Mélanges, p. 293.

** Foerster was the first to advance the theory that Cliges was
composed as an Anti-Tristan, viz., in the Introduction to his small
Cliges (1901). He repeated it in subsequent editions. Cp. the third
(final) edition (1910), pp. XLVIff. The theory was accepted by Golther,
Zs. f. fre. Spr. u. Litt., XXIV*, 7 ff. (1902) — see, also, his Tristan
und Isolde, pp. 211ff. (Leipzig, 1907) and A. G. van Hamel, “Cliges
et Tristan”, Romania, XXXIII, 465 ff. (1904). G. Paris also accepted
it, but with the modification indicated in the the text above. See his
fourth Cliges article, Journal des Savants for August, 1902, pp. 442ff.
(in the Mélanges reprint, pp. 288ff.). For a reply to Paris, cp. Foerster,
op. cit., p. LILI, note 2.

In his “Randglossen zum Athisroman”, Zs. f. rom. Ph., XXXVI,
727 ff. (1912), Foerster finds, also, strong resemblances between this
famous tale of friendship (especially, in Part II of the text of the
Tours MS.) and Cliges. He argues that Athis et Prophilias contains
no allusion to Arthur or Tristan, and no marks of the Minne spirit
— hence is older than Cliges. The reasoning, however, to my mind,
is, by no means, conclusive. The omission of allusions to Arthur and
Tristan is not surprising in a romance based on Oriental materials,
and, as a matter of fact, many passages in the romance betray the
new Minne ideal, e.g. 11. 2805ff. (Athis and Gaite fall in love
with each other), 3360ff. (Athis’s monologue on his love-sickness).
Cp. A. Hilka’s edition, I, 99, 118 (Dresden, 1912). — Op. cit., p. 736,
Foerster thinks that Chrétien’s Perceval, 1. 9336 (Baist’s edition, 1.
7926) shows, also, the influence of Athis et Prophilias, 11. 2936 ff.
In each we have a discourse extending through several lines on the
necessity of being on one’s guard against catching cold after overheating.
Prophilias thinks that Athis, owing to his neglect of the requisite
precautions in such cases, has taken cold and is “sanmellez’’, and the
girl in the Perceval warns Gawain, “Que maint an sanc meslé an
sont’, from the same cause. Foerster declares that he knows of no
other parallel to these passages in Old French literature and that only
in the Athis and Prophilias passage is the meaning of sanmellez
(sanc mesle) clear. The two passages are certainly very similar, but,
Chrétien de Troyes and his Successors 117


that the whole character of the Cliges, indeed, was determined by
the lost Tristan poem. Not only have we here the introductory ro-
mance of the hero’s parents told in full, but the whole poem may
be regarded as an Anti-Tristan, or, in any event, as a pendant of
Tristan.2® The manner in which Iseult in the older story yields
herself to the embraces of two men, her husband and her lover,
was shocking to the sentiment of the cultivated, though immoral,
society for which the poet was writing, so that the Cliges was
manifestly composed by way of polemic against the coarser views
of love which underlay that romance. It is hardly correct to as-
sume” that our poet is here adopting the bourgeois ideal, which
permits the union of lovers only through the marriage ceremony.
Such an ideal would have had but little attraction for Chrétien’s
aristocratic patrons of the twelfth century*! — either women or
men — and, besides, the deceit which Fenice practised on Alis,
her legitimate husband, and her subsequent conduct are little con-


apart from the unsettled relative date of the two romances, the simi-
larity may be due to the fact that both authors drew independently
from contemporary notions concerning the physiological process in
such attacks.

In his [/évolution du roman francais aux environs de 1150,
p. 345, M. Wilmotte states that Cliges was composed manifestly under
the influence of Gautier d’Arras’s Eracle, which, like Foerster, he dates
(p. 337) 1164. He even lists pp. 351 ff. (including notes) a number
of verbal coincidences in which, as he thinks, Cliges shows the in-
finence of Kracle. It is difficult to say how far their common classical
sources account for the resemblances of situation and of phrasing, but
Wilmotte’s argument is plausible. — W. M. Stevenson assumes in his
Der Einflu8 des Gautier d Arras auf die altfranzésische Kunst-
epik, insbesondere auf den Abenteuerroman, p. 102 (Gottingen diss.
1910), that Gautier and Chrétien mutually influenced each other. This
seems very likely.

*° This last is the opinion of G. Paris, Mélanges, p. 293.

*° So Foerster, Cliges*, pp. XXIXff.

_ *? Andreas Capellanus ascribes! to Chrétien’s patroness, Marie de
Champagne, the sentiment “Amorem non posse suas inter duos conjugales
extendere vires’, (Trojel’s edition, p. 133). We know, too, from the
author of the Kracle that she suggested to him the story of Athenais’s
adultery in Part I of that romance.
118 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


sonant with such an ideal. To be sure, the heroine frequently
expresses a horror of being associated in the minds of the people
with Iseult. She exhibits, however, no repulsion for Iseult’s sin,
but merely for the evil reputation which the detection of her guilt
had given the latter throughout the world.*

This main story Chrétien has complicated and retarded by
the episode of the hero’s visit to Arthur’s court, the most interesting
feature of which is the well-known Three Tournament motif where
the knight, incognito, wins the tournament on three successive
days, appearing each day in a new colour — red, white, and black
— still further, by the final episode, borrowed from the Tristan,
in which Bertram detects the lovers together in an orchard — an
incident which is common in tales of Eastern origin.

No less important, however, for an insight into our poet’s
methods of composition is the first division of the Cliges — the
story of the love of the hero’s parents. As already observed, it
was obviously suggested by the corresponding division of Chré-
tien’s Tristan original — the story of the love of Rivalin and
Blanchefleur, the parents of Tristan; but the correspondence does
not extend to details — at least, to the more important features.
Paris has justly noted the inferiority of the imitation to the ori-
ginal in the essential matter of its connection with the main theme
of the romance. The whole life of Tristan is determined by the
tragical fate of Rivalin and Blanchefleur, whereas there is no
such relation between the stories of Cliges and his parents. In
this the Cliges, then, exhibits a manifest want of unity.

Altogether the connection between the first and second di-
vision of the narrative is full of blunders in composition.*® But
the first division is, itself, also composite. For the rest, this first
division contains a rather commonplace story of love between two
young people of high rank. Doubtless, the fact that their love-
affair begins at sea is a pale reflection of the same feature of
the Tristan romance with the love potion left out; and similarly
with some other features. The whole story, however, such as it


** So G. Paris, loc. cit.
** G. Paris has enumerated them, Mélanges, p, 285.
Chrétien de Troyes and his Successors 119


is, is interwoven with a supposed episode in Arthur’s career, ac-
cording to which the king goes abroad, appoints a regent in his
absence, but is compelled to return, because of the treachery of
this regent. There is an incident somewhat like this in the Tristan
story, but, as I have noted above, there can be little doubt that
the real original which Chrétien here had in mind was Mordred’s
treachery to Arthur, under similar circumstances, as related in
Geoffrey of Monmouth’s Historia and Wace’s Brut. Apart from
the incidents, the monologues on the subject of love constitute
a marked feature of this first division of the Cliges, but these,
too, have their originals; they were suggested by the monologues
of the Roman de Troie and Eneas — especially the latter — and
are ultimately descended from Ovid and Virgil’ — for example,
the monologues of Byblis and Myrrha in the Metamorphoses and
Dido’s speeches in the Aeneid, which, of course Chrétien also knew
at first hand.®%

It will be observed that virtually every incident even of this
first division of the poem can be traced to its source. It approaches,
however, close to invention — certainly as near to invention as we
can expect of a poet of the Middle Ages or of most poets of
modern times — that is to say, Chrétien, has taken widely sepa-
rated details and brought them into a new combination, so as to
produce the effect of originality. That the total impression in
this case is not particularly striking is due to the fact that the


** Cp., especially, E. Faral: Recherches sur les sources latines
des contes et romans courtois du moyen age, pp. 73 ff. (Paris, 1913).


*° The Greek names of certain characters have led some scholars
to imagine that Chrétien used a lost Greek source for this division
of his romance. Cp. E. Herzog, Literaturblatt, XXV, 19 (1904).
But these names, insofar as they are genuine. are derived from Ovid
and the Old French romances of antiquity. Cp. Foerster’s Cliges’,
p. XXXVIII (Halle, 1910). In his “Byzantinisch-Geschichtliches im
Cliges und Yvain”’, Zs. f. rom. Ph., XXXII, 400ff. (1908), F. Sette-
gast sees in the Byzantine element of Cliges a reflex of the history
of the Byzantine emperor Isaac I (1057—1059) and, especially, of his
two nephews, Isaac and Alexios I. The latter reigned 1081—1118
and was well-known in the West, because of his relations to the First
Crusade. On this fanciful hypothesis see Foerster, op. cit., pp. XXXVIf.
120 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


elements combined do not individually possess any especial in-
terest — far less, for instance, than attaches to the ancient story
that underlies the second division.

It cannot be too strongly emphasized that the Cliges con-
stitutes the proper starting-point for any study of Chrétien’s rela-
tion to his sources.26 We can analyze with certainty his prin-
ciples of composition in the case of this poem, whose sources can
be fixed, one may say, even in the minutest details. Now we
may be reasonably sure that these principles were essentially the
- same in the poems whose sources we are unable to fix — at any rate,
so exactly. And this is substantially true, whether we assume
his originals to have been mainly Celtic or not. The analogy of
Cliges then certainly tells against the theory®? as to a uniform
Celtic tale’s forming the basis of the Yvain. The narrative of
that romance is also obviously a composite one and it is impos-
sible to fit it into the scheme of some hypothetical Irish analogue.

We have already considered the question of the sources of
the Yvaim in another connection and the same question in the
case of the Lancelot and Perceval will be dealt with when we come
to trace the history of these heroes in romance. In general, it is
sufficient to say here that the sources are, in each instance, com-
posite and that the writer exercises a certain amount of invention
in combining originally disparate elements — moreover, that these
elements are only partly Celtic.

Taken altogether, Chrétien is undoubtedly the best of the
French authors of. metrical romances that deal with the matiére


** This has been stressed by A. G. van Hamel, Romania, XXXII,
486 (1904), and in his “Bydrage tot de vergelijking van Cliges en
Tristan”, Taal en Letteren, XIV, 193ff. (Leiden, 1904) — especially,
p. 211. On the other hand, Nitze, Romania, XLIV, 33 (1915) ob-
jects that what is true of Cliges is not necessarily true of the rest
— especially, since Cliges is a combination of an Oriental tale with
an Arthurian theme, as the others are not. The last point, at least,
however, is of no weight, for, as Faral, pp. 418f., has observed, the
division of the romances into four groups according to their subject-
matter is largely artificial.

*7 A. C. L. Brown, “The Knight of the Lion”, PMLA. XX,
673 ff. (1905).
Chrétsen de Troyes and his Successors 121


de Bretagne. In saying this, however, we are making an acknow-
ledgement of the limitations of what was achieved in this genre
— at least, in France; for in the works of this writer there is
no question of the higher imagination, of philosophical insight
into the riddles of existence, of ‘‘the dower of spanning wisdom”,
with regard to either character or the conduct of life, or of the
magic of diction and phrase, which have distinguished the represen-
tative poets of many other ages. His imagery is confined to a few
similes — the majority of which are of a purely conventional
kind — and to a restricted, though somewhat richer, store of
metaphor. His “criticism of life’ is merely that of a shrewd,
alert, man of the world of his time. He was quite contented with
the feudal society in which he moved and he delighted in the
bustle and splendor of its festivities, its pageantry, and its tourna-
ments. Within the bounds of this society, apart from the externals
just mentioned, the code of chivalry and the problems of the rela-
tions of the sexes — the latter especially in the new form which
these problems had assumed under the system of the amour cour-
tois — were the things that most attracted him. Moreover, living
in a naive age, when in the elementary interests and emotions the
grown man was nearer to the child than at present, he was keenly
susceptible to the spell of the marvellous, as were his contempo-
raries generally. Consequently, the setting which he gives to the
life of chivalry and to his solution of the above-mentioned pro-
blems is taken largely from the folk-tales of Celtic regions and of
the Orient, where such fancies most abounded, with occasional
admixture of classical motifs. In the case of the Perceval, per-
haps, he did not understand the full significance of the materials
that he drew from his sources, but, in general, the combination of
the various elements of content and setting in his poems produces
on the reader an effect of harmonious unity, and the creation of
this new world in which mediaeval barons and ladies jostle fairies
and even stranger Otherworld figures is no mean achievement.


Since love is the dominant theme of Chrétien’s romances,
it is natural that he should display most knowledge of the human
heart in his characterizations of women. We are wearied occasion-
ally, it is true, with the hair-splitting analyses of amorous emo-
122 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


tions in the lovers’ soliloquies of his romances and with the conceits
which such analyses engender, but the patient loyalty of Enid, the
sovereign haughtiness of Guinevere and the piquant fickleness of
Laudine in their relations with their lovers or husbands are depic-
ted with much truth to nature and with no little charm, and,
in the last-named case, also, with an effective touch of malice.

It is particularly however, as a born conteur that Chrétien
can claim a notable place among the poets of the Middle Ages. In
telling a story his sparkling vivacity never fails him, and, as a
German critic has happily said, he makes the impression of a
juggler who can shake couplets out of his sleeve as long as he
pleases. .He, himself, thoroughly enjoys telling his tale and his
enjoyment is consequently contagious. We have seen above that
his work is marred in some instances by serious faults of construc-
tion; but the same thing is true of Marmion and Rokeby — yet,
in spite of these defects, Scott is, perhaps, our greatest English
master of narrative poetry. Chrétien, of course, paints on no such
broad canvases and with no such variety of poetical resources as
the nineteenth century writer. With greater vividness and agré-
ment, nevertheless, than any other poet of the Middle Ages, he has
preserved for us, at least, the outward lineaments of the society
which Scott idealized. After all, however, his most memorable
services to the great cause of poetry, perhaps, were in stimulating
immeasurably the imagination of his contemporaries — for the vast
forest of mediaeval Arthurian romance sprang mainly from the
seeds of his sowing — and in enriching the whole poetic tradition
of Europe with new and beautiful themes on which greater men
than himself have exercised their genius, from the age immediately
succeeding his own down to that of Tennyson and Wagner.

During the life-time of Chrétien there were other romance-
writers like Gautier d’Arras, author of Eracle and Ille and Galeron,
which, though similar in the most essential respects, cannot be
classed as Arthurian romances, inasmuch as Arthur and his knights
do not figure in them. No one, however, but Chrétien, during
these years, as far as the extant works show, made it his object
to embody the ideals of contemporary feudal society in romances
connected with Arthur.*® Thomas’s Tristan was written about
Chrétien de Troyes and his Successors 123


1170 and those critics are probably right who see in it here and;
there the influence of Chrétien rather than vice versa,®® but, apart
from its dependence on the lost Tristan romance, the spirit of this
work is somewhat different from Chrétien’s. The new ideals of
chivalry occupy here a subordinate place in comparison with the
passion of the lovers and the subterfuges to which they resort
in the fulfilment of that passion. The Béroul Tristan fragments
are, at least in the main, later than Chrétien, but they belong, be-
sides, to the tradition of the popular minstrels and are on a diffe-
rent level from the poems we are dealing with.


It may be that the supremacy of Chrétien during his life-
time deterred others from trying their hand in a genre which he
had made his own. In any event, he was the object of admiration
for the generations that immediately succeeded him. The fre-
quent allusions to his works prove this, but even more decisively
the variety of influences which they exercised on subsequent lite-
rature. In the first place, we have from the closing years of the
twelfth century and the first part of the thirteenth many bio-
graphical and episodical romances which continue the genre. So,
for instance, Li Biaus Descouneus (Le Bel Inconnu)* by Renaud
de Beaujeu, on the theme which has also been treated in the middle
English romance, Libeaus Desconus — itself based, of course, on
some lost French original — that is to say, the theme of the un-
known young knight who claims the first adventure after his arri-
val at Arthur’s court, astonishes the girl whose champion he has
been made by his acts of prowess, visits the fairy isle, L’Ille d’Or,
resists its temptations and abolishes its bad customs, delivers the
enchanted princess who has been turned into a serpent by venturing
the fier baiser (dangerous kiss). Similar are the works of Raoul
de Houdenc, at the beginning of the thirteenth century, which show,


*° On the probable mutual influence which Chrétien and Gautier
exerted upon each other, cp. p. 117 note 28 above.

°° Cp. M. Wilmotte, L’évolution du roman frangais, p. 67,
and Foerster, Chrétien WB, pp. 65*f., as against G. Paris, Mélanges,
p. 282.

*° For editions of this and the other metrical romances mentioned
in this chapter, cp. the Bibliography at the end of the present work.
124 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


to a marked degree, the influence of his great predecessor — the
Meraugis de Portlesguez, where the heroine, Lidoine, exemplifies
the idea that courtesy — the perfection of courtly breeding — is
superior to mere beauty, and the Vengeance de Raguidel, which re-
counts the vengeance that Gawain took for a knight named Ra-
guidel, who was slain before the action of the romance begins.
These are only a few of those that have survived. The list drawn
up by Gaston Paris‘! includes thirty-seven romances, and some
additional ones have come to light since the publication of his
treatise. Even now (1921) one of the very best of Paris’s list
remains unedited — namely, Gliglois. And so the Arthurian me-
trical romance drags on into the fourteenth century until it ex-
pires with the Meliador of Froissart in the second half of that
century.”


The influence of this product of French genius outside of
France is well-known to all the world. In Germany, before the
end of the twelfth century, we have in the Lanzelet of Ulrich von
Zatzikhoven an adaptation from a French romance, and, about
the same time, the Erec and Iwein of Hartmann von der Aue —
paraphrased, of course, from Chrétien’s romances of the same names.
Then come Gottfried von Strassburg’s adaptation of Thomas’s
Tristan and Wolfram von Eschenbach’s Parzival, based, according
to his own statement, on the work of an enigmatical Kyot — a
French poet, of course. Both of these illustrious writers belong
to the early thirteenth century and there are others less illustrious
of the same nation who about the same time drew likewise from
the vast store-house of the French metrical romances. Especially
to be noted is Heinrich von der Tiirlin (about 1220) whose Créne
preserves in German dress much lost French material which we
know only from this poem. The same thing is true of the vast


*! At the beginning of the Histoire littéraire de la France,
XXX (1888).

“* For references to Arthur in works outside of the Arthurian
romances, cp. F. L. Critchlow, “Arthur in Old French Poetry not of
the Breton Cycle’, MPh., VI, 477ff. (1909). The author’s list,
however, is by no means exhaustive. For analyses of these romances
see Part V, below.
Chrétien de Troyes and his Successors 125


thirteenth century Dutch compilation in short-rhymed couplets
called the Lancelot.4s Its 87000 lines (and somewhat more) em-
braces, besides large portions of the prose-romances of the Ar-
thurian cycle, more than one metrical romance which in its original
French form has perished.


Owing to the special conditions which prevailed in England
after the Norman Conquest, when the language of the patron-class
was for many generations French, the English were slow in adap-
ting in their language these most characteristic reflections of the
life of the ruling classes in the Middle Ages. As long as the
language of those classes was French, there was, of course, no
incentive to produce English versions of the French originals, and
when at last there was such an incentive in the growing decline
of French in familiar use among the upper classes, these poems
belonged to a past age and no longer represented, at least with
such perfection, the spirit of contemporary society. Perhaps, this
may account in part, at least, for the fact that the Middle English
romances, on the whole, are inferior to German production in the
same genre; for the latter, it will be recalled, fell at the end of
the twelfth century and beginning of the thirteenth — that is
to say, it was coincident with all but the first period of production
in France itself and so was a vivid representation of actual con-
temporary ideals. It is significant that the best English Arthu-
rian romances — those which seem addressed to the more cultured
classes and not to rude popular audiences — belong to the north —
the most backward part of the kingdom, where the old feudal
ideals and the literary tastes corresponding were least changed.
To this region belongs the gem of the English romances, Sty
Gawain and the Green Knight, which was composed about the
middle of the fourteenth century — at a time when the metrical
romance on the continent was utterly decadent. Notwithstanding
the impression of uncouthness which Middle English alliteration
always makes on the modern reader, this romance, by the general
verdict, belongs among the best productions of the Arthurian muse


‘* Edited by W. J. A. Jonckbloet, 2 vols. (The Hague, 1846
— 1849).
126 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


in the Middle Ages. It is safe to say, too, that although derived
from a lost French original, it contains a larger share of origi-
nal invention than is the case with any other English specimen
of the genre. A similar vigor and a similar uncouthness mark
the alliterative Morte Arthure, which was produced in the same
general region. It is a pity that the large proportion of words
of French and Scandinavian origin in this romance and in Sir
Gawain and the Green Knight that time has rendered obsolete
should have rendered these fine poems sealed books to all but pro-
fessional students at the present day. |

The earliest Middle English metrical romance that has come
down to us is the King Horn, which dates from the middle of
the thirteenth century, and the earliest Middle English metrical
romance connected with the Arthurian cycle is the Sir Tristrem
which belongs to the close of that century. The latter is a rude
poem in stanzas of eleven lines and .it was composed in the North-
west of Midland England. It is based on Thomas’s Tristan, but,
like virtually all the Middle English romances, whether Arthurian
or not, it condenses the original. The English audiences of the
time were evidently unequal to the task of appreciating the re-
finements of the French romances and the poets themselves stood
on a lower level of culture than the authors of their originals.‘

To the following century, however, — the fourteenth — be-
long the great bulk of the English metrical romances, including
those with Arthurian connections. One of the most important
of these, the alliterative Morte Arthure, which is often assigned
to the Scottish knight, Huchown of the Awle Ryale, although it
more likely originated in Northern England, represents, as we
have already seen, rather one of the later developments of the
chronicles in verse than the metrical romance proper, as we have
it in the works of Chrétien and his followers. Moreover, a large
number of the Middle English metrical romances are derived from


**) It has been contended by Bossert, Kélbing etc. that the
English poet was not following a written text, but was merely working
up in his own language the narrative of Thomas, as he recollected
it from a previous reading or from having heard it read. For a con-
trary view, cp. Bédier’s edition of Thomas’s 7'ristan, II, 87f.
Chrétien de Troyes and his Successors 127


. French romances in prose and not in verse. This is the case with
the stanzaic Morte Arthur of the end of the fourteenth century
— a poem of much naive charm, whose ultimate original is the
great French prose romance of the early thirteenth century, cal-
led the Mort Artu, (Mort Artus, Mort d’ Arthur). It is also
the case with the Middle English poems that deal with the Holy
Grail theme — namely the alliterative Joseph of Arimathie (Mid-
land dialect about 1350) and Lovelich’s Holy Grail (South or
South Midland, about 1480), both based on the thirteenth cen-
tury Estoire del Saint Graal (Grand St. Graal) — one of the great
French prose romances of the Vulgate cycle. It is the case, also,
with the Arthour and Merlin (end of thirteenth century) and the
Merlin of Lovelich, the fifteenth century poet, both of which are
derived from the Old French prose Merlin in the same cycle of
the prose romances as the Estoire del Saint Graal. So too with
the Scotch Lancelot of the Latk of the late fifteenth century, which
merely paraphrases an episode of the famous Lancelot del Lac —
the prose romance of the early thirteenth century. This is in-
teresting as the latest in date of all the metrical romances com-
posed in Great Britain.

It must be confessed that with the exception of the stanzaic
Morte Arthur, none of the English romances in verse that are
based on French romances in prose rise above mediocrity. Love-
lich’s works, especially, are monuments of tediousness.

But, besides the English Arthurian romances in verse which
are based on French romances in prose, we have, in addition to
Sir Tristrem, a number of others which are based on French ro-
mances in verse and which are markedly superior in literary qua-
lity to the former. First, the Sir Perceval of Galles which is,
probably, a mere adaptation of Chretien’s Perceval‘) — then the
Iibeaus Desconus, mentioned above, whose lost French original
was closely akin to the Li Biaus Descouneus of Renaud de Beaujeu
— the Yvain and Gawain, an adaptation of Chrétien’s Yvain —
Sir Gawain and the Green Knight (already mentioned), whose
French original is also lost — the Aumnters of Arthur, made up,


*° Cp. Part III, below.
*° Cp. Part Il, below.
128 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


it seems, from various French sources, which is also probably true
of the Avowing of Arthur, preserved in the same MS. and appa-
rently of the same date. All of the romances just enumerated were
composed in the North Midland or Northern districts of England
during the fourteenth century. The Scotch Gologrus and Gawain,
the story of which is taken from the continuation of Chrétien’s
Perceval, belongs to the fifteenth century. Still further, five brief
romances, hardly more than ballads, concerning Gawain have been
printed by Sir Frederick Madden in his great edition of the ro-
mances‘’ relating to that hero published by the Bannatyne Club,
London, 1839. If we add in conclusion a version of Marie de
France’s Lanval*® and the brief fragment called Arthur which
Dr. Furnivall published in the second issue of the Early English
Text Society,4® we have completed the list of the Middle English
Arthurian romances. This last piece is a very condensed narrative
based on Geoffrey’s Historia.


*? Sir Gawayne: a collection of Ancient Romance-Poems by
Scottish and English Authors relating to that celebrated Knight
of the Round Table, with Introduction, notes and a glossary.
London, 1839.

For everything relating to these poems — sources etc. — cp.
G. L. Kittredge, A Study of Gawain and the Green Knight (Boston,
1914). They are entitled respectively, (1) The Green Knight (fifteenth
century), which is derived from the English romance, Sir Gawain
and the Green Knight. (2) The Turk and Gowin (fifteenth cen-
tury). (3) The Jeaste of Syr Gawayne (fifteenth century). (4) Syre
Gawene and the Carle of Carelyle (fifteenth century). (5) The
Weddynge of Syr Gawen and Dame Ragnell (fifteenth century).
Part IV, below, I have discussed the use which Miss Weston makes
of these poems in her hypothesis of a primitive “Gawain-complex”’.

** Last edited by Rudolf Zimmermann at Kinigsberg in PreuBen,
1900. For previous editions and literature of the poem, see this edition
or Miss A. H. Billings’s A. Guide to the Middle English Metrical
Romances, pp. 144 ff. (New York, 1900). The author was Thomas
Chestre and he wrote in the fourteenth century — probably the first half.

*° Arthur, a short sketch of his life and history in English
verse of the first half of the fifteenth century, copied and edited
from the Marquis of Bath’s MS. By F. J. Furnivall. E. E. T. 8.
Original Series, no 2. London 1864. It was composed about 1400
in the Southern dialect. The fragmentary poem (only 642 four-stressed
lines) is based on one of the Bruts.
Chapter IV.


Merlin.


It is only in the writings of Welshmen that we find any
trace of a character corresponding to Merlin before the Arthurian
romances. As has been said above more than once, literary re-
cords from mediaeval Brittany are practically non-existent and
the Breton ballads about Marzin or Merlin which in the last cen-
tury La Villemarqué published in his Barzaz-Breiz and Myrhddin,
(having collected them, as he pretended, from oral tradition) are
now universally regarded as forgeries! Indeed, the lady from
the neighborhood of Molaix, whom he cites as an authority for
these ballads, has been pronounced by one critic to be probably
a sister of the imaginary Mrs. Harris in Dickens’s Martin Chuz-
zlewit. Furthermore, Merlin, like the other characters of Ar-
thurian romance, does not, of course, appear in the literature of
the Gaels. Now, with regard to the Welsh evidence: In the body
of ancient Welsh poetry? there are eight poems which purport
to be the compositions of a bard named Myrddin. This 1s evi-
dently the same name as the Merlinus of Geoffrey of Monmouth —
only as Gaston Paris has remarked,’ Geoffrey probably shrank
from Latinizing the Welsh name in the natural way as Merdinus,
owing to the similarity to a French word of unpleasant associations
which would have resulted, and so changed the d to an/. But the
value of these poems as evidence of traditions concerning Merlin
among the Welsh is seriously impaired by the doubt which at-
taches to their antiquity. The result of the most authoritative

* Cp. pp. 39ff. and notes.

* Edited by W. F. Skene, Four Ancient Books of Wales, 2 vols.
(Edinburgh, 1868).

* Romania, XII, 376 (1883).

BKefperia, Ergadngungsreihe: 8. 9
130 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


examination of this question that has been made‘ is that all the
Welsh poems in question were really composed later than Geoffrey
of Monmouth, with the single exception of the Dialogue of Merlin
and Taliesin,® wsich is either contemporary with Geoffrey of
Monmouth or perhaps slightly earlier.6 Moreover, all of them,
exzept the Dialogue, betray the use of Geoffrey’s Vita Merlini.?
Nevertheless, these poems give evidence as to the existence in
‘Welsh tradition of Merlin and the personages associated with him
in the Vita Merlint — only the few concrete allusions they con-
tain bearing on the history of Merlin seem derived from Geoffrey.
Besides, after all, they merely show that Merlin was a bard like
Taliesin, who certainly enjoyed greater fame among the ancient
Welsh than Merlin ever did. The Dialogue, which, as we have
seen, is the least open to suspicion of the Welsh poems gives us
a conversation between Myrddin (Merlin) and Taliesin concerning


‘ By F. Lot, “Etudes sur Merlin”, Annales de Bretagne, XV,
324ff., 505ff. (1900). |

° Skene, I, 368ff. (translation), II, 3ff. (Welsh text).

* In Y Cymmrodor, XI, 48 (1892), E. Phillimore, one of the
best Welsh authorities, speaks of the Welsh Merlin-poems “following”’
Geoffrey’s Vita Merlin in making the hero go out of his mind, in
consequence of the battle of Arderydd, so that he, too, evidently re-
gards these poems as subsequent to Geoffrey. In the same article
(“Additional Notes” to J. E. Lloyd’s “Welsh Place-Names”, ibid.,
pp. 15ff.) this scholar interprets Myrddin (the Welsh name for Merlin)
as a mere eponymus “derived from the place-name Caerfyrddin
(= modern Carmarthen), like Efrog (Peredur’s father in the Peredur)
from Caer Efrog (Modern English York) or Lileon Gawr from
Caerlleon (Modern English Chester). And again, pp. 47f. he remarks
that, in changing the narrative of Nennius (his source) and putting
“the fatherless boy” (Geoffrey’s Merlin) at Carmarthen, “Geoffrey had
here in his mind’s eye the connection of Myrddin with Caerfyrddin’”’
— that, moreover, Geoffrey in the Vita Merlini makes Merlin king
of Dyfed (his mother in the Historia was already daughter of a king
of Dyfed), because in those days (down to 1132) Dyfed included
Carmarthen.

_ It would seem, however, from Lot’s study that, even if the name
Myrddin is derived from Caerfyrddin, the derivation is older than
Geoffrey. May not, indeed, the latter name be derived from the former?

* Cp. Lot, op. cit., p. 515.
Merlin 131


the battle of Arderydd in which Merlin expresses sadness at the
slaughter. This battle, it may be remarked, was fought at Ar-
thuret, near Carlisle, about the year 575, between Rhydderch ap
Tudwal, the friend of St. Columba, and another Celtic chieftain
of the North, Gwenddoleu ap Ceidio, the former being victorious.®
The poem, however, is so meagre and its meaning so dark, that
we merely gather from it that Merlin is a bard. At the end of the
Dialogue we have the obscure words:


Since I, Myrddin, am next after Taliessin,
Let my prediction become common.

This is the only hint in the poem that Merlin has prophetic
gifts — indeed, the only thing in works not demonstrably depen-
dent on Geoffrey that suggests the possession of prophetic powers
on the part of Merlin in all Welsh literature. But, apart from
the doubtful antiquity even of the Dialogue, this would be a
slender basis for supposing that the Welsh regarded Merlin as a
prophet, especially as, notwithstanding the words just quoted, there
is actually no prediction in the poem — a fact which excites
the suspicion? that these words may have been a later addition.

If the poems which we have been considering throw little
light on the subject of Merlin’s place in Welsh tradition, it is
even worse with the remaining Welsh records — the Triads and
the Mabinogion. Two of the former mention Merlin — the first
of them as one of the three chief bards of Britain, the second in
connection with his marvellous disappearance. But these triads
are late!® and, hence, worthless for our purpose. The Mabinogion
do not mention Merlin by name at all and the only connection
whatever between the tales in this book and the traditions con-
cerning Merlin is that in one of them, Lludd and Llevelys, there
is a story of a combat between a white and a red dragon which,
figures in the narrative of Merlin and Vortigern’s tower in Geof-


° Cp. J. E. Lloyd’s History of Wales, I, 166.
° Cp. Lot, op. cit., p. 535, note 2.


1° Cp. E. Phillimore’s observations on the subject in the Early
English Text Society's edition of the Middle English Merlin, Part IV,
p. XCVI, note 3.


QO*
132 Evolution of Arthurian Romence


frey’s Historia. This same story, to nS sure, appears in Nennius
connected with another name.

The conclusion to be drawn from extant Welsh literature,
then, is, evidently, that Merlin was of relatively little importance
in Welsh tradition, and, if we depended merely on the mention that
the above records make of him, we should say that he was known
to that tradition simply as a bard — not as a magician or prophet.

It will simplify subsequent discussion, if we state at once the
conclusion to which we are forced by all the evidence — namely,
that Merlin owes his fortune in the history of fiction and popular
tradition to Geoffrey of Monmouth. He is virtually the creation
of Geoffrey. Let us take up now the history of this wondrous
being.

In the Historia Brittonum of Nennius (ch. 40—42)12 we
have the following story concerning the tower which Vortigern
tried to build on Mount Hereri or Snowdon as a refuge from the
Saxons:

Workmen begin to lay the foundations of the building, but on
three successive nights the work done during the preceding day is
destroyed. Vortigern’s wise men inform him that, before the tower
can be built, the ground must be sprinkled with the blood of a
child born without a father. The king at once sends out messengers
in search of such a child. When they arrive at the field of Elleti
in Gleguissing they hear a boy jeer at a comrade, because he has
never had a father, and the boy’s mother confirms the truth of
the taunt and asserts that the child is, indeed, the son of no mortal
man. The messengers accordingly take him to Vortigern whom
the boy proceeds to question shrewdly, until the king admits why
he has been brought thither. Then the child orders the wise men
to declare what there is beneath the spot where Vortigern wishes
to build. When they say that they do not know, he bids them
dig into the ground where they will find a pond in which there
are. two vases; in the vases is a folded tent and in the tent are
two sleeping dragons, one white and the other red. The men dig
and find that the boy’s words are true. Suddenly the dragons


4 See Mommsen’s edition, pp. 181ff., Monumenta Germaniae
Historica, 1904.
Merlin SS 133


begin a terrible combat with each other, in which the red dragon
succeeds in routing the white one. The boy proceeds to explain
to the king that the pool signifies the world, the tent Britain, the
red dragon the British nation, the white dragon the Saxons. Vor-
tigern, he adds, must depart from this place, but he himself to
whom fate has allotted it will remain there. The king asks him
his name, and he replies: “I am called Ambrosius.’1 The king
next asks as to his origin and he replies that he is the son of
a Roman consul. This is, of course, a flat contradiction of what
was said at the beginning of the episode. Vortigern obediently
assigns the site of the stronghold to Ambrosius with all the other
provinces of Britain and himself departs elsewhere. Later Nennius
tells us that, after the death of Vortigern, his son, Pascentius,
received two provinces from Ambrosius, “who was the great king
among the kings of Britain.”


Miss L. A. Paton has justly observed'!® that we evidently
have here a reminiscence of the barbarous “custom of offering
a human being to the deity of a selected site as a foundation sacri-
fice”. Whether, as she maintains, the two dragons were origi-
nally two supernatural shape-shifters who had assumed for the
time being the form of dragons is, I believe, much less certain.
The part which Ambrosius plays in this affair1+. seems borrowed
from one of the numerous Talmudic legends concerning Solomon
in which the wise king by a ruse captures the demon Aschmedai
(or Asmodeus, as we are accustomed to call him) and makes him


** Nennius’s Ambrosius is identical, of course, with the Ambrosius
Aurelianus who, according to the historian Gildas, led the Britons
against the Anglo-Saxon invaders after the withdrawal of the Roman
legions. E. Phillimore remarks, Y Cymmrodor, XI, 48f. (1892), that
the identity is proved by the gloss which is found in all the MSS.
of Nennius after the words “Ambrosius vocor’, in this passage, viz.,
“id est Embreis Guletic’. Now, Gwledig (Guletic), which is equi-
valent to the Latin Princeps or Imperator, could indicate here no
one save the historical chieftain named by Gildas.

**) In her article on this episode, “The Story of Vortigern’s
Tower — an Analysis”, Radcliffe College Monographs, no. 15,
pp. 14ff. (1910).

** Cp. Miss Paton, op. cit., p. 18, note 1.
134 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


tell how he can obtain possession of a certain wonderful creature
who is necessary in the building of the Temple of Jerusalem.
Now this story of Nennius was used by Geoffrey of Mon-
mouth (Book VI, ch. 17—19) with certain differences of which
the most important are as follows: He calls the boy without a
father Merlin as well as Ambrosius.15 Moreover, the messengers
take Merlin’s mother, who is the daughter of a king of Demetia,
to Vortigern with the lad, and she gives the king a full account
of Merlin’s birth, explaining that his father was an incubus.!¢
Just after this story Geoffrey inserts the famous prophecies of
Merlin, which, as a matter of fact, in large part, refer to recent
political events of the author’s own time. They make up the
entire Seventh Book of his Historia, but had already been in cir-
culation as a separate work.!?7 The next book begins with a pro-


** Cp. Geoffrey, Book VI, ch. 19: Tune ait Merlinus, qui et Am-
brosius dicebatur”’. Similarly, VI, 3.

In his “Merlin and Ambrosius”’, Kittredge Anniversary Papers,
pp. 119ff., G. H. Maynadier explains (p. 125) Geoffrey's identification
of Merlin with Ambrosius as follows: Nennius says, ch. 41, that Am-
brosius was found in the region Gleguissing, which, even if it did not
actually include the vale of the river Towy, was, in any event, near
that stream. Now, Caermarthen, which is connected by name with
Merlin (Myrddin) — see p. 130, note 6 above — lies on the Towy.
Hence, “nothing would be more natural than for Geoffrey to combine
the two men”. — Apart, however, from our ignorance as to the extent.
of Gleguissing, the vague geographical connection here assumed
seems unnecessary for the identification. The inclusion of a great
magician in his work was suggested to Geoffrey by Nennius’s Ambrosius
and the designation, Ambrosius Merlinus, testifies: to this historical
connection between the two characters, but Geoffrey’s enchanter was
to have an altogether different scope from Nennius’s — as a matter
of fact, he was destined to prove one of the greatest creations of the
mediaeval imagination —- and so he calls him, after a brief period of
hesitation, exclusively by the new name.

** This notion of the sexual commerce of incubi with mortals
was common in the Middle Ages.

77 On Geoffrey’s so-called Libellus Merlini and the numerous
political phrophecies which were modelled after it in the Middle Ages,
see San Marte, Die Sagen von Merlin, pp. 32ff., (Halle, 1853) and
Rupert Taylor, The Political Prophecy in England, (New York, 1911),
Merlin 135


phecy of Merlin concerning the death of Vortigern and, later on,
tells of his exploit of moving the stones of Stonehenge — or
Giants’ Dance, as it is called — from Mount Killaraus in Ireland
to their present site. In this affair, which was probably invented
by Geoffrey, Merlin appears as hardly more than a marvellous
engineer. He reappears, however, (ch. 15), as interpreting to
Uther Pendragon, the father of Arthur, a portent which betokens
the death of Aurelius Ambrosius — the Ambrosius Aurelianus
of Gildas — whose gallant deeds constitute a large part of the
narrative of this Eighth Book. Then follows (ch. 19—20) the
last and most famous of Merlin’s achievements related by Geof-
frey — his transformation of Uther into the likeness of Gorlois,
Duke of Cornwall, so that he might have access to Igerna, the
wife of Gorlois — on which occasion he begets Arthur. It has
often been maintained, and no doubt correctly, that this episode
is merely an adaptation of the well-known story of the conception
of Hercules — how Jupiter assumed the appearance of Amphitruo
and in the latter’s absence deceived Alcmena and begot the fa-
mous hero.

Looking back over the Merlin material in Geoffrey’s Historia,
which I have just summarized, it seems in the highest degree
unlikely that any of it was derived from oral tradition. Nennius,
classical legend, and his own fancy seem to account for the whole.
Things are not so plain — at first blush, at any rate — when
we come to the next important Merlin document — namely, the
poem in Latin hexameters called the Veta Merlint — which is also
commonly ascribed to Geoffrey of Monmouth. To be sure, the
correctness of this ascription which is found at the end of the poem
itself, has at various times been disputed,!® but the fact that


in Columbia University Studies in English. Despite the title of the
latter, it contains also, ch. 6, a discussion of the Galfridian type of
prophecy in other countries than England.

There is, in addition, a thirteenth-century French (prose) work
entitled Les Prophécies de Merlin, which, notwithstanding its title,
is very different from the Libellus Merlin. On this later work
cp. Part III, below.

*® Cp. San Marte’s Die Sagen von Merlin, pp. 273 ff. and various
scholars cited by H. L. D. Ward, Catalogue of Romances in the De-
136 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


in the concluding lines of the poem the Historia is spoken of -as
celebrated throughout the world is no reason for doubting the.
authenticity of the ascription. Modesty was certainly not the
strong point of the writer who tried to palm off the Historia as
an authentic narrative. Moreover, the prophecy of Ganieda found
in this poem (11. 1474ff.) relates to actual political events during
the years 1189—1144,!* and 1148—9 has been established as its
date.2° These facts. suppert the view that the work is really
Geoffrey’s. It is, indeed,-singular that a poem by so famous an
author should exist in only: one complete MS. (Vespasian E. IV,
of the British Museum), and that of the late thirteenth century
— yet this does not justify us in rejecting it as spurious.

The Vita Merlini is the most original of all the works con-
cerning Merlin which the ‘Middle Ages have left us, and parts of
it are genuinely poetical — go ‘that’ it will be necessary to consider
for a moment this curious production, the action of which is sup-
posed to fall after the translation of Arthur to Avalon. Following
is a condensed analysis of-its contents:

Merlin was a king and a prophet who had already lived an
indefinite age, when a war breaks out between the princes of
Britain, Peredur, King -of Venedotia (North Wales), being the
leader on one side, and Guennolous, King of Scotland, on the
other. Merlin and Rodarchus,. King of Cumberland, were with
Peredur. The Scots are routed, but Merlin loses three brothers in
the battle. This misfortune plunges him into grief and madness
and he flies to the desert: There he becomes a wild man (sil-
vester homo), lives on fruits, and fills the Caledonian forest with
his lamentations. Rodarchus, however, who had married Ganieda,
Merlin’s sister, tried to bring back the fugitive to his court. At


partment of Manuscripts in the British Museum, I, 278ff. So
far as I know, however, Brugger is the only living scholar who denies
the poem to Geoffrey. For his views cf. Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt.,
XX!, 105 (1897) and ibid., XXX", 217, note (1906). For an answer
to the objections which have been raised to Geoffrey's authorship of
the Vita Merlin, cp. Ward, loc. cit.

*° Cp. Ward, op. cit., pp. 282ff.

*° Cp. Ward, pp. 285. and F. Lot, Annales de Bretagne, XV, 333.
Merlin 137


last, this is effected by a messenger, who finds Merlin seated
by a spring in the forest and watching the play of the wild ani-
mals. This man sings to a ‘‘cithara” the woes of Merlin’s wife,
Gwendoloena, on account of her absent husband. The music heals
Merlin of his madness and he allows himself to be led back to the
court of Rodarchus. But there his madness soon returns on him


-. and he is eager to return to the oaks and high mountains of the


forest. To prevent his escape, Rodarchus has him put in bonds.
Merlin falls into a profound melancholy and does not utter a word.
One day the queen was traversing the hall, when her husband,
took her by the hand and made her sit down; but, as he leant
over to kiss her, he observed a leaf in her hair. He took it and
threw it on the ground. Merlin burst into laughter at this.
Everyone was astonished, but the sage refused to explain his singu-
lar merriment, unless he was set at liberty. Rodarchus had him
unbound and Merlin explains that the leaf which the king had
just removed from his wife’s hair had fallen there shortly be-
fore as she was passing through the thicket for a rendezvous with
her lover. The queen tries to discredit Merlin’s power of divi-
nation by putting him to a test. She has the same child brought
in three times in different costumes, so as to deceive the enchanter
as to his identity, and Merlin each time predicts a different kind
of death for him: he will fall from a high rock — he will die
on a tree — he will be drowned. The queen is exultant over the
success of her ruse, but, as a matter of fact, Merlin’s prophecies
all come true; for the child, when he grew up, whilst chasing
a stag, fell from a high rock and was drowned in a stream that
flowed at its base, but his feet caught in a tree and there he
was suspended.

Merlin returns to the forest and gives permission to Gwen-
doloena to marry another man, but the bridegroom must beware
of letting Merlin see him. One bright night the seer reads in
the stars that his wife has taken him at his word and is about to
marry. He assembles a great herd of wild deer and goats and
mounts a stag. Driving the remaining animals before him, he
goes to his wife’s house and calls her out to see the wedding pre-
sents he has brought her. She naturally smiles at the spectacle,
138 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


but the bridegroom puts his head out of the window and laughs.
Filled with rage, Merlin tears off the antlers of the stag he is
riding, hurls them at his unlucky rival and kills him on the spot.
He then flees, but is stopped by a torrent, made prisoner, and
brought back before his sister in chains. He falls into a sullen
dejection and refuses food. To distract him, his brother-in-law
has him taken out for a walk through the town, but at the palace
gate they meet a porter miserably clad, asking alms of the passers-
by. Merlin bursts out laughing and acts similarly when, a little
further-on, in the market-place, he sees a young man buying shoes
and pieces of leather to repair them with. In both cases Merlin
refused to explain his laughter, unless his freedom was to be the
reward. Rodarchus at last consents, and Merlin explains that the
beggar had at that very time a hidden treasure under his feet
and the young man was drowned immediately after making his
purchases. |
The enchanter returns again to the wilderness. His sister
wishes to follow him, but he prevents her — only, later on, he per-
mits her to visit him and bring him food in the cold season.
He gets her, moreover, to build him a house in the forest with
70 doors and 70 windows, so that he can sit within and predict
the future by observation of the heavens. His prophecies are
taken down by 140 scribes. Here he foretells most of the calamities
which are to befall the Britons — including the death of Rodarchus,
after which event Ganieda resolves to fly from the world and live
with her brother.
- TPaliesin joins Merlin and gives a long description (11. 787 ff.)
of the universe, winding up with the famous account (11. 908 ff.)
of the Happy Isle, where Morgan lives with her eight sisters.??


** The immediate source of this description, as of several other
similar descriptions (11. 827ff., 859ff., 1179ff,, 1298ff.), in the Vita
Merlini, is the Etymologiae of Isidore of Seville, who, in turn, derived
his information from Pliny’s Historia Naturalis. Cp. F. Lot, Ro-
mania, XLV, 1ff. (1918—1919).


** “Tnsula pomorum quae Fortunata vocatur,


Ex re nomen habet, quia per se singula profert:
Non opus est illi sulcantibus arva colonis;
Omnis abest cultus nisi quem natura ministrat:
Merlin 139


Thither Taliesin in a boat, steered by Barinthus,*? has taken Arthur


Ultro foecundas segetes producit et uvas,

Nataque poma suis praetonso germine silvis;
Omnia gignit humus vice graminis ultro redundans.
Annis centenis aut ultra vivitur illic,

Illic iura novem geniali lege sorores

Dant his qui veniunt nostris ex partibus ad se:
Quarum quae prior est fit doctior arte medendi,
Exceditque suas forma praestante sorores;

Morgen ei nomen, didicitque quid utilitatis
Gramina cuncta ferant, ut languida corpora curet;
Ars quoque nota sibi qua scit mutare figuram,

Et resecare novis quasi Daedalus aera pennis;
Cum vult est Bristi, Carnoti, sive Papiae

Cum vult in nostris ex aere labitur horis.
Hancque mathematicam dicunt didicisse sorores,
Moronoe, Mazoe, Gliten, Glitonea, Gliton,
Tironoe, Thiten, cithara notissima Thiten.

Illuc, post bellum Camblani, vulnere laesum
Duximus Arcturum, nos conducente Barintho,
Aequora cui fuerant et coeli sydera nota.

Hoc rectore ratis, cum principe venimus illuc,

Et nos quo decuit Morgen suscepit honore,

Inque suis talamis posuit super aurea regem
Strata [MS. has stu/ta] manuque sibi detexit vulnus honesta.
Inspexitque diu; tandemque redire salutem

Posse sibi dixit, si secum tempore longo

Esset, et ipsius vellet medicamine fungi.
Gandentes igitur regem commisimus illi,

Et dedimus ventis redeundo vela secundis,”


Only in this passage is Morgan represented as one of the nine
sisters. For a plausible explanation of the names of these sisters see
L. A. Paton’s Fairy Mythology, p. 44, note 2. There is a similar
description in the Gesta Regum Britanniae — a thirteenth century
adaptation in verse of Geoffrey's Historia. The island, however, is
unnamed and the healer is merely called regia virgo. For the text
of this passage and a discussion of the same see Bruce, Mort Artu, p. 300.

*° In the Revue Celtique, XXII, 339ff. (1901), A. C. L. Brown
has pointed out that this character is really a seagod, who, like
Manannan in the Welsh tales, conducted voyagers to the Celtic Other-
world. We have a similar Christian adaptation of this idea in the
Nawigatio Brendani.
140 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


after the battle with Mordred, in the hope that the fay might
be able to bring him back to life.

Merlin then laments over the misfortunes which the Saxons
are destined to inflict on the Britons; but no one now alive will
see that time. Conan of Brittany and Cadwallader, however,
will expel the invaders.

During the dialogue of the two friends an attendant announces
that a fountain of pure water has sprung up in the valley. Merlin
drinks of it, to quench his thirst, but it also restores him to reason.
He thanks the creator, and Taliesin takes occasion (11. 1179ff.)
to describe the celebrated fountains of the world.

‘At the end of this conversation Merlin is again plunged into
sadness by the sight of a madman who comes up and whom he
recognizes as a friend of his youth. The madman had been a
noble and worthy knight. He and some of his companions had
gone hunting with Merlin. They came upon a spring with fruits
lying about them. Merlin picked them up and distributed them
so generously among his friends that there was not one left for
himself. But the men who ate them were deprived of reason and
ran away like wolves. The poisoned fruit had really been inten-
ded for Merlin by a quondam mistress of his whom he had aban-
doned (11. 1422ff.). They take the poor madman now, compel
him to drink of the spring, and he recovers his reason. He an-
nounces his purpose of remaining in the wilderness with Merlin.
Taliesin sends home the kings who had assembled to hear Merlin’s
prophecies and the enchanter is left with his two friends and his
sister. The latter, Ganieda, is, in her turn, seized with the pro-
phetic gift and declares a number of marvels. With her speech
the poem ends — only there is an epilogue in which contey
bids the Britons weave a crown for him.

On first reading this strange narrative concerning the great
enchanter of Celtic legend, as we are accustomed to call him, one
is naturally inclined to take for granted that the materials on
which it is based are Celtic — but a closer analysis of its elements
reveals the fact that the sources are only to a very limited degree
Celtic, in any proper sense, and that the Orient has supplied a far
larger proportion of the motifs.24 The longest step made in the
Merlin — 141


analysis of the Merlin legend we owe to the late H. L. D. Ward,
who published®* in 18938 the so-called Lailoken fragments preser-
ved in the British Museum MS., Titus A. XIX. Here we have
the most important single source for the Vita Merlini. To be
sure, Ward does not seem to have been fully aware of the im+
portance of his own discovery. ;
There are two fragments in the manuscript just named. Both
relate to a madman named Lailoken, but the second is later than
the first, and its author seems to have been familiar with the first
fragment. In the first fragment at one point Merlin is identified
with Lailoken, but this sentence, as Ward has observed, is the
addition of a later hand under the influence of Geoffrey. In the
first of these fragments Lailoken gives the triple prediction of the
death of one person (only the person is himself). In the second
we have the incident of the leaf which betrays the queen’s adul-
tery. The fragments give these narratives in a more consistent
and primitive form than the Vita Merlini, and there can be no
question that Geoffrey made use of these Lailoken stories and
possibly of others concerning the same personage that have not
survived. The whole conception of Merlin in the Latin poem is
borrowed from this earlier madman and prophet, and the one
ranges the Caledonian forest, because the other had done so be-
fore him. Im the words of Phillimore,?* the eminent Welsh
scholar, Merlin has simply stepped into the shoes of Lailoken.
* This has been proved by Ward and Lot in the discussions
which IT have already cited above.
*> In “Lailoken or Merlin Silvester”, Romania, XXII, 504 ff. (1893).
7° Cp. Y Cymmrodor, XI, 45f. (1892). He observes, also,
(p. 48): “With Geoffrey the identification of Merlin and Lailoken was
complete; but with the later Scottish writers it was still a matter of
doubt.” Phillimore says, Joc. cit., that Lailoken (Lailocen) “is mentioned
in ch. XLV of Jocelyn of Furness’ Life of St. Kentigern as Laloecen
or Laloicen, a fool at the court of Rhydderch Hael, who possessed
the gift of prophecy; in the Welsh Merlin poems this word (there
used as a name or epithet of Merlin) is made into Llalogan, which
has been explained as meaning ‘twin-brother’; but there is plenty of
evidence that it was a personal name.” He then cites (p. 48) Lalocan
in the Cartulaire de Redon, 125 (already cited by Ward) and the
simpler form, Lalécc, as a woman’s name, in Whitley Stokes’ Tripartite
Life of St. Patrick, pp. 82, 104, 317.
142 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


According to the first fragment of the Cottonian MS., Lai-
loken had an evil disposition and, like the Irish Bricriu, was con-
stantly stirring up discord among his compatriots. As he was
one day watching a battle, however, (localized, it would seem,
in the neighborhood of Carlisle) which was due to his malicious
efforts, a voice from heaven reproaches him with the responsibi-
lity and condemns him henceforth to a life among the beasts.
He also saw a supernatural light and hosts of angels casting their
lances at him. At this sight he loses his reason and flies to the
desert. But he would often come to a rock in sight of Glasgow
and utter predictions which people took down in writing. One
day whilst Saint Kentigern, the famous Scottish saint, is cele-
brating mass, Lailoken disturbs the ceremony by howling and de-
manding communion. Kentigern sends a messenger to bid him be
quiet — but without success. The messenger goes three times
and each time the madman predicts that he is about to die —
stating, however, in each instance a different mode of death. He
adds also a prediction of the impending death of three eminent
personages in Britain. After this he runs away, but the same day
the triple prediction of his own death is fulfilled.

In the second fragment Lailoken is captured by king Meldred
and kept in chains at Dunmeller. He will not gratify his cap-
tors, however, by uttering prophecies — on the contrary, for three
days he will neither eat nor speak. Then comees the incident
of the leaf, when, like Merlin, he bursts out laughing and will
only explain his laughter on being promised his liberty. At the
same time he gives directions as to his burial, for in a few days he
is to die the triple death. On -being released, he discloses the
queen’s adultery. She tries to discredit the prophet by pointing
out the impossibility of the triple death. The king, however, will
not believe her. On the other hand, the queen, later on, out of
revenge, compasses the death of Lailoken, and he is buried, as
he had requested, at the junction of the Pausayl with the Tweed.

The Lailoken legend, then, is the most important source for
the Vita Merlini, but it is doubtful how far this legend itself re-
presents oral tradition among the Celts. The motif of the pro-
phecy of a triple death is found in the East — so, too, the reve-
Merlin 143


lation of adultery by the scornful laughter of a captive gifted
with supernatural knowledge.?? The same is true of the motif
of the boy whose ignorance of his impending fate, when making
provision for the repair of his shoes, causes the prophet to laugh.
Parts of the remainder, like Ganieda’s prophecy, are, no doubt,
mere inventions of Geoffrey,?? whilst the apples that cause mad-
ness and the wild story of Merlin’s appearing at his wife’s marriage
riding a stag with whose antlers he slays the bridegroom are,
in all probability, both drawn from oral tradition. The latter
has every mark of a folk-tale, but there is no reason to suppose
that it was originally told either of Merlin or Lailoken, and Geof-
frey was, no doubt, the first to connect it with the former.


Before leaving the Vita Merlini, it should be remarked that
Giraldus Cambrensis distinguishes two Merlins?® — Merlin Am-
brosius and Merlin Silvester — and this fictitious distinction has
descended to our own time and confused some modern students
of the Arthurian romances. But there is no reason whatever for
such a distinction; the Merlin of the Historia and the Merlin
of the Vita Merlini differ in some respects, but, as we have seen,
both are substantially the creations of Geoffrey and neither have
any root in popular tradition. He himself identifies them by a
specific reference in the Vita Merlini (11. 681ff.).


During the forty years or so that followed upon the com-
position of Geoffrey’s Latin poem the fame of Merlin was spread
far and wide, not only by Geoffrey’s own writings, but by deri-


*7 Compare the Indian tales cited in another connection by Miss
Paton, PMLA, XXII, 241 ff. (1907).

*® Miss Paton, in her article, “Merlin, and Ganieda’, MLN for
June, 1903, has tried to prove that in the original form of the story
Ganieda must have been the enchanter’s fairy-mistress, not his sister.
But this theory is a pure exercise of fancy, for there is no documen-
tary evidence whatever to support it. Cp. this scholar’s similar theory
in regard to the original relations of Arthur and Morgan le Fay, in
her Fairy Mythology, pp. 29, 33.

*° Cp. Itinerarium Kambriae, Book I, ch. 8.


*° This has been made clear. by F. Lot, Axnales de Bretagne,
XV, pp. 333 ff.
144 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


vatives from those writings — especially, by extensions of Mer-
lin’s Prophecies and by paraphrases of the Historia in the verse
and prose chronicles. It was not until the appearance of the Merlin
of Robert de Boron, however, that the stories that centre about
the character received any material development. This poem —
which, for the most part, survives only in a prose version — falls
probably in the last fifteen years of the twelfth century. As
we shall see more fully later on, it constitutes the second member
of an intended series of poems and follows, in the main, the ac-
count of Merlin given by Geoffrey, whom Robert, however, pro-
bably knew only through Wace.*! The most striking thing in
the poem — the story of Merlin’s conception — is based on Geof-
frey, but the original story is happily combined with a motif drawn
from popular notions concerning Anti-Christ in the Middle Ages.
We find here again some of the motifs of the Vita Merlint —
which reached the French poet, however, no doubt, through indirect
channels — viz., the triple prediction, the incident of the man
about to die who is so careful in regard to his future footwear.
Some variations in the account of Arthur’s conception, as com-
pared with Geoffrey and Wace, may be due to the lost chronicle
of a certain Martin of Rochester, which appears to have covered
these events.32 In the account of Arthur’s birth and childhood,
however, Robert makes a radical departure from his sources in
order to increase the importance of his hero, Merlin. In Geoffrey
(Book VIII, ch. 20), immediately after Uther Pendragon had be-


*2 In his Introduction to the Huth-Merlin, pp. Xff., G. Paris
has established, in essentials, the sources of Robert’s Merlin. Note, .
besides, that the incident of the man who so carefully provides himself
with foot-gear, although, as a matter of fact, in a few minutes he is
destined to die, occurs in Robert (Huth-Merlin, I, p. 48f£.), as well
as in the Vita Merlim, 11. 495ff. — so, doubtless, the latter should,
also, be reckoned among Robert’s sources. Cp. Lot, Annales de Bre-
tagne, XV, 336, note 1.

** According to MS. 749, fol. 32 (Bibl. Nat.), as quoted by
P. Paris, RTR, I, 36, note, Robert used a chronicle by this person,
and some scholars, as we have seen, — e.g., Brugger, Zs. f. frz.
Spr. u. Lit., XXX’, 182 ff. (1906) — accept the statement as authentic.
With regard to this Martin cp. p. 29, note 59, above.
Merlin 145


gotten Arthur upon Igerna, having assumed the form of her hus-
band, Gorlois, through Merlin’s magic art, Gorlois himself is killed
and Uther marries his widow. Thus when Arthur is born, there
is no scandal concerning his birth, only Uther and Merlin being
in the secret of his conception. But Robert puts the marriage
two months after the conception, so, to obviate scandal, Merlin
has the boy turned over to him, as soon as it is born, and entrusts
it to a good man named Antor (Auctor)’’ who does not know
the child’s rank and whose wife gives it suck. Fifteen years after-
wards Uther dies and Britain is without a king. The kingdom
is to go to the man who can draw a sword from a certain mar-
vellous anvil. Arthur alone provesequal to the task.*4 The
barons murmur at the success of a person of apparently low rank,
but he soon convinces them that he possesses royal qualities, and
he is first knighted and then crowned king at the Feast of Pen-
tecost. Here Robert’s poem ends.

Finally, we should note that, in a passage®® which occurs
before the account of Arthur’s conception, Robert connects the
poem with an unnamed knight who is destined to achieve the ad-
ventures of the Grail.26 Merlin relates here the story of the


*° This is, probably, a mere corruption of Arthur. Gawain and
Helyas (the Swan-Knight) were, also, named after their foster-fathers.
Cp. Bruce, Mort Artu, p. 288.

** This sword motif is found, also, in the legends of Theseus
and Sigmund. Cp. Bruce, op. cit., pp. 297 f.

*° Sommer, II, 53ff.

** Scholars (e. g., G. Paris, Huth-Merlin, I, p. XVID have been
accustomed to assume that this unnamed knight was Perceval. This,
is, however, by no means, certain, although I have no doubt that Robert
knew Chrétien’s Perceval. The passage runs in the Huth MS. (cp.
Huth-Merlin, I, 98) as follows: “Tant te puis jou [i. e., Merlin, who
is speaking to Uther Pendragon] bien dire qu'il ne sera pas emplis
en ton tans. Et cil qui l’emplira naistera de celui qui engendrer
[Paris’s emendation for MS. emplir] le doit. Et n’a point encore de
feme prise ne ne set riens qu'i[1] le doie engenrer. Et couverra
que cil qui emplir le doit acomplisse chelui [lieu] av.nt ou li vaissiaus
del graal siet, car cil qui le gardent ne le virent onques acomplir;
ne che ne sera jamais en ton tans, ains averra au tans le roi qui
apries toi verra.”

In the MS followed by Sommer (II, 56) the second sentence in

Hefperia, Erganzungsreihe: 8. 10
146 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


two holy tables of Jesus and Joseph of Arimathea — the table
of our Lord’s last supper and the table which Joseph instituted
in memory of our Lord’s table — and he induces Uther to in-
stitute a third table at which there is to be a vacant seat as at
the former tables. Merlin prophesies that this seat will only be
filled in the reign of Uther’s son and by a knight who will put
an end to the adventure of the Grail. This idea, like most of
Robert’s inventions, had a great success with the prose romancers.


Robert de Boron’s poems have no striking merit — they are
far inferior to those of Chrétien de Troyes — but in the genre
of the prose-romances their influence is of capital importance. He
is, above all, responsible for three innovations in Arthurian ro-
mance: 8? he gave it both a religious and a pseudo-historical co-
loring and he cast his compositions in a cyclic form. His Merlin,
with which we are now more especially concerned, was turned
into prose, and this prose rendering, as we have seen, forms the
first section of the various prose Merlins which were composed in
the first half of the thirteenth century. These romances, accor-
dingly, begin with Robert’s story of Merlin’s conception, whose
elements we have indicated above. The devils hold council as to
how they shall counteract the work of Christ. They agree that


the passage just quoted is represented by: “& cil qui l’acomplira nest
encore mie engendres’, whilst there is nothing at all corresponding
to the third sentence.

If the reading of the Huth MS. is correct, the allusion certainly
would not fit with anything that we learn about Perceval’s father mn
Chrétien’s poem. On the other hand, it seems to correspond rather
with the allusion to the future heir of Alein (Hebron’s son) in Robert’s
Joseph, 1. 3467:

“Et ques oirs de li peut issir’,
where there is no hint that Perceval is intended. In any event, even
if the unnamed knight in the passage under consideration is to be
accepted as Perceval, to judge by Robert’s extant works, he would
have been a very different character from Chrétien’s and his story
would have differed accordingly. On this subject, see, still further,
Part IV, below.

*? This has been pointed out by Brugger, Zs. f. frz. Spr. u.
TaAtt., XXIX’, 75ff. (1905).
Merlin 147


this can only be done by a man who is born of a virgin and one
of the devils undertakes to engender such a person. The narrative
of how this enterprise is executed is weird in the extreme and has
a real tragic force, but, fortunately, the innocence of the victim
defeats the object of the fiends and the child who is thus begotten
inherits his father’s supernatural powers, but not his wickedness.
We have already seen how this being was destined to watch over
Arthur’s infancy and childhood up to the coronation of the great
king with which Robert de Boron’s poem ends. In the several
continuations of Robert’s Merlin, the enchanter appears again from
time to time as a deus ex machina, but, after all, the Merlin ma-
terial in these huge continuations — the Vulgate continuation,
for example, is more than four times the length of the de Boron
section — constitutes only a small portion of the whole romance.
Take, for instance, the continuation, just named, which is the
oldest of the three extant continuations. It is really, as we shall
see, a pseudo-history of Arthur’s reign down to the appearance
of Lancelot on the scene — Arthur’s wars with his rebellious
barons and with the Saxons, his marriage with Guinevere, and
what not. Most of this narrative is a patch-work of motifs deri-
ved from Wace or from the lost expanded version of that writer’s
Brut or again from romances lke the Meraugis de Portlesgquez.
Only occasionally do we have a bit of genuine Celtic tradition
as in Arthur’s fight with the Capalu, a monster-cat.® As far
as Merlin is concerned, there is no reason to believe that any of
the new incidents connected with his name in the Vulgate con-
tinuation (or Livre d’Artus, as it 1s also called) are of Celtio
origin.

The most distinctive of these are: 1. the Grisandole episode.
2. The episode of Merlin and Viviane, which ends in l’enserrement
Merlin, as the Old French romance calls it: he succumbs to Vi-


*® See Sommer, Il, 442ff. Freymond (ep. p. 41, note 9, above),
in a masterly monograph, Artus’ Kampf mit dem Katzenungestiim
(in the Festgabe fiir G. Gréber, Halle, 1899), has shown that the
Capalu is the Cath Paluc of Welsh saga, although in Welsh the creature
is not at all connected with Arthur.


10*
148 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


viane’s spell and is imprisoned forever in the forest of Brocé-
liande.®9

First, as to the Grisandole episode, it is briefly as follows:
Julius Caesar, emperor of Rome, is troubled by an incomprehensible
dream. Merlin knows of it, assumes the form of a stag, comes to
Caesar’s palace, followed by a multitude of people, and tells him
that only the wild man of the woods can interpret his dream. The
enchanter then opens the palace gates by magic and vanishes. The
emperor promises his daughter’s hand as a reward for the capture
of the wild man or the stag. Many knights go on the quest,
but all later abandon it, save Grisandole, who is really a princess
disguised as a man. The stag appears to Grisandole and tells
how the wild man may be caught. She is to spread food for him
in the forest as a snare. She does this, and when the creature,
after gorging himself, lies down to sleep, she and her men capture
him and take him back to court. We have now the motif of the
sudden bursts of laughter, like those of Merlin in the Vita Merlinz.
There is no need of relating the three incidents — all significant,
however, of the wild man’s powers of divination. In the end he
explains his laughter in each case, as Merlin does in the Latin
poem. The main thing is that, on reaching the palace, he inter-
prets Caesar’s dream as signifying that the twelve ladies-in-honor
to the queen are really twelve youths in disguise with whom she
is leading an adulterous life. He further explains that he had
laughed on looking at Grisandole, because a woman by her craft
had taken him prisoner when no man could capture him. Gri-
sandole’s sex is thus revealed. Aw a result of it all, the queen and
her paramours are burned, Grisandole marries the emperor and
her brother the emperor’s daughter.

The wild man refuses to reveal who the great stag is or his
own name and leaves the hall abruptly, writing an inscription
in Hebrew on one of the door-posts, as he passes out. Some time
afterwards a messenger from Greece interprets the inscription,
which explains that the wild man and the stag are one and the


*° For this latter episode see Sommer, Il, 208ff., 280, 421.
*’ Cp. Sommer, II, 282¢ff.
Merlin 149


same being, named Merlin, Arthur’s counsellor. Instantly there-
after the letters vanish.

The main motifs of the above episode are found combined,
already in a number of stories current both in Europe and the East
— that is to say, the story of the disguised girl who captures the
wild man or satyr, as he is sometimes called, this wild man being
endowed with the gift of divination by which he reveals his cap-
tor’s sex and a queen’s infidelity to her husband. We even have
in these tales the sudden outbursts of laughter.4t The stories
of Solomon and Aschmedai (Asmodeus), as we have seen, had
already furnished motifs to the Vita Merlimi, and in the above
episode, no doubt, we have these same stories drawn on; for in
the Hebrew legend of Solomon Asmodeus plays exactly the same
role as the wild man does here. As regards Merlin’s assumption
of the form of a stag, this seems a sort of confused recollection
of the passage in the Vita Merleni, where Merlin rides to the
palace on a stag. This preface of the Grisandole episode was
evidently introduced merely to connect with Merlin the piquant
tale of the disguised maiden, the faithless queen, and the mar-
vellous wild man of the woods; but the connection is, after all,
of the most awkward kind.

The Grisandole episode, then, is not Celtic in origin. The
same thing is true of the story of Merlin and Viviane, immortalized


*. In her paper on this episode, “The Story of Grisandole”,
PMLA, XXII, 234ff. (1907), Miss L. A. Paton tries to show that we
have here again the hard-worked fairy-mistress theme (see p. 256) in
disguise (Grisandole was originally a fairy and Merlin her lover) and
that the story is drawn from oral Celtic tradition. For my own part,
as I have already intimated, I am skeptical on principle as to virtually
every story of any importance in mediaeval romance being a variant
of the fairy-mistress theme. But, besides, as Miss Paton herself acknow-
ledges, some features of the tale — to my mind the most essential —
are indisputably of Oriental origin — for example, the capture of the
laughing wild man who is compelled to exercise his powers of divi-
nation. Why not take this wide-spread story at its face value, instead
of reading into it the worn-out fairy mistress motif? This explains
everything in the episode, except Merlin’s part in it, and that is plainly
a clumsy addition, as anyone might have guessed, even if a comparison
with the cognate tales did not prove it.
150 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


by Tennyson, and here the case is even plainer than in the epi-
sode just examined. It was pointed out by Gaston Paris,‘? that
the essential conception of this famous story — the only really
pretty one in the whole Merle continuation,* is first found
in the prose Lancelot.44 There Merlin betrays the magic spell
to Viviane or Niniane (the MSS. vary as to the form of the
name), on her promising him her love, but, after obtaining the
secret, she uses her magic power to make him believe that he has
enjoyed her favours, though, in reality, he has not. At last she
shuts him up forever in a cave in the forest of Darnantes. Vi-
viane in this passage is identified with Lancelot’s foster-mother,
the Lady of the Lake, This story of Merlin and Viviane is,
probably, an early interpolation in the Lancelot,** but, in any
event, it is certainly the original of the more fully developed
episode in the prose Merlin. Furthermore, it is unquestionable
that, contrary to former views on the subject, the conception here
involved was first attached to Merlin by the author of the above-
mentioned passage in the prose Lancelot and has nothing Celtic
about it; for, obviously, the Merlin-Viviane incident is merely
a new adaptation of the old fabliau motif of the wise man deceived
by a woman, which is ultimately of Oriental origin.*? Aristotle,

** Cp. Huth-Merlin, I, p. XLVI.

“* Cp. Brugger, Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt., XXXII*, 149 (1908).

“* Sommer, III, 19ff.
The MSS. show still other variants. Cp. Sommer’s Index to
his Vulgate Version under Viviane. This is, most probably, the
correct form of the name. It would be, then, the feminine, corres-
ponding to the masculine Vivian (Vivien), so well-known from the
chansons de geste. Names, however, are subject to such corruption
in mediaeval MSS. that, after all, Diane (Diana) may be the true
etymon of Viviane. In her Fairy Mythology, ch. 4, Miss Paton
treats at length Viviane’s character, as well as her name, and con-
cludes that both are Celtic. The episodes in the Huth-Merlin, etc.,
however, which she discusses, in reality, are all of purely literary
manufacture. We shall see in our chapters on the prose romances that
this was true, in general, of these works.

** In the Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt., XXX'*, 175 ff. (1906), Brugger
seems to me to haye proved this.

“7 A. Jeanroy was the first to point this out tm his review of
Miss Paton’s Fairy Mythology. Cp. Romania, XXXIV, 120 (1905).


45
Merlin 151


Hippocrates and Virgil, as we have seen above, figure successively
in these tales as the butt of feminine deceit. Merlin’s turn was
sure to come. That this is the true derivation of the Merlin-Vi-
viane story is so evident that no further argument on the subject
is required. Even the detail noted in the Lancelot passage of
the magical illusion under which Merlin labors as to his enjoyment
of his lady’s favors is found in the Solomon and Marcolf legend
and had already been employed by Chrétien in Cliges, as was ob-
served above. It is a noteworthy mediaeval feature of the Vulgate
Merlin that Viviane was only twelve years old when Merlin fell
in love with her. The author of the Merlen of the so-called Robert
de Boron prose cycle, best represented in the somewhat shortened
form of the Huth-Merlin, took over this episode from the Vulgate
romance and from his work‘*) it passed into Malory*® and thence
into Tennyson’s Idylls of the ‘King. This episode and a gene-
ral reputation for magic and prophetic powers are all that can
be still called vital in the stories concerning Merlin which are
found in the books that we have been passing in review.


—-


Brugger had, independently, arrived at the same interpretation. Cp.
his elaborate argument in Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt., XXX", 117ff. (1906).
** TI, 191ff.,, in the edition of G. Paris and J. Ulrich.
*® Book IV, ch. 1.
5° Merlin and Vivien.
Chapter V.
Tristan.


In one important respect the study of the story of Tristan
is easier than is the case with that of Lancelot: there is sub-
stantial agreement among authorities on the subject that all the
mediaeval romances and shorter poems concerning this hero go
back to a lost French romance! of a considerably earlier date


* Owing to its archaic character and, the (in many respects)
rade civilization which it depicted Bédier, II, 314, dates this lost
romance back “jusq’ aux premiers temps de la conquéte de |’Angleterre
par les Normands”’, which must mean, at the latest, the early years
of the twelfth century. Golther, p. 73, however, objects that the in-
troduction of Arthur and his knights proves that it must have been
written after Geoffrey's Historia, which dates from about 1136, had
made these characters familiar figures — more specifically, between
1140 and 1150. Indeed, Golther, p. 34, was inclined to believe
that the adultery of a nephew with his uncle’s wife in this pri-
mitive Zristan was imitated from the similar relations of Mordred,
Arthur, and Guinevere in Geoffrey's work, as Muret, Romania, XVI,
322 (1887) had already suggested. Miss Schoepperle, p. 183, dates
the lost romance “very shortly” before the extant redactions, none of
which, according to her, antedate the last decades of the twelfth century.

Bédier, II, 154f., accepts 1154 as the date of Bernart de Ven-
tadour’s lyric which contains the earliest allusion to Tristan and Iseult,
and hence as the terminus ad quem of the primitive Tristan, but
Miss Schoepperle, pp. 112ff., has shown that the true date of com-
position of this lyric is wholly uncertain, and, consequently, that it
cannot be used for dating the lost archetype of our Tristan poems.
Her own late dating of this archetype (pp. 120ff.) is based on the
observation that it contained motifs that did not become current until
the latter half of the twelfth eentury: 1. A girl who eludes an im-
portunate lover (Kaherdin-Camille episode), imitated, according to Miss
Schoepperle, from the pastourelles; 2. Two lovers deceive a jealous
husband, despite all his precautions (Kaherdin-Gargeolain), imitated from
Tristan 153


than any on the subject that is now in existence. The close rela-
tion of the incidents in the various extant versions of the story,
despite individual divergencies, was explained by scholars of the
last generation as due to the fact that the writers all drew from the
same body of lays or prose tales which were supposed to be current
orally,? but the conviction gradually forced itself on the minds


the chansons de mal mariée. 3. Notions that are rooted in the amour
courtots (cp., already, Muret, Romania, XVI, 360), such as the extra-
vagant tests of humiliation to which a lady puts her lover and the
idea that a lover must do anything, if appealed to in the name of his
lady-love. 4. The stereotyped characters of Arthur, Kay and Gawain,
which show the influence of the Arthurian romances. In Hilhart ll. 5047 ff.
especially, I may add, show unmistakably this influence. They describe
as accurately as possible the plan of the regular Arthurian romances.

F. Lot’s criticism (Romania, XLIII, 128£.) of these points has
invalidated, I think, so late a dating of the primitive Tristan as Miss
Schoepperle’s (which, besides, would be impossible, if Thomas’ poem
were written about 1170), but it seems to me that the evidence, espe-
cially under the above heading, is sufficient to prove that this lost
archetype was not earlier than the romances of antiquity (1155—1165).
G. Huet, Moyen Age, 2e. série, XVIII, 380ff. (1914), has added
Iseult’s love-monologue (Eilhart, 2398ff.) to Miss Schoepperle’s illu-
strations of the amour courtois. The matter is not susceptible of
determination, but it seems most likely that ideas of the @mour cour-
tots were in the archetype, since they are found in all the extant
versions. The same thing applies to the Arthurian connections of these
versions. To be sure, in the case of Thomas, this connection is very
slender, consisting entirely of Arthur’s encounters with two giants
(Bédier, I, 290ff., 307), which really stand outside of the Tristan
adventures and may very well have been borrowed directly from Ge-
offrey’s Historia, Book X, ch. 3 or Wace’s Brut, ll. 11634ff. In
Béroul, ll, 3706ff. ef passim, and Kilhart, UJ. 5231ff., Arthurian
characters are more intimately connected with the narrative, and Lot,
op. ctt., pp. 1311, argues that the episode in Eilhart was expressly
introduced by the author for the purpose of imparting novelty to the
story. This, of course, is possible.

In his “Tristan bei Cercamon ?”, Zs. f. rom. Ph., XLI, 219ff.
(1921), C. Appel, detects an allusion to Tristan in a poem of this
Provencal poet. He assigns the poem to the period, 1150—1160,
and contends that this is the earliest extant allusion to Tristan. The
evidence, however, is too uncertain. .

* So R. Heinzel, Zs. f. d. A. XIV, 272ff. (1869), W. Golther,
Die Sage von Fristan und Isolde, pp. 30 ff. et passim (Munich 1887),
154 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


of students of the Tristan romances that the resemblances in
question were really due to a common original — a definite ro-
mance, now lost.’ This solution of the problem was given scientific


F. Novati, Studj di filologia romanza, Il, 390 (1887), G. Paris,
Manuel, pp. 99ff. (1888). For historical surveys of Tristan studies,
cp. Bédier, II, 168ff. and Golther, 1 ff.

3) In his review of Réttiger’s Program in Romana, XXVII, 608ff.
(1898), E. Muret makes Chrétien’s lost poem and Thomas the sources
(one or the other) of all extant Tristan versions. E. Brugger, Zs. /f.
frz. Spr. u. Intt. XX, 134, note (1898) suggested a single source
(undefined). Golther, however, ibid. XXII’, 23 (1900), was the first
to work out a definite scheme, based substantially on the hypothesis
of a single source (Chrétien). In his later work Golther gives up
Chrétien as the author of the Ur-Tristan.

In the Journal des Savants for 1902, p. 301, note 2, G. Paris
expressed the belief that all French Tristan poems go back to a lost
English poem, itself incomplete. In that case, the story of Tristan
and Iseult would have passed from the Cornish (or Welsh) to thie
English and from the English to the French. For a discussion of this
hypothesis and the reasons which led Paris to adopt it see Bédier I,
314ff. In so far as these reasons are connected with Paris’s general
theory of the Anglo-Norman origin of the Arthurian romances, I have
dealt with them elsewhere. For the rest, I will add to what Bédier
says on the subject that the testimony of the unpublished French poem
Waldef (eleventh or twelfth century) as to the existence of an early
English Tristan (Tristram) is, on the face of it, valueless, since in
the same line the author of this poem speaks of an early English
original for the French Bruit (Brut). The line of works entitled
Brut, however, all go back to Geoffrey of Monmouth (cf. Gaimar,
Wace etc.) and have, of course, nothing to do with any earlier English
works. Cp. on this subject Golther, Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt. XXIX*,
151ff. (1906) and Brugger, ibid. XXXII*, 136ff. (1907), and, above
all, R. Immelmann in his edition of the fifteenth century Latin Waldef
romance, Johannes Bramis’ Historia Regis Waldet, pp. XXXif.
(Bonn, 1912). The argument from the Waldef which Paris had al-
ready cited, Romania XV, 597 (1886), XVIII, 510 (1889), in con-
nection with the discussion of Tristan’s origin, was adopted, also, by
W. Hertz, Tristan und Isolde von Gottfried von Strassburg, pp. 477f.
— so, too, apparently by W. H. Schofield, English Literature from
the Norman Conquest to Chaucer, p. 202 (New York, 1906). Schofield
here goes so far as to connect the incident of Tristan’s sending his
message to Iseult by the chips on the stream with the Anglo-Saxon
lyric which is usually entitled “The Husband’s Message.”
Tristan 155


demonstration by Bédier in the Second Volume (1905) of his
great edition of Thomas’ Tristan, ‘and substantially the same
results were reached independently by W. Golther in his Tristan
und Isolde (1907), which, though published two years later, had
been written before the appearance of Bédier’s work. The con-
clusions of Bédier and Golther have been disputed by a few scho-
lars, as will be observed from the notes below, but, in general,
we may say that the-existence of a single primitive Tristan ro-
mance (Ur-Tristan, as German scholars call it) from which all
extant versions are ultimately derived is one of the few matters
of Arthurian discussion on which students are definitely agreed.®


“) Also in a popular article in the now defunct International
Quarterly (March-June, 1904).

° It would seem natural to identify this Ur-Tristan with the lost
poem “del roi Marc et d’ Iseut la blonde” which Chrétien, in the list
of his works, Cliges, ll. 1ff., tells us that he wrote, and, as a matter
of fact, Foerster, Cliges*, p. LXVIII, argues that the two are identical.
But its connection in this list with Chrétien’s tales from Ovid (cer-
tainly compositions of the poet’s youth) shows that the lost poem was
an early work. Now, the Ur-Tristan was evidently a masterpiece
and superior in construction and in poetical content to even the ma-
turest romances from Chrétien’s pen, so that it is inconceivable that
it was one of Chrétien’s compositions. Golther, p. 74, very properly
raises this objection to the theory of the identity and adds with less
force that Chrétien is not likely to have had the knowledge of Eng-
lish conditions that the Ur-Tristan (as reconstructed by Bédier and
himself, with a high degree of probability) implies. Foerster, loc. cit.,
tries to. meet Golther’s objection, with the supposition that Chrétien
had before him a still earlier 7'ristan poem (Ururtristan) and that
the merits of construction may have come to him from his original.

In the Journal des Savants for 1902, pp. 299ff., G. Paris has
argued that Chrétien did not write a full poem on the story of Tristan
and Iseult, but merely a brief one, dealing with some episode in which
Marc and Iseult figured. Novati, Studj di filologia romanza, I,
411 and Réttiger, Der heutige Stand der Tristanforschung, pp. 28f.
(1897) had already discerned a significance in the absence of Tristan’s
name from Chrétien’s allusion to his lost poem. /Paris’s hypothesis is
based on the consideration that in all the literature of the Middle
Ages there is no allusion to a Tristan poem by Chrétien. We have,
however, no episodic poems from Chrétien’s pen, and it seems to me
more likely that he planned a long poem on Tristan and Iseult, but
156 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


Bédier has reconstructed the narrative of this primitive Tristan
by tke comparative method, and so has Golther. Their respective


failed to complete it, as he later failed to complete his Lancelot (to
say nothing of the Perceval) — only in the case of this earlier com-
position he never put his work into circulation, recognizing it as im-
mature. — In Paul’s Grundriss der germamischen Philologie Il,
1, 459 (1890) J. te Winkel conjectures that there was a (lost) Dutch
translation of Chrétien’s Tristan, but gives no reasons for this con-
jecture.

In the Roman de Renard, Branch I, there is an allusion to
a lost Tristan poem by a certain La Chievre and in a conte dévot
(Foerster Festschrift, Halle, 1902) there is a similar allusion to this
lost poem — only its author’s name is here given in the Picard form,
Li Kievres. The poem, of whose contents we know nothing, was
probably composed in the twelfth century and its author should, doubt-
less, be identified with the lyric poet, Robert La Chievre of Rheims.
On these subjects cp. Griéber’s Grundriss, Band I, Abteilung I, pp. 494,
671, and G. Paris, op. cit. p. 299.

In 1. 2119 of his Tristan, Thomas appeals to “Breri” as his
authority for representing that Tristan sent Kaherdin, and not Governal,
as his messenger to Iseult on a certain occasion. G. Paris, Romama,
VIII, 425ff. (1879) identified this “Breri” with “famosus ille fabulator
Bledhericus, qui tempora nostra paulo praevenit’, of Giraldus Cam-
brensis, Descriptio Kambriae, ch. XVII, in Vol. VI (London, 1868)
of that writer’s Works edited for the Rolls Series by J. F. Dimock.
As Paris, himself, however, says, Thomas does not hereby imply that
he is using a book by Breri, but is merely appealing to the authority
of a person of that name who is said to know more about British
history than anybody else. “Breri” and “Bledhericus” are, indeed,
probably the same name and Paris’s identification of the persons con-
cerned is @ priort admissible. The identification was favored, also,
by H. Zimmer, Gé6ttingische Gelehrte Anzeigen for Oct. 1, 1890,
p. 805, note, and Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt., XIII’, 84, (1891). Never-
theless, Thomas’s appeal to Breri is, no doubt, merely one of the in-
numerable instances in mediaeval literature of a writer’s bolstering up
his narrative by the citation of fictitious authorities. He puts off on
Breri the responsibility for innovations in the story which are really,
his own. Cp. Muret, Romania, XVII, 608f. For a full discussion
of the Breri question cp. Bédier, Il, 95ff. He lists p. 95, note 1,
the chief previous discussions of the subject. Add J. L. Weston,
Romania, XXX, 334ff. (1904), who identifies Thomas’s Breri
with the Bleheris (Blihos-Bleheris) of the additions made to Chré-
tien’s Perceval — also, W. Golther, Tristan und Isolde, pp. 139f.
Tristan 157


reconstructions do not differ in essentials, so that the task of the
Tristan student at the present time consists mainly in the study
of the sources of this hypothetical romance, as reconstructed by
these scholars.


The materials which form the basis of these reconstructions
are. 1. The Tristan-poem of the Anglo-Norman poet, Thomas,
composed somewhere between 1155 and 1170.6 2. The fragments


(Leipzig, 1907), who points out that Thomas, in the passage referred
to above, cites Breri as a great authority on British history, yet,
as a matter of fact, derives all his knowledge of that history from
Wace. Very important is L. Foulet, “Thomas and Marie in their
relation to the conteurs,’ MLN, XXIII, 205ff. (1908). Foulet shows
that Thomas’s reference to the “conteurs”, to whose varying accounts
he opposes the authority of Breri, is really a “meaningless mannerism”’,
copied from Marie de France, and does not imply any knowledge of
oral traditions concerning Tristan.

We shall have to return to this mysterious Breri in the discussion
of the continuations to Chrétien’s Perceval.


° The upward limit is fixed by the author’s use of Wace’s Brut,
the lower by his influence on Chrétien’s Cliges. F. Lot, Romania,
XXVII, 42 (1898), called attention to the first point, G. Paris, Jour-
nal des Savants for July, 1902, pp. 354ff. to the latter. For a full
discussion of the subject cp. Bédier, I, 37 ff. M. Wilmotte, L’évolution
du roman francais, p. 67 (Brussels, 1903) and W. Foerster, Cliges*,
pp. LXVIff. (Halle, 1910) have disputed Paris’s proofs as to the
priority of Thomas’s Tristan over the Cliges, on the ground that
Chrétien and Thomas may have been drawing from a common source
(one of the lost Tristan poems), in the cases where Paris assumes
imitation of the latter by the former. The question is difficult to decide,
but it seems to me that Thomas would hardly have appropriated from
a predecessor so distinctive a play on words as amer: mer.

The limits of date would be still further narrowed, if we could
accept S. Singer’s contention, “Thomas, Tristan, und Benoit de Saint
Manure,” Zs. f. rom. Phil. XXXII, 729ff. (1909), that the Roman
de Trote influenced Thomas's Tristan; for the former was written
about 1165. Singer compares especially the description of the loves
of Rivalen and Blanchefleur, Bédier, I, 12ff., with those of Achilles
and Polyxena, R. de Troie, 17554ff. But the matter is too inde-
finite, and the passage in Thomas, just named, may be imitated from
some other romance embodying the new spirit of the amour courtois.
Singer, himself, compares, also, Gottfried, ll 16478ff. (which goes
158 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


of a French poem which is, at least in part, by a poet of Normandy
named Beroul,’? coupled with the Middle High German poem


back, doubtless, to Thomas) with Eneas, 9885ff. (eye belongs to love,
hand to grief).

Traces of the influence of the Disciplina Clericalis in Thomas
throw no light on the subject of date, since the author of that work,
Petrus Alfonsi, flourished in the early part of the twelfth century.
Cp., on this influence, A. Hilka, “Der Tristanroman des Thomas und
die Disciplina Clericalis,” Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt., XLV’, 38ff. (1917).

That Thomas was not identical with the poet of the same name
who wrote Horn et Rimenhild has been shown by W. Séderhjelm,
“Sur l’identité du Thomas, auteur de Tristan, et du Thomas, auteur
de Horn”, Romania, XV, 175ff. (1886). The identification of our
Anglo-Norman Thomas with Thomas of Erceldoune is, of course, merely
the individual fancy of the author of the English Sir T'ristrem.

Novati, Stud) di filologia romanza, II, 403, note 3, conjectures
that Thomas, author of J’ristan, was an ecclesiastic. There is no
means of deciding the matter, but the conjecture hardly seems probable.

* The poem has been preserved in the unique MS. 2171 of the
Bibliothéque Nationale and was edited by H. von der Hagen in Vol. II
of his edition of Gottfried von Strassburg (Breslau, 1823) and by
F. Michel in his edition of the Tristan fragments I, 1ff. (London and
Paris, 1835). The authoritative editions, however, are E. Muret’s 1.
Le roman de Tristan par Béroul et un anonyme (Paris, 1903, for
the Société des Anciens Textes Francais) and 2. Béroul, le roman
de Tristan, poéme du XIT® siécle (Paris, 1913, in Les Classiques
frangais du moyen age). Ll. 1268 and 1790, the poet calls himself
Berox (nominative form). Down to |. 2754 the narrative accords
closely with that of Eilhart. Not so with ll. 3028—4485 (end), nor
with ll. 2767—3031, which latter connects the two principal divisions
of the poem. In his first edition of Béroul (Paris, 1903) Muret, pp.
LXV ff., concluded with G. Paris and others that Béroul II (ll. 3028
—4485) was by a different hand from Béroul I (ll. 1—2754) and that
the two were connected by still a third hand. Beroul II, he observes,
is grosser and more barbarous, is not marked by the same literary know-
ledge or influences of chivalrous courtesy. In his second edition (Paris,
1918) he repeats this opinion, though with some hesitation (pp. VIITff.),
being affected, it would seem, by Bédier’s view (Légendes Epiques,
Ill, 399), that the whole of the Béroul fragment is by one person.
Heinzel (Zs. f. d. Altertum, XIV) had maintained, as no one would
now, that it consisted of nineteen different lays by different authors.
Bédier’s view seems to me, the most likely. — The Béroul 7’ristan
was undoubtedly addressed to an audience of lower social position


Go ogle


Tristan 159


on Tristan by E:ilhart von Oberge.* Both belong to the closing
years of the twelfth century and both draw evidently from the
same source — a lost derivative of the primitive Tristan.2 3. Por-


than Thomas’s poem. It is a jongleur’s version. There is nothing,
however, to support the view, formerly held, that it was older than
Thomas.

The upward limit of date for Beroul II, is fixed by an allusion
(1. 3853) to the epidemic of leprosy which raged among the crusaders
at Acre, 1190—1. This part of the poem probably falls in the last
decade of the twelfth century. Muret (p. LXIV of his first edition)
assumes that Beroul I was not earlier than 1165 or 1170. There is
no evidence, however, to prove that this part of the poem was not
composed substantially at the same time as Béroul IJ, granting even
that the two parts were by different authors.

* Edited by Franz Lichtenstein (Strassburg, 1877). In the ex-
tant MSS. Kilhart’s poem has been subjected to changes. On this
subject cp. especially E. Muret, ‘““Eilhart d’Oberg et sa source francaise”,
Romania, XVI, 287ff. (1887) and G. Schoepperle, II, 476ff. Between
these two discussions E. Gierach, “Zur Sprache von Eilhart’s Tristrant’’,
Prager Deutsche Studien, IV (1908), had shown that the Czech version
of Eilhart did not have the importance for the reconstruction of Eil-
hart’s text that Knieschek and Muret attributed to it. Knieschek trans-
lated the Czech version into German, Zs. f. d. Altertum, XXVIL, 261 ft.

Eilhart composed his poem probably between 1185 and 1189.
Cp. Gierach, op. cit. pp. 254f. When Muret, Romania, XVI, 361f.,
suggests that the author of his source was Li Kievres, this is pure
conjecture.

Recently a fragmentary twelfth century MS. of Eilhart’s Tristrant
— now in the (formerly) Royal Library at Berlin — has been dis-
covered. It contains 461 lines, corresponding to ll. 7061 ff. of Lichten-
stein’s edition, and has been edited by H. Degering. “Neue Funde
aus dem zwélften Jahrhundert: Ein Bruchstiick der Urfassung von Eil-
harts Tristrant”, PBB, XLI, 513 ff. (1916).

: ° Like Golther, p. 59, Miss Gertrude Schoepperle, Romania,
XXXIX, 277ff. (1910) and Tristan and Isolt, pp. 72ff. (Frank-
fort and London, 1913), disputes the existence of this hypothetical
intermediate derivative (the y of Bédier’s stemma) and derives both
Eilhart and Béroul direct from the primitive 7ristan poem. In my
review of her book, MLN, XXIX, 213ff. (1914), however, I have
pointed out the improbability of her derivation. So, too, Nitze, JEGc
Ph. XII, 444ff. (1914). Muret, in his review of Golther’s book,
Zs. f. fre. Spr. u. Litt., XXXVIL*, 167ff. (1911), has adopted Golther’s
and Miss Schoepperle’s conclusions in regard to this matter, but adds
160 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


tions of the French prose Tristan which, in its earliest form,
is dated by Léseth (p. XXIV) between 1215 and 1230 and by
Bédier (II, 309) about 1230.1° 4. Two short French poems each
called La Folie Tristan: One (the Oxford version) was the pro-
duction of an Anglo-Norman poet of the last quarter of the twelfth


no new arguments. Ibid. he contends that the author of the primi-
tive Tristan merely combined Celtic (insular) traditions concerning
Tristan.

Bédier’s reconstruction has been criticised by Jakob Kelemina,
Untersuchungen zur Tristansage (Leipzig, 1910), and by Muret and
Miss Schoepperle loc. cit. — also, by R. Zenker in his “Zum Ursprung
der Tristansage,’ Zs. f. rom. Ph., XXXV, 715ff. (1911) — espe-
cially, pp. 728ff. — and again in Romanische Forschungen, XXIX,
328ff. (1911). Kelemina and Miss Schoepperle complain that the
French scholar does not sufficiently recognize cross influences between
the extant versions, and Zenker offers the same criticism, though in
milder terms. Zenker, accordingly, does not accept the lost primitive
Tristan poem as the sole source of Eilhart and the prose J’ristan.
What he says of the partial dependence of the prose on Béroul and
Thomas is, doubtless, true. A romance on Tristan, written so late as
the prose (circa 1220) could hardly escape such influences. — Kele-
mina, on the other hand, denies altogether the possibility of recon-
structing an Ur-Tristan and takes the ground that already in the
pre-literary period of the development of the Z'ristan legend there
were two lines of tradition, corresponding roughly to the Béroul and
Thomas forms of the story, respeetively. His theory, however, has
found no adherents.

‘° The passages in question are preserved only in MS. 103 (Bibl.
Nat.) and are printed by Bédier, II, 321ff. See, also, his article, “La
mort de Tristan et d’Iseut d’aprés le manuscrit fr. 103 de la Bibli-
othéque Nationale comparé au poéme allemand d’Hilhart d’Oberg,”
Romana, XV, 481ff. (1886). The relation of these passages, how-
ever, to the primitive Tristan is somewhat uncertain. They were
late modifications, doubtless, of the prose 7'ristan under the influence
of a poetic version — but of which one? According to W. Rottiger,
Der heutige Stand der Tristanforschung, p. 26 (Hamburg, 1897),
it was a compilation similar to the source of Eilhart and Béroul.
Miss Schoepperle, I, 10, conjectures, on the other hand, that the epi-
sodes were drawn from the source of the primitive Tristan, which
seems, however, very improbable.

It should be noted that G. Paris once held the opinion (cp. Ro-
mama, XV, 602), that an imitation (presumably in prose) of Chrétien’s
Tristan constituted the nucleus of the prose Tristan. His subsequent


Goo gle


Tristan 161


century, the other (Berne version) of a poet of North-Eastern
France, probably of the early thirteenth century."


theory, however, that Chrétien composed only a brief episodic poem
concerning Tristan implies a withdrawal of his earlier opinion. In
his discussion of the subject Rittiger, op. cit., pp. 28f., had already
expressed himself unfavorably as to the dependence of the prose ro-
mance on Chrétien. Liseth, in his analysis of the prose Tristan,
p. XXV, regards that work as based largely on the lost poem of Chrétien.

For the closeness of the prose-romance to Eilhart-Béroul cp. Heinzel,
Zs. f. d. Altertum, XIV, 354, Brakelmann, Zs. f. d. Phil., XVIII,
87, Muret, Romania, XVI, 292.


3d ** The two Folie Tristan’s have the same general design: Tristan


gains access to Marc’s court by disguising himself as a madman and
in this disguise gradually reveals himself to Iseult by recalling the
various incidents of their love-affair. Both poems were first edited by
Francisque Michel in his Tristan: recueil de ce qui reste des poemes
relatifs a ses aventures, from the Berne MS. (No. 354 of the Berne
Library), I, 215ff., and the Bodleian MS. (Douce d 6) II, 89ff. (1835).
The second of these versions was, also, edited by H. Morf, Romania,
XV. 558 ff. (1886). The standard edition of both poems now, however,
is that of J. Bédier, Les deux poéemes de la Folie Tristan, 1 ft.
(Paris, 1907, for the Société des Anciens Textes Francais). The Ox-
ford Folie is plainly dependent on Thomas; that of Berne is closely
related to Béroul, but, according to Bédier, pp. 82f. not directly de-
pendent. On the subject see, still further, W. Lutoslawski, “Les Folies
de Tristan,” Romania, XV, 511ff. (1886) and E. Hoepffner, “Das
Verhaltnis der Berner Folie Tristan zu Berols Tristandichtung,” Zs.
jf. rom. Ph. XXXIX, 62ff. (1917), and “Die Berner und die Ox-
forder Folie,” ibid., XXXIX, 551ff. (1918), 672ff. (1919). Accor-
ding to Hoepffner, the Berne version follows closely an hypothetical
lost poem (X), derived from Béroul. On the other hand, the author
of the Oxford version, he thinks, recast this, using very fully in the
process Thomas’s poem and aiming at the production of a romance in
the courtly style. Ibid. XL, “Die Folie Tristan und die Odyssee”,
Hoepffner has discussed the motif in the French Folies ae compared
with the similar one in the Odyssey.

A similar episode to that of these two poems is found in the prose
Tristan (cp. Bédier’s edition of Thomas, I, 372ff.), in Eilhart, ll. 8695 ft.,
in Ulrich von Turheim’s and Heinrich von Freyberg’s continuations to
Gottfried von Strassburg.

For a discussion of the affiliations of all the various versions,
see W. Lutoslawski’s above-mentioned article and Bédier, I, 287ff.


Hefperia, Erganzungsreihe: 8. 11


Go ogle


162 _ Evolution of Arthurian Romance


The problem of reconstruction was rendered more difficult
by the fact that only fragments of Thomas’s poem in its original
French form have come down to modern times, and so this poem
itself, in the missing portion, had first to be reconstructed from
the versions in foreign languages which are known to be based
‘upon it — viz: the Scandinavian prose Tristan saga, Gottfried
von Strassburg’s Tristan, the Middle English Sir Tristrem, the
Folie Tristan of the Oxford MS., and the Italian La Tavola Ri-
tonda..2 This task has been accomplished in masterly fashion


Bédier’s stemma (p. 296) is preferable to Lutoslawski’s (p. 287). Some-
what different is W. Golther, p. 219, note 1. ‘

Tristan appears elsewhere in other disguises—namely, as 1. leper,
Thomas, ll. 1773ff. 2. penitent, ibid., ll, 2061ff. 3. minstrel, Ger-
bert’s continuation to Chrétien’s Perceval, Romania, XXXVI, 497ff.
4. monk, Middle High German poem (based, no doubt, on a lost French
original), Tristan als Monch, edited by H. Paul, Sitzwngsberichte der
Miinchener Akademie der Wissenschaften for 1895, pp. 317ff., from
the two extant MSS. of the thirteenth century. The author, it seems,
was an Alsatian.

As Golther, p. 29, has remarked, these stories of Tristan seeking
his lady-love in various disguises were probably due, in the first in-
stance, to the influence of the legend of Solomon.

*? Of Thomas’s French original only 3144 lines, all told, are extant.
Following are the works on which reconstructions of the remainder
of Thomas's -poem have to be based: 7. The Old Norse prose saga
(dating from 1226), edited by Brynjulfson, Saga of Tristram ok
Isondar (Copenhagen, 1878) and E. Kélbing Tristrams Saga ok
Isondar (Heilbronn, 1878). 2. Gottfried von Strassburg’s poem, T'ristan
(early thirteenth century), which has been often edited (cp. list in
Golther p. 165, note 1) — last by K. Marold (Leipzig, 1912). Marold
furnishes the best text, but the commentary has not appeared. A. Bossert,
Tristan et Iseult, poéme de Gotfrit de Strasbourg, comparé a
d'autres poémes sur le méme sujet (Paris, 1865), was the first to show
that Gottfried’s poem was based on Thomas. For the best studies of
the relation of the German poet to his original see W. Hertz, Tristan
und Isolde,°, pp. 473f. (Stuttgart and Berlin, 1907), F. Piquet,
L’originalité de Gottfried de Strasbourg (Lille, 1905) and Bédier,
I, 76ff. (1905).

Of minor importance are the articles in a controversy on this
subject in Pfeiffer’s Germania between O. Gléde (who claims greater
independence for Gottfried) and E. Kélbing: cp. that journal, Gléde
XXXII, 17ff. (1888), XXXV, 344f. (1890) and Kélbing, XXXIV,


Go ogle


Tristan 163


by Bedier in the First Volume of his edition of Thomas’s Tristan,
so that we have here a solid basis for the reconstruction of the
primitive poem.

In the discussion of the sources of this hypothetical romance,
from which the whole mediaeval tradition concerning Tristan
flows,43 it will be necessary, as in previous cases, to indicate


187 ff. (1889). 3 The English Sir Tristrem (probably, end of the
thirteenth century) edited by E. Kélbing (Heilbronn, 1882) and by
G. P. McNeill (Edinburgh, 1886, for the Scottish Text Society). 4. La
Folie Tristan (Oxford MS.), edited by Bédier (Paris, 1907). 5. La
Tavola Ritonda (thirteenth century), edited by F. L. Polidori, 2 vols.
(Bologna, 1864—5). Chapters 63—67 are based on Thomas’s poem
for this part of the narrative (Mare spies upon Tristan and Iseult from
the pine-tree, but is observed, etc.). On this subject see E. G. Parodi,
Il Tristano Riccardiano, pp. LXXXIIff. (Bologna, 1896) and Bédier,
II, 91. The text edited by Parodi is the chief source of La Tavola
Ritonda.

** In the Middle Ages no branch of the matiére de Bretagne,
perhaps, won such popularity as the story of Tristan and Iseult. For
allusions to the same in mediaeval literature cp. L. Sudre, “Les allusions
& la légende de Tristan dans la littérature du moyen age,’ Romana,
XV, 534ff. (1886) and Bedier, Ul, 397ff. For allusions in Italian
literature cp., more particularly, A. Graf, “Appunti per la storia del
ciclo brettone,” Giornale Storico della Letteratura Italiana, V, 81 ff.
and Miti, leggende e superstiziom nel medio evo, I, 339ff. (Turin,
1893), and, above all, Elvira Sommer-Tolomei, , La leggenda di Tristano
in Italia,” Rivista d’Itaha for July, 1910, pp. 73ff. P. 127 of the
last-named article, some additional minor contributions to the subject
of Tristan and Iseult in Italy are named. The fourteenth century
Italian poem, La Morte di Tristano, is still unpublished. For an
account of it see G. Bertoni, Fanfulla della Domenica, nos. 48, 46,
48 (Rome, 1915). It is of popular origin. — For similar allusions
in Spanish literature see A. Bonilla y San Martin, Libro del esforgado
cauallero Don Tristan de Leonis, pp. XXVIff. (Madrid, 1912).

For the literature of allusions to Tristan and Iseult in German
writings of the Middle Ages cp. Golther p. 211, note 1.

The popularity of the Tristan romances (especially the Hilhart-
Béroul tradition) is reflected, also, in the use which is made of them
in the decorative arts (apart from miniatures in MSS.). Examples
of such use are found in all the principal European countries, —
particularly, from the fourteenth century. For the literature of this
subject see Hertz, pp. 475f., 541, Golther, pp. 408 ff. and, above all,


11*


yGo ogle


164 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


briefly the succession of episodes which made up the romance.
The reconstructions of Bedier (II, 194ff.) and Golther (pp.


R. S. Loomis in “A Sidelight on the T'ristan of Thomas,” Modern Lan-
guage Review, X, 304ff. (1915) — an article which corrects Bédier’s
reconstruction of Thomas in three minor details — and “Illustrations
of Medieval Romance on Tiles from Chertsey Abbey,” University of
Illinois Studies in Language and Literature, Vol. Il, No. 2 (1916).
The tiles in question are both the earliest (circa 1270) and the finest
specimens of decorative illustrations drawn from the 7’ristan romances.
In the second of his above-mentioned studies, Loomis gives plates
(with identifications and discussions) of the tiles (34, in all). They
are based on Thomas. In this same study he gives, also, full indi-
cations of the very extensive literature on the subject of the 7istan
romances in the decorative arts. Cp. now, also, the same scholar’s
articles: “The Tristran and Perceval Caskets,” RR, VIII, 196ff. (1917)
and “Notes on the TJ'ristan of Thomas,” MLR, XIV, 38ff. (1919).
The first describes a Zristan casket in the Hermitage Museum at.
Petrograd; the second makes additions to the author’s previous articles.
— also, some corrections.

Of especial interest is Pio Rajna’s description of two coverlets
(dating from about 1400) embroidered with figures from the legend
of Tristan. See his article “Intorno a due antiche coperte con figura-
zioni tratte dalle storie di Tristano,’ Romanta, XLII, 517 ff. (1918).
The legends accompanying the figures are in the Sicilian dialect and
the nitimate source of the scenes is the prose 7’ristan, the immediate
source some Italian version of that romance. The plates in Rajna’s
article reproduce the figures in the coverlets.

Localizations from the Tristan poems in Dublin and its vicinity
from as early as the twelfth century are noted in letters to The
Athenaeum for Feb 21 and April 26, 1913. Cp., too, the issues for
May 10 and 17, 1913. The writers naively cite these localizations
as proofs of the actual existence of the characters concerned. “Chapelizod”
(= Iseult’s Chapel), as the name of a village near Dublin, persists
even to this day.

From the romances, the name, 7'ristan, passed into the general
nomenclature of France, England, etc. Students of the romances
| appear to have overlooked the fact that Tristan is recorded as a
. French surname as early as 1207. In that year a person of this
- Mame, whose Christian name seems to have been Arnoul, bought a
property in the neighborhood of Soissons. More distinguished than
himself was one of his sons, Pierre Tristan, (Tristran) — or in Latin,
Petrus Tristanides — who saved the life of Philip Augustus in the
battle of Bouvines (1214). Cp. Oeuvres de Rigord et de Guillaume


Go ogle


Tristan 165


40ff.) do not differ very materially.1¢ The following succinct out-
line which is based on the former, represents, then, in essentials,
with virtual certainty, the content of the lost French romance:


de Breton, I, 282 (2 vols., Paris, 1882—1885), edited by H. F.
Delaborde for the Société de l’Histoire de la France. We have,
also, a record of Pierre’s purchasing a piece of property in 1207
— from the convent of St. Magloire de Paris. On the other hand,
he was still living in 1249. Since he was of age in 1207, he could
hardly have been born later than 1185 and his father, who bore the
same name, is not likely to have been born later than 1165. If he
(Arnoul), in turn, inherited the surname from his father, we should
have 7'ristan occurring as the proper name of an actual person in the
first half of the twelfth century. I see no way, however, of deter-
mining which of Pierre’s progenitors was the first to assume the sur-
name. For abundant documentary evidence relating to this family
cp. Henri Stein: ,Pierre Tristan, chambellan de Philippe Auguste et
sa famille,” Bibliotheque de ’Kcole des Chartes, LXXVIIL, 135ff.
{1918). Stein does not mention the legendary Tristan in connection
with the family.

** For an enumeration of the differences cp. Golther, pp. 59ff.
I have given my reasons, MLN, XXIX, 214ff. for not accepting with
Golther (p. 59) and Miss Schoepperle (pp. 75ff.) certain features of
Kilhart and Béroul as belonging to the lost Tristan poem: In these
poems (as against Thomas) there is an abatement in the influence of
the love-potion after the lapse of three (Béroul) or four (Eilhart) years,
whereupon the lovers confess to a hermit (Ogrin) in the forest and on
his advice it is agreed that Iseult shall return to Mare. Marc takes
her back, but banishes Tristan. In the earliest form of the story,
however, the efficacy of the love-potion obviously could not have been
limited as to time and it is not so limited in Thomas (nor in the
prose 7'ristan), so that it is highly improbable that in the intermediate
version (the primitive Tristan poem) there was any such limitation.
It is principally on account of these views regarding this feature and
the changes in the narrative that are corollary to it that Golther
(p. 103) and Miss Schoepperle (pp. 72ff.) consider the narrative of
Kilhart as differing very slightly from that of the lost Tristan poem.

Another point in which Eilhart’s narrative shows degradation is
in dropping the motif of jealousy, which is necessary to explain the
conduct of Iseult of Brittany at the end of the story, in the incident
of the sails. Miss Schoepperle, pp. 96ff. and in the Zs. f. d. Ph.,
XLII, 453ff. (1911) “Isolde Weisshand am Sterbebette Tristan’s,”’
argues that she is jealous in Eilhart, too, but the argument does not convince.

Altogether, Bédier’s stemma of the Tristan versions seems to me
to be the soundest that has yet been offered.


Go ogle


166 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


Tristan was the son of Rivalen, King of Loenois (in some
versions, Armonie or Parmanie) in Great Britain and of Blanche-
fleur, sister of Marc, King of Cornwall. Blanchefleur dies in
the act of giving birth to Tristan, whose name! was suggested
by the affliction that accompanies his birth. A knight, named
Gorvenal, instructed the young Tristan in the accomplishments
of knighthood, and when his charge was fifteen years old, they
set out for Cornwall and arrive at Marc’s court. Although Tristan
does not disclose his identity, he becomes a favorite at court. In
the course of time an opportunity arises which enables him to
show his prowess. A great knight called Morholt, brother-in-law
of the Irish king, comes from Ireland to exact the tribute of
every third child of fifteen years old, but he was ready to settle the
raatter with any suitable Cornish champion. The Cornish knights
hold back, but Tristan undertakes the combat, after having first
had himself knighted. The duel takes place on the isle of Saint-
Samson and only the combatants are present. Morholt is mor-
tally wounded, but escapes to his boat with a fragment of Tristan’s
sword in his head. He expired before he could reach Ireland;
nevertheless, his niece, Iseult, daughter of the Irish king, kept
the fragment of Tristan’s sword.

Tristan, too, had been wounded in the combat and his con-
dition grows constantly worse. In despair, he finally has himself
put in a boat which is pushed out to sea.!* He carries his harp
with him. The boat drifts to the Irish coast, and the king, hearing
Tristan playing on his harp, takes him ashore, and Iseult, who
is skilled in the healing art, cures him. He calls himself Tantris,
and so eludes identification. He then returns to Cornwall.

King Marc had always refused to marry, but one day a
swallow brings to his hall some strands of a woman’s hair as beauti-


ee Se


** Cp. French triste = sad.

** In the primitive Tristan, the hero, when he started on his
voyage, evidently had no fixed destination in view. According to
F. Piquet, “L’originalité de Gottfried de Strasbourg,’ pp. 165ff.
(Lille, 1905), Thomas modified this and made Ireland his destination
from the beginning. For a refutation of this opinion, however, cp.
R. 8. Loomis, MLR, XIV, 39ff. (1919).


Go ogle


Tristan 167


ful as gold. The king thought that he could rid himself of the
importunities of his courtiers by declaring that he was willing
to marry the woman to whom this hair belonged, but no one else.
Tristan goes forth to discover the unknown beauty and is borne
by chance to Ireland. The king’s officer is sent to slay him, but
‘Tristan pretends that he is a merchant and secures a delay. A
dragon was then devastating Ireland and the king promises his
daughter’s hand to any man that would kill the monster. Tristan
accomplishes this and cuts out the dragon’s tongue as a token
of his victory. He falls afterwards into a swoon and the king’s
seneschal, stealing the dragon’s tongue, represents himself as the
victor.17_ Iseult knows, however, that the seneschal is a coward,
suspects some deceit, goes forth with her mother to look into the
matter and finds Tristan. Aided by her mother, she heals him,
but Tristan, perceiving her golden hair, sees that she is the woman
for whom he is looking. She, however, observes that the frag-
ment taken from the dead Morholt’s head fits exactly a gap in
Tristan’s sword. She would have informed on him, despite his
prayers, but she knew that she would then be compelled to marry
the treacherous seneschal. The deceit of this man is disclosed
and the Irish king pardons Tristan, who asks for Iseult’s hand
on behalf of his uncle. Iseult is sent to Marc under the charge
of Tristan. Then follows the incident of the fatal love-potion..
Iseult’s mother had prepared it, to render perpetual the love of her
daughter and Marc, but, through an accident on the voyage, Bring-
vain (Brangien), Iseult’s female attendant, gives it to Tristan and
Iseult, so that they are united in an undying passion.!® Accor-


17 For parallels in folk-tales to this incident of the false seneschal
cp. Bolte and Polivka’s “Anmerkungen zu den Kinder- und Haus-
miarchen der Briider Grimm,” I, 547ff. (Leipzig, 1913).

7° Miss Schoepperle, “The Love-Potion in Tristan and Isolt,”
Romania, XXXIX, 277ff. (1910), tries to show that the motif of
the love-potion here is Celtic. I agree, however, with Bédier, II, 163 ff.
and Golther, p. 34, that it was introduced into the legend by a French
poet from classical sources.

For the variant forms of the name of Iseult’s attendant in the
different mediaeval versions of the T7'ristan story, ep. W. Hertz’s Tristan
und Isolde von Gottfried von Strafburg’, p. 527 (Stuttgart and


Go ogle


168 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


dingly, on Iseult’s wedding night, Bringvain takes her place with
Marc and she remains with her lover.19

Fearing that Bringvain would betray the deception prac-
tised on Marc, Iseult engages two men to murder her. By a
clever allegory the girl touches the hearts of these men and they
spare her. They report to Iseult that they have executed their
commission, but she exhibits such remorse that they tell her the
truth.

One day an Irish harper plays at court on condition that
Marc will grant anything he wishes. It turns out that he wishes
Iseult, and Marc, though reluctant, is constrained to comply with
his promise. The Irishman takes the queen to his ship, but Tristan
returns at this moment from the forest and goes to seek Iseult.
He tells her captor that he can quiet her distress with his rote.2°
He gains time in this way, wins the Irishman’s confidence, and
finally manages to carry off Iseult, flinging back the taunt, as
he goes, that the Irishman has won her with his harp, but that
he has won her back with his rote.?!


Berlin, 1907). It is hardly open to doubt that Bringvain was the
form used by Thomas, although in our extant MSS. of his poem, the
name sometimes appears in an altered form. See on the subject
W. Golther, Zs. f. rom. Ph. XII, 352. According to G. Paris, Romania,
XVI, 323, Brenwain was the form employed in the source (or sources)
of the 7’ristan romances. This is, however, purely hypothetical, and
I have thought it better to use in an outline even of the Ur-Tristan
the form of the name which is virtually assured for Thomas. There
is no agreement as yet in regard to the etymology of this name.

*’ For parallels to this motif in folk-tales and literature cp.,
especially, Hertz, Tristan und Isolde’, pp. 533ff., and P. Arferth, Das
Motw von der untergeschobenen Braut (Rostock Diss. 1897 Je

*° The rote was a kind of violin, it seems.

*" Miss Schoepperle, II, 417ff., has shown that this incident,
doubtless, formed a feature of the Tristan saga in its original Celtic
form. In the Archw fiir das Studim der neueren Sprachen,
CXXIX, 375ff. (1912), Brugger had already contended that the inci-
dent was of Celtic origin. He cites examples from the Welsh tales,
Kulhwch and Olwen and Pwyll Prince of Dyvet — also, from the
Irish story of Mongan, son of Manawyddan. It is very questionable,
however, whether the don-motif in Arthurian romance is so exclusively
of Celtic origin as Brugger believes.


Go ogle


Tristan 169


The lovers now continue their intrigue, but Audret (Andret),
another nephew of Marc’s, who hates Tristan, spies on the pair,
and, assisted by a wicked dwarf, endeavors to ruin them. Tristan
communicates with his mistress by sending inscribed pieces of
wood down a stream which flows through Iseult’s chamber. They
have all sorts of escapes. Once Marc is hidden in a tree above them,
listening to them, but they observe his shadow in a spring and
give their conversation such a turn that he is deceived. They are,
however, finally detected. Tristan is sleeping in the same chamber
with the king and queen. The king by design leaves the chamber
and Tristan wishes to join Iseult. The dwarf has strewn the
floor between them with meal, so that Tristan’s tracks may be
shown, but, seeing the snare, Tristan springs over to Iseult’s bed.
He had lately been wounded, however, and the exertion broke
his wound. The blood accordingly stained both his bed and Iseult’s
and their guilt was divulged. Tristan escapes, but Marc, who at
first had determined to burn his wife, later decides to give her up
to a band of lepers. Her lover however, rescues her from this
fate and they fly to the forest and spend two years there in the
enjoyment of each other’s love. One day Marc, in hunting, came
upon them asleep in their hut, but Tristan’s sword lay between
them, which convinced him of their innocence.?2 On awakening,
the lovers observe signs that Marc had been there (his sword and
his glove) and fly deeper inte the forest.

The forest-life, however, becomes no longer bearable, and
Tristan and Iseult agree to part. Tristan threw a letter into Marc's
chamber, inquiring whether he would take her back. By another
letter Marc signified his willingness to do so, provided Tristan
left the kingdom.

Tristan now goes to Arthur’s court, but with Gawain’s help
has another meeting with his mistress. Arthur hunts near Tin-
tagel and Marc has to receive him and his followers, including
Tristan. To guard Iseult from Tristan, he has sharp blades set
near her bed. Tristan is wounded by them, but, in order to pro-


* For this common folk-tale motif cp. Hertz, Tristan und


Isolde, pp. 551ff., B. Heller, Romania, XXXVI, 36ff., XXXVI, 162f.,
and Bolte and Polivka, I, 554f.


(50 ogle


170 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


tect him, his companions feign a fight, get wounded with the
same blades, and so it is impossible the next day to convict him.
The king now compels Iseult to make a public declaration of her
innocence. To confirm her veracity, she will have to endure the
test of holding a red-hot iron in her hand. On the way to the
place where the test is to be made Iseult is borne across a ford
by Tristan disguised as a beggar. She swears afterwards that no
one but the king and this man had touched her. The people do
not see into the real significance of this oath, but it enables the
queen to go through the test unharmed.”8

Tristan next goes to Brittany and helps Duke Hoel of Carhaix
in his war with a rival. The latter has a daughter named Iseult
(Iseult of the White Hands she is called) and she is wedded to
Tristan, but the marriage remains merely nominal, the husband’s
mind still dwelling on Iseult of Cornwall. The wife lets her brother
Kaherdin know this. Tristan tells this brother of the love of
Iseult of Cornwall for him and they go then to Cornwall together,
where Tristan has a secret meeting with Iseult. Afterwards, how-
ever, through a misunderstanding, Iseult is out of humor with
him because of a supposed act of cowardice on his part. Dis-
guised as a leper, he seeks an interview with her to explain, but
although she recognizes him, she has him beaten away. He returns,
therefore, to Brittany and becomes really the husband of the other
Iseult. Iseult of Cornwall now fegls remorseful in regard to her
lover and even puts on haircloth. On hearing the news of this,
Tristan again comes from Brittany — meets her in secret — the


*° For numerous parallels in Oriental literature to this motif cp.
J. J. Meyer’s Isolde’s Gottesurteil in seiner erotischen Bedeutung,
(Berlin, 1914). For some additional examples see Golther’s review
of Meyer’s book in the Deutsche Literaturzeitung, March 14, 1914,
and Miss Schoepperle, pp. 223ff. Miss Schoepperle gives references to
articles and books on the motif, in general. Bédier II, 265, expresses
some uncertainty as to whether this episode was in the estore. He,
also, rejects the beautiful incident, told in some of the versions, concerning
the dog, Petitcri, presented by the King of Scotland to Tristan and
by him, in turn, to Iseult. The sound of a magic bell hung about the
creature's neck had the power of dispelling grief, but Iseult would not
be happy, whilst her lover was sorrowful, so she broke the bell.


Go ogle


Tristan 171


next day bears off the prize in some sports, but 1s detected by
accident and escapes. At a later time, however, having been much
altered in appearance because of his sufferings from a wound which
he had received in war, he goes back to Cornwall, disguised as
a madman, and carries on his clandestine amours with Iseult,
until he is finally detected and returns to Brittany.

Kaherdin carries on an intrigue with tha wife of Bedenis.
In the fight that follows on account of this affair he is killed and.
Tristan severely wounded. Tristan sends to Iseult of Cornwall
to come and cure him. It is agreed that the ship on its return
shall hoist a white sail, if it brings her — otherwise a black sail.
She comes, but Tristan’s wife is jealous and reports that the sail
is black. At this the hero dies, and when Iseult of Cornwall arrives,
she too expires upon his body. Marc at last learns how the lovers
were bound together by the fatal potion and has them buried
side by side. Rose-bushes spring up out of the two graves and
intertwine their branches.


Now, the investigations of Miss Gertrude Schoepperle*4 have
made it virtually certain that the starting-point of this long and
romantic narrative is a Celtic Atthed® (elopement story), similar
to the Old Irish story of Diarmaid and Gramne.** In this Irish
story, too, the hero (Diarmaid), under the influence of passion,
violates the obligations of friendship and loyalty and flies with
the wife of his uncle and king to the forest. They are pursued from
place to place and have to endure all sorts of hardships. Dtarmaid
and Grainne is preserved only in such varying fragmentary and


* Later Mrs. R. S. Loomis. See her fine study, Tristan and
Isolt, a Study of the Sources of the Romance, 2 vols. Frankfort and
London, 1913. The pagination of the volumes is continuous.

*° For a list of this class of Celtic tales cp. Schoepperle, II,
393f. The Attheda are not to be confounded with tales headed Aided
(Death), which recount the deaths of heroes and heroines. Cp. the
long list of the latter in G. Dottin’s catalogue of Irish epic literature,
Revue Celtique, XXXII, 1ff. (1912).

*° J. F. Campbell identified the story of Tristan and Iseult with
that of Diarmaid and Grainne in his Popular Tales of the West
Highiands, IV, 240 (4 Vols. London, 1890— 1893). Miss Schoepperle
seems to have overlooked this.
172 Evolutvon of Arthurian Romance


corrupt versions?’ that it is difficult to compare the story with
that of Tristan in detail, and the difficulty is still further en-
hanced by the fact that these versions are so largely lyrical. The
central motif, however, is the same in the two stories, so that
the derivation of the latter from the former or some similar Aithed
seems to be an acceptable conclusion.?® It is, doubtless, due to
this origin that the Tristan of the Old French poems still differs
so greatly from the conventional hero of the French romances
of chivalry — Gawain, for example, whose main function is to
exemplify the knightly virtues of prowess and courtesy in their
highest manifestations. Tristan’s nimbleness of hand and foot, his
forest cunning, his skill in elementary feats of strength (leaping,
putting the stone) are all surviving traits of a more primitive type.
Apart, however, from the numerous accretions to the central theme
and the coloring of French chivalrous society which the whole
story has received, it must be acknowledged that the Celtic tale,
even in respect to this central theme, has undergone a transfor-
mation in the hands of the French romancers, who developed it
into what is, perhaps, the greatest love-story in literature. The
transformation, indeed, is so great that some scholars have been
disposed to deny any Celtic influence at all in the shaping of the
love-story. In particular, it has been objected that the conflict
of passion and law which constitutes the tragedy of the lovers
in the romance could not have been of Celtic origin, since the dis-


*7 For an account of these versions, which range from the tenth
century to the present time, see the two articles by J. H. Lloyd,
0. J. Bergin and G. Schoepperle in the Revwe Celtique: “The Re-
proach of Diarmaid,” XXXIII, 41ff. (1912), and “The Death of
Diarmaid,” tbid., 157ff. We have here, also, editions and translations
of some of the most important texts. Cp., also, on the subject Miss
Schoepperle’s Tristan and Isolt, Il, 395ft.

7° It must be confessed that in the Diarmaid and Grainne texts
the passion displayed is mainly on the part of the heroine. Cp. for
instance, The Reproach of Diarmaid, just cited, where the hero
bewails to the heroine the misfortunes which she has brought on him.
In still other versions (cp. Revue Celtique, XXXII, 49 and Miss —
Schoepperle, II, 402) he resists her advances for a long time. On
the other hand (cp. Rev. Celt., loc. cit.), in some of these versions
Grainne is unfaithful to Diarmaid with a stranger who visits their cave.


(6 ogle


Tristan 173


solution of the marriage tie was easy among the Celts®9 and the
idea of womanly modesty and virtue had little force among the
Celtic populations in the period with which we are concerned.*°
There is a measure of truth in the first of these objections, for
the moral reprobation of adultery is not emphasized in these Celtic
tales, which reflect a more primitive condition of society than the
French romances, but the parallelism with Diarmaid and Grainne,
or even with the more celebrated story of the love of Naisi and
Deirdre, wife of Conchobar,*! is too striking to be accidental.
All three of these tales, with their forest setting to a drama of
adultery, in which the principal actors are a hero, his uncle (a
king ), and the latter’s wife, bear unmistakably, it would seem, the
stamp of the same mint. A recognition of this fact, however, does
not conflict with the view that, after all, the tragedy of Tristan
and Iseult, which, through the romances, has impressed itself on
the imagination of the modern world so deeply, owes its strength,
mainly, to the changes which the French poets wrought in the
Celtic tradition. Leaving aside the addition of the story of Iseult


7° Cp. Bédier’s edition of Thomas’s Tristan, Il. 163ff. Bédier
appeals especially to the Welsh law on the subject in the so-called
Laws of Howel the Good (ninth and tenth centuries). In his reply to
Bédier, Revue Celtique, XXX, 270ff. (1909), Loth has attenuated, in
some measure, the force of that scholar’s argument.

*° Cp. the posthumous article of H. Zimmer, cited above: “Der Kultur-
geschichtliche Hintergrund in den Erzahlungen der alten irischen Helden-
sage,” Sitzungsberichte der kéniglhchen preussischen Akademie der
Wissenschaften,” pp. 174 ff. (Berlin 1911), where he collects some extra-
ordinary instances of shameless immodesty on the part of women in the
Irish heroic sagas. Loth observes in reply, Revue Celtique, XXXII, 260,
note (1912), “Quant aux faits de divergondage qu’il cite ils ne prou-
vent pas plus contre les moeurs des Celtes que la conduite des per-
sonnages de l’Olympe contre les moeurs des anciens Grecs.” Loth,
ibid., refutes Zimmer’s idea that this supposed immodesty was a con-
comitant of the matriarchal system which was in vogue among the Picts.

*' The Aithed of these two characters is preserved, in one of
its versions, in the Book of Leinster (a MS. written before 1150).
For editions and translations cp. Miss Schoepperle, II, 411, note 1.
There are convenient English translations of this Irish saga in A. H. Leahy,
Heroic Romances of Ireland, I, 95, (2 vols., London, 1905—6) and
Eleanor Hull, The Cuchullin Saga, pp. 123 ff. (London, 1898).


(6 ogle


174 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


of Brittany to the original Acthed and other accretions that
heighten, in a variety of ways, the interest of the legend, one may
note among these changes the discardal of the bizarre paganism
of the Old Irish tale with its duplicate motifs of the-hero’s love-
spot and the heroine’s gets®? — both based on forms of super-
stition that are too primitive to win the interest or sympathy of
modern society — and the substitution in the romances of the in-
cident of the love-drink, shared by the two lovers, which has the
double advantage of a unified motif and of the hallowed famili-
arity of classical associations. But, above all, the power of the
story in the French romances is due to the initial scene of Tristan
and Iseult’s love-story (the scene of the love-potion), with
its definite symbolism that dominates the rest of the narrative —
the symbolism of a passion against which no human convention
can stand — to the elaboration of the forest scenes, to the true
and vivid picture of the passion that constantly draws the hero
back to the heroine, contrary to the obligations of kinship
and personal loyalty, and, despite every variety of obstacle, not
permitting him to forget her even in the embraces of another
woman. The Celtic texts, such as The Reproach of Diarmaid and
Death of Diarmaid, have a beauty of their own that testifies to
@ more intimate contact with the life of nature, but the French
romances are manifestly the products of a higher civilization*
and a more strongly sustained narrative art.

*? Cp. Miss Schoepperle, Il, 401f. on this subject. The “love-
spot’ was a mark on a man’s person that rendered him irresistible to
women. “The geis is a peculiarly Irish taboo which any individual
seems to have been at liberty to impose upon any other, and which,
if disregarded, entailed moral degradation and swift retribution.”’ D’Arbois
de Jubainville observed, however, Revue Celtique, XV, 406, note 1
(1894), that the Irish gezs differs from the spell which the love-potion
exercises in the French 7ristan romances, inasmuch as one was free
to disregard the former — only the punishment inevitably followed.

** It has been remarked that the whole character of this great
love-story, with its dreteckiges Verhdltnis (husband, wife and lover),
is manifestly French, and, consequently, could only have entered into
the Tristan tradition after the French writers began to handle the
theme. But adultery has been a favorite theme of romances, both
written and oral, in all parts of the world. The Irish Aitheda show
how common it was in Celtic romances. Nevertheless, as said above,


(50 ogle


Tristan 175


Granting, now, the Celtic origin** of this famous love-story
of Tristan and Iseult of Cornwall, it remains to fix as far as pos-


the conflict of passion and law which is at the basis of the tragedy
of Tristan and Iseult in the French romances is characteristic of a
more advanced stage of civilisation than that which produced the Irish
sagas. There are some admirable remarks on this subject by H. D’Arbois
de Jubainville, Revue Celtique, XV, 407f. (1894). It was the growing
power of women in the twelfth century, who now inherited fiefs, that
gave their quality to such heroines as Iseult.

I may remark, in passing, that, owing to the idea of fate, which
the Tristan legend seems to show, Egidio Gorra has suggested that
the primitive story concerning this hero was of classical origin. Cp.
his article “Tristano,” pp. 577ff. of the Studj letterari e linguisticr
dedicati a Pio Rajna, nel quarantesimo anno del suo insegnamento
(Milan, 1911). This is true, doubtless, of the love-potion feature of
our extant texts, but one cannot make such an assertion of the story
as a whole. Gorra’s article is purely subjective throughout and adds
nothing to our knowledge of the evolution of the legend.

** Bédier, II, 155ff., has noted the following details in various
Tristan poems as being too primitive for a French knight of the twelfth
century, and hence, as of Celtic origin: Z. In the Tristan episode, ll.
453—662 of the Donnei des Amanz (Amorous dialogue of lovers),
edited by G. Paris, Romania, XXV, 497ff. (1896). According to
Paris (pp. 531, 534), the poem, which is a mediaeval “debate”,
and not a romance, was written in England towards the end of the
twelfth century. The lover (a cleric, it seems), urging his lady-love
to yield to his suit cites the example of various heroines of ro-
mance — among others, Iseult — and, in connection therewith, tells
a story not found elsewhere in the 7’ristan romances, viz. how Tristan,
returning to Cornwall from Brittany, signaled his presence to Iseult
from a garden near Marc’s palace by imitating various birds. From
childhood, the poet says (ll. 475ff.), Tristan had been able to imitate
any bird in the forest. The episode is one of the most vigorous things
in the literature of the Tristan legend, and Paris is, no doubt, right
in regarding it (p. 536) as based on an earlier short poem concerning
Tristan. One may agree, too, with Bédier (loc. cit.) that the power
of the hero to imitate birds exactly belongs to a different state of
society from that which prevailed among the knights and barons of
the twelfth century. But the episode, as is acknowledged even by
G. Paris (p. 537), who is inclined to believe that it is essentially of
Celtic origin, shows unmistakable dependence on Béroul, and so the trait
in question is, in all probability, secondary. Besides, Miss Schoepperle,
Il, 288ff., has shown that the power of imitating birds was a not


Go ogle


176 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


sible, the history of its growth before it reached the French ro-
mancers and the share which the different regions, inhabited by


uncommon accomplishment of French minstrels in the twelfth and
thirteenth century. It would be, then, quite natural for one of the guild
to attribute to the hero of a poem he was composing this trick under
the circumstances of the above-mentioned episode, especially as we find
one of them in the Folie Tristan, ll. 184f. ascribing to him other
juggler’s tricks. Cp. Schoepperle, I, 290ff. 2. In Béroul, Il. 1752f.
Tristan has a bow that never fails to hit the mark. For a similar
bow, however, in English tradition, much earlier than Béroul cp. the
example from Geffrai Gaimar, Lestorie des Engles, ll, 4409ff. (edited
for the Rolls Series in 1888 by T. D. Hardy and E. Martin), cited
by E. Muret in his edition of Béroul, p. IX, and Miss Schoepperle, II,
316f. The traitor, Eadric, is there said to have slain Edmund, King
of England, in 1016 with such a bow. 3. Mark’s horselike ears which
he has to conceal under his hair, Béroul, ll. 1306ff. As stated above,
this is, doubtless, Celtic, although similar to the Midas legend. 4. Tin-
tagel, Folie Tristan ll. 129ff. (Douce MS.), disappears twice a year.
Occurring in only one version, the detail may well be the fancy of
the individual poet.

There is nothing distinctively Celtic in vanishing castles, which
are common in fairy-tales the world over. I agree with Miss Schoep-
perle, II, 325, note 2, that the Irish parallels to this and the next
detail, No. 5, cited by D’Arbois de Jubainville, Revwe Celtique, XXII,
133 (1901) and approved by Bédier, ll. 156f., are really no parallels.
In the Folie Tristan (Douce MS.), ll. 301ff., Tristan, playing the réle
of a fool, says that he has a hall of glass up in the air. What I
have said of No. 4 applies here, too. On the subject of glass-houses
cp. W. O. Sypherd, Studies in Chaucer's House of Fame, pp. 85f.
Publications of the Chaucer Society (London, 1907).

Besides these five features, Bédier has conjectured, also, a Celtic
origin for two others, though less positively: 1. In both Thomas (cp.
Bédier, I, 194ff.) and Eilhart, ll. 3504f., and hence, one may say,
certainly in their common (lost) source, Tristan communicates with
Iseult by writing on bits of wood which he drops into a stream that
flows through or past Iseult’s chamber. Kuno Meyer, Zs. f. rom. Ph.
XXVI, 716f. (1902) and XXVIII, 353f. (1904), first cited indu-
bitable parallels to this from Irish sagas, with examples of streams
flowing through houses in Wales and Southern Scotland even at the
present day. See, also, Miss Schoepperle, pp. 303ff., for examples
drawn from the saga of Dairmaid and Grainne, which, as we have
seen, is so Closely akin to that of Tristan and Iseult. It seems certain
that this detail descended to the Tristan poems from the original Celtic
Tristan 177


the Celts, had in this process. The task is one which has long
enlisted the energies of the ablest students of the matiére de
Bretagne. |


As is customary in cases where the records are so scanty,
scholars have turned to the nomenclature® of the story in the


saga, although streams running through houses, despite K. Meyer, Zs.
Jf. rom. Ph. XXVIII, 353, note 2, are not confined to Celtic regions.
Cp. Miss Schoepperle, II, 302, notes 1 and 2. To the examples which
she discusses I may add one from the version of the Alexander saga
called Historia de Preliis, Il, 22 (tenth century). It is cited by
A. Hilka, Vollméller’s Jahrbuch, Teil II, p. 86, note 89. Here a stream
flows under Candace’s palace. 2. The incident of the blades which
Marc places by Iseult’s bed and by which Tristan is wounded. Here
thirty or forty guests are represented as sleeping in the chamber of
their host. This trait belongs, as Bédier remarks, to a primitive state
of society. This is true, but that society need not have been Celtic,
for we find the same thing in the actual customs, as well as folk-
tales, of other regions too. — Cp. Schoepperle, I, 215 ff. The trick,
by which, Tristan, with the aid of Arthur’s knights, evades detection
{they all wound themselves, so that no one can say who is really the
guilty person) is merely a variant of the tale of the Masterthief, which,
from Herodotus, Book II, Ch. 121, down, is found in innumerable variants.
For the literature of the subject see Schoepperle, I, 214, note 3. On
this particular episode, cp. G. Huet, “Sur un épisode du Tristan d’Kilhart
d’Oberg,” Romania, XXXVI, 50ff. (1907).

*°) For variants of Tristan, Iseult, Marc and the other names in
the Tristan romances, cp. W. Hertz, Tristan und Isolde, pp. 479 ff.
Hertz, however, is mistaken (pp. 483f.) in accepting the supposed dis-
covery of the name “Tristan” in a document of the year, 807 (from
Langenargen on Lake Constance). The name there is really “Cristan’’.
Cp. F. Lot, Romania, XXXV, 596f. Hertz, ibid., discusses there
(pp. 482f.) other Tristans in mediaeval romances — likewise, other
Iseults (pp. 487f.).

In his “Tristan on the Continent before 1066”, MLN, XXIV,
374. (1909) F. M. Warren points out in early documents relating to
South Italy instances of the occurrence of names (of Normans) which
he identifies with Tristan, viz. Trostayne in Ystoire de li Normant
(early fourteenth century), translated from the lost chronicle (written
in Latin about 1075) of Amatus of Monte Cassino; Torstainus, Tri-
stainus (also, names of Normans in South Italy) in the part of the
Latin chronicle of Monte Cassino by Leo de Marsico (died 1115),
which ends towards the year 1075, Trostenus (Tristaynus), Tro-
staynus, in the continuation (carried down to 1139) of the same chro-

Fefperia, Ergingungsreihe: 8. 12


Go ogle


178 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


search for light regarding the question just mentioned. In his
well-known studies of Arthurian names,®* the late Professor
Zimmer endeavored to establish the Pictish origin of the hero’s
name, and that scholar’s identification *’ was all but universally
accepted, even by those who had been engaged in the bitterest
controversies with him.*8 In the Irish chronicles of the Picts
we have in the eighth century a Talorcan filius Drostan and a
Drest filius Talorcan.® Now, Celtic scholars are agreed that
Drostan is the same as Drest (Drust), with a common Celtic suffix
added, and that Tristan is derived from Drostan.© It has been
shown, however, that Drust (Drest and its derivatives) is not con-


nicle by Peter the Deacon. We may have here, however, MS. corrup-
tions of the common Norman name Turstin (from Old Norse Thorsstein),
which is found in Domesday Book and (as Tursten) in Rotuli Scac-
cartt Normanniae, p. LVII (2 vols., London, 1840). In Ordericus
Vitalis’s Historiae Ecclesiasticae Libri Tredecim we find twelve
different men of this name (Turstinus). Cp. the edition by A. Le
Prevost, V, 477 (5 vols., Paris, 1838—1855. Société de 1’Histoire
de France). It occurs many times as Tosteins (Tostains) in Wace’s.
Roman de Rou, Il, 166, et passim (edited by H. Andresen, 2 vols.
Heilbronn, 1877—1879). In the form of Toustain the name is still
met with in Normandy. The variant T'ristaynus would then be due
to the influence of the Zristan of our romances. Warren thinks that
the forms which he has cited represent Celtic Drostan and that they
reached Normandy through Brittany. As he remarks, however, this
- would not necessarily imply that the legend accompanied the name.


°° Zs. f. fre. Spr. u. Litt. XIN", 1ff. (1891).
°? Ibid. pp. 58ft.
*° So by F. Lot, Romania, XXV, 15 (1896), who goes so far


as to say that this is Zimmer’ 8 sole serious contribution to the aneeon
of the origin of the Arthurian romances.


*° Cp. Zimmer, op. cit, p. 71.


*° That is to say, by weakening of the radical vowel under con-
ditions of light stress. The examples of T'ristan (Trystan) from Celtic
documents, cited by Zimmer, p. 72 of the above-mentioned article, show
that there is no need of assuming the influence of French triste, as
is sometimes done, to explain the change of form.

Zimmer still further maintained that the Trystan mab Tallwch
of a Welsh triad, which we shall soon discuss, was merely a Welsh
Tristan 179


fined to the Picts, as Zimmer maintained, but belongs to the
general nomenclature of the Brythonic Celts, although commonest
among the Picts.44 As far, then, as the name alone is concerned,
we could not infer anything positively as to the ultimate origin
of the story. It might have belonged to any branch of the Bry-
thonic Celts. Nevertheless, there are sufficient reasons, I believe,
for regarding Tristan as, in the first instance, a Pict. First of all,
the name, although not confined to the Picts, is much commoner
among them than among the other Celts. Furthermore, all the
chief versions of the story represent the hero’s father as ruling
Loonois (Loenois) and the region in which he and Iseult lead
their forest-life as Morois. Now, despite mistaken identifications
in the romances, themselves, it seems most probable that Loonois


rendering of a Pictish Drostan mac Talorg. J. Loth, however, the
eminent Celtic authority, who argues, as we shall see, that the story
of Tristan and Iseult is a Cornish legend, which reached the French
poets through the Welsh, has proved, Revue Celtique, XXXII, 409 (1911),
that there is no phonetic correspondence between Tallwch and Talorg:
the names are not identical. On the other hand, as it seems to me,
Tallwch is so close in sound to Talorg.that we may reasonably accept
it as an inexact rendering of the latter. It is significant that the name,
Tallwch, is not found elsewhere in Welsh records.


‘1 Loth further contends that Dristan, the form nearest to the
French name, which is actually found in Welsh documents of about
1100, cannot even be Cornish, that it is only possible in Welsh and,
still further, that, since in pronunciation this 7 had the sound of an
umlauted 0, the French must have derived the name from written and
not oral sources. (On these subjects cp. loc. cit. and the reprint of
the same in his Contributions a [étude des romans de la table
ronde pp. 16ff. In Romama, XIX, 455ff. he had already contended
that Welsh (Cornish) Drystan was independent of the Gaelic and the
French Jseult came from Welsh Essylt). I confess, however, that
this distinction seems to me somewhat wire-drawn. It would be easy
for anyone who was not familiar with the name to catch imperfectly
the pronunciation, Drostan or Trostan, and write it down, Tristan.
Indeed, there would be nothing very surprising if a person, hearing
even the Cornish or Breton pronunciation of the name, Drostan, were
to record it inaccurately as Tristan.

On the names, T'ristan and Iseult, see, still further, E. Windisch,
Das Keltische Brittanien bis zu Kaiser Arthur, pp. 213ff. (Leip-
zig, 1912).

12*
180 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


is the Scottish Lothian and Morois (Morrois) the Scottish Murray
— so two districts that were undeniably inhabited by the Picts.‘?

The fame of Tristan began, then, as we may assume, with the
Picts, probably merely as a character in heroic saga, with no love-
story attached; but did it pass through Wales** and, perhaps,
Cornwall on its way to the French, and, if so, what accretions
did it receive in those regions? The principal evidence bearing
on the Welsh side of the question is that which is offered by the
Triads. In one of these (Loth’s Mabinogion, II, 231) Tristan is
called one of the three chief diadem-wearers of Britain; in another
(ibid, p. 238) he is one of the three machine-masters of Britain;
in still another, (ibid, p. 260), he is one of the three lovers of
Britain. Lastly, in a fourth triad (ibid, pp. 247f.), he is one of
the three great swine-herds of Britain, but he is, at the same
time, the lover of Marc’s wife, apparently. He keeps Marc’s swine,
whilst the regular swine-herd goes on a message to Essylit, as she
is here called; Arthur, Marc, Kay and Bedivere could not get a


** This interpretation was first proposed by F. Lot, Romania,
XXV, 16ff. (1896). J. Loth, Revue Celtique, XXXIII, 280ff. (1912),
identifies Morois with a manor in Cornwall named Moresc (now,
St. Clement’s), in the neighborhood of Truro; but, as A. Smirnov has
pointed out in his excellent review of Loth’s Contributions a U’étude
des romans de la table ronde, Romania, XLII, 121 (1914), Moresc,
as a place-name, occurs frequently in other Celtic regions. Besides,
as he says, the situation of the Cornish Moresc does not fit well with
the requirements of the 7ristan narrative. For my own part, I would
add that Loonois and Morois evidently belong together and that they
are both explained satisfactorily on Lot’s theory, whereas Loth, op.
cit., pp. 286f., is unable to explain the former at all, under his new
theory. In the Annales de Bretagne, XI, 479 (1895—6) he had
accepted the identification of Loonois with Loonia (Lothian).

** The question would be hardly arguable, if the Welsh: 7'’ristan
fragments from the Black Book of Carmarthen which J. Loth has edited
and translated, Revue Celtique, XXXIII, 403ff. (1912), really date
from the first half of the twelfth century, as he thinks. These frag-
ments are excessively obscure, but the second one would appear to
relate to Kaherdin, brother of Iseult of Brittany. Now the story of
Iseult of Brittany seems plainly a French addition to the Tristan ro-
mance, as set forth above, but the date assigned by Loth to these
fragments would be too early for French influence.


Go ogle


Tristan 181


single hog from him, whether by ruse, violence, or theft. Further-
more, in the Dream of Rhonabwy, a prose tale of the Mabinogion
collection, he appears (Drystan mab Tallwch) among Arthur’s
counsellors. This tale is certainly not earlier than the middle
of the twelfth century and it may have been influenced by the
French poems. The triads, enumerated above, are found only in
a MS. of the fourteenth century, when the French romances had
spread the fame of Tristan throughout Europe, and if we were
dependent entirely on them, it would be impossible to say whether,
in representing the hero as a lover of Marc’s wife, they were
really reflecting native tradition. After he became known through
‘the French romances, it would be only natural that native writers
should weave still other stories about him and his famous mistress.
This seems certainly the origin of the pretty tale** in which
Arthur is called on to judge between Marc and Tristan as to the


“« Arthur decided that one should possess her, whilst the leaves
were on the wood, the other, whilst they were off, the husband to
have the choice. Mark chose the second alternative, because the nights
are longer in that season, but Iseult joyfully pointed out that the
holly, the ivy and the yew were never without leaves — hence Mark
lost her forever.

This tale, the earliest MS. of which dates from about 1550, was
first edited by J. Gwenogvryn Evans in the Report on Manuscripts
in the Welsh language (Historical Manuscripts Commission), Vol. I,
Part II, (London, 1899) and Vol. II, Part I (1902). It has since
been edited (as Ystoria Tristan), with translation, by J. Loth, Revue
Celtique, XXXV, 365ff. (1913), and by T. P. Cross, under the title
of “A Welsh Tristan Episode,” [University of North Carolina] Studies
im Philology, XVU, 93ff. (1920). Cp., too, W. Golther, Tristan und
Isolde, pp. 238f. for an outline of the tale, which he quotes from
I. B. John’s paper on it in the Transactions of the Guild of Graduates,
pp. 14ff. (Cardiff, 1904). Loth gives, also, an account of the story
in the Comptes Rendus de l Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-
Lettres, Bulletin de Mars-Avril, 1913, pp. 92 ff.

Bédier does not include this tale in his discussion (in his Intro-
duction) of the different versions of the Tristan legend. Evans claimed
that. it was the story of Tristan in its earliest form and Windisch,
Das Keltische Brittanien bis zu Kaiser ‘Arthur, p. 285 (Leipzig,
1912), unwarily accepted this claim, but Loth has refuted it in his
edition, pp. 377 ff.


Google |


182 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


possession of Iseult. It includes a metrical dialogue* of mutual
compliment between Tristan and Gawain (Gwalchmai), the latter’s
object being to induce his friend to meet Arthur.

The following considerations, however, seem to show that the
conception of Tristan as the lover of Iseult originated either in
Wales or, more probably, in Cornwall. The mistress of Tristan
is in all versions represented as the wife of Marc (Mark), King
of Cornwall. Now Mark is common as a Germanic name, but
it is also given as the name of a king of Cornwall in the sixth
century in the life of the saint, Paulus Aurelianus. It is said of
this saint in his Latin biography, which was written by Wrmonoc,
a monk of Landevennec (in Brittany) in 884, that his fame
reached the ears of King Marc — “otherwise Quonomorius’’.‘¢
Quonomorius, it may be observed, is a Celtic name occurring else-
where. On the other hand, Marc means horse in the Celtic langua-
ges. In the Tristan poem by Beroul, King Marc is represented
as having the ears of a horse, which he tries to conceal, and we
have here, doubtless, a trait of Cornish tradition‘? which came
to Beroul through the primitive Tristan. Moreover, Marc’s sene-
schal, Dinas of Lidan, bears a name of Welsh‘*® or Cornish‘
origin, which, to be sure, as it appears in the French poems, rests
on a misunderstanding, since Dinas [idan in these languages means
“large fortress.” In the poem the proper name (perhaps, Dinan)
or title, which must have stood in the original Celtic source, has


“® These verses, which belong to the species of poetry called
Englynion (epigrams) in Welsh, were known to scholars long before
the rest of the tale in which they occur. Cp. Golther, op. cit., p. 239.
Cross, p. 93, cites another Welsh dialogue between Tristan and
Gwalchmai, similar to this.

*° F. Lot, Romania, XXV, 19f. (1896), shows that Wrmonoc’s
sources were certainly insular, and he is probably right in regarding
Mare (Quonomorius) as an actual person. For other occurrences of
Marc as a Celtic name, cp. Miss Schoepperle, II, 271, note 3.

“7 In a note, however, to A. de Braz’s La Légende de la Mort,
Il, 97 (new ed. Paris, 1902), G. Dottin derives it from the story of
Midas and cites it as an instance of the adaptation of a classical
legend by the Celts.

** Cp. F. Lot, Romania, XXIV, 337.

*° Cp. J. Loth, Revue Celtique, XXXIII, 288f.
Tristan 1838


dropped out.5° This character, it should be remembered, has an
intimate connection with the legend and his name is, therefore,
significant of the origin of the romance, or, at least, of the epi-
sodes in which he plays a part.

As regards the name of the heroine, Iseult, this has been
usually regarded as of Germanic origin, and, accordingly, seemed
to conflict with the theory of the Welsh or Cornish, or, indeed,
Celtic origin of the love-story. Iswalda, Ishild (parallel to Brune-
hild, Richild) have been suggested as Germanic equivalents.®!
Zimmer disputed the Celtic character of the name, Essylt, which
is given to Marc’s wife in the Welsh triads, and derived it from
the Anglo-Saxon Ethylda.5? This accorded with his view that the
triads about Tristan and Essylt do not reflect a native tradition.®
The Cornish place-name, Ryt-Eselt (‘‘Eselt’s ford’), which
is found in an Anglo-Saxon charter of the year 967,54 proves,
however, that this name could be Cornish as well as Welsh. The
matter is too technical for a layman to pass judgment on, but,
on the whole, the argument in favor of the Celtic origin of the
name appears to carry with it the weight of probability, and it
seems, furthermore, mere pedantry to lay stress on the fact that
the French Iselé (Iseut) is not quite exact in its phonetic corre-
spondence to Welsh Essylt or Cornish Hselt.5> Foreign names are


** Loth, loc cit. p. 290, points out that “Dinas” cannot be
Armorican. “Pendennis” (whence the name of Thackeray’s hero), name
of a place in Cornwall, was originally “Pen-dinas” — “chief fortress”.
On Dinas and its diminutive, dinan, cp., still further, E. Phillimore,
Y Cymmrodor, XI, 38. 42ff. (1892). The last is frequent as a
suffix in place-names, though disguised in spelling as — dinam, —
dinham, e. g. Cardinham in Cornwall, which Phillimore wrongly
identifies with the Arthurian Caradigan. Cp. Lot, Romania, XXX, 19f.

°? Cp. Muret, Romania, XVII, 606, and G. Paris, ibid. XVIII, 423.

? Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt., XII’, 73 ft. (1891). F. Lot, Romania,
XXV, 18f. (1896) was inclined to accept Zimmer’s view.

°* So, too, D’Arbois de Jubainville, Revue Celtique, XV, 408 (1894),
and Golther, Tristan und Isolde, pp. 237ff. (1907).

*“ Cp. J. Loth, Revue Celtique, XXXII, 414 ff. (1911). He argues
that Iseult (selt) is Celtic in origin.

°* Loth, ibid., XXXII, 420, declares quite positively that Armorican
participation in transmitting the name of Iseult to the French is, on
phonetic grounds, out of the question.


Go ogle


184 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


seldom caught correctly and the difference, after all, is very slight.
This difficulty seems, then, to offer no serious obstacle to the
acceptance of the Welsh or Cornish origin of the love-saga.

As between Wales and Cornwall, the evidence would seem
to point rather to the latter as the region in which the great love-
story of Tristan and Iseult first took shape. Indeed, but for the
role of an intermediary between Pictland and Cornwall — regions.
far apart — which we are compelled to assume, there would be
no reason to attribute to Wales any part at all in the development
of the legend. The wronged husband, as we have seen, bore a
Cornish name, and was very likely an actual Cornish king. As
Loth has pointed out,* his Lancien was identical with the Lantien.
(Lantyan) of our own day, a village on the river Fowey, and the
parish in which this village is situated is still called Saint
Sampson’s — that is to say, still bears the same name as the church
where, according to Beroul (1. 2977), Marc and Iseult performed.
their devotions.*? In the neighborhood there is a place of the
name of ‘Kilmarth, a corruption for Kilmarch (“Marc’s retreat’’).
Taking into consideration the evidence of these place-names, to
say nothing of some others, suggested by Loth, which are more
open to question,®* and the fact that the Tristan poems distinctly


°* Cp. Revue Celtique, XXXIM, 270f. (1912). It appears im
Domesday Book as Lantien (Lanthien). This name for Marc’s
capital is found only in Béroul, ll. 1155 et passim, and in Gerbert’s.
continuation to Chrétien’s Perceval, in the episode which Bédier and
Miss Weston have published, Romania XXXV, 497ff. (1906), under
the title of Tristan menestrel. The latter derived it from Beéroul,.
no doubt. It is safe to assume that Béroul, in turn, derived it from.
the (lost) primitive Tristan poem.

In the Comptes Rendus of the Académie des Inscriptions et.
Belles-Lettres, Bulletin de Decembre, 1916, pp. 592f., Loth points
out that a gate entering Lantyan Wood is still called Mark’s Gate.

*7 According to the Folie Tristan, prose Tristan and Chrétien’s
Erec, Tristan and the Morholt fight on an island of St. Sampson, off.
the coast of Cornwall. In the Bulletin cited in the previous note,
pp. d89ff., Loth cites a charter of May 20, 1301, to prove that an
island once existed at the mouth of the Fawe. This isle he identifies
with the Isle of St. Sampson.

. °* Namely, of Tristan’s Leap with Bodrigan’s Leap (south of
Lantien), Mal Pas with Malpas (near Truro, on the Truro river),
Tristan 185


locate the story in Cornwall, there can be no doubt that Cornwall
had a main share in the formation of the legend. It would appear
that the fame of a character, originally Pictish, had spread through
Wales and Cornwall, and that in the latter, owing to circumstances
over which time has drawn an impenetrable veil, that character
became the hero of this crowning love-story of the Middle Ages.

Apart from the Pictish, Welsh and Cornish elements already
noted, an analysis of the Tristan tradition®® reveals still further
Breton and French names, which point to the conclusion that both
of these people likewise had a hand in the final shaping of the
story, before it reached the author of the lost romance which was
the common source of the extant Tristan poems. For instance,


Blanche Lande with Blaunchelound (not far from Malpas and recorded
as early as 1306), now called Nansavallan. Cp. Revue Celtique,
XXXII, 274 ff. (1912) and the above-cited Bulletin, 590. The first
of these identifications, however, is hardly more than a guess. As for
the last two, A. Smirnov, Romania, XLIII, 121 ff., has raised objections
which appear to me worthy of serious attention: The two names are
common in the Middle Ages; Arthur, coming to Lantien from Wales,
would not pass by Blanche Lande; and, besides, the names occur in
episodes that do not appear to belong to the story of Tristan in its
original form.

Loth, Revue Celtique, XXXII, 287f. (1912) also proposes to
emend Parmenie (name of the kingdom of Tristan’s father in Gottfried)
to Hermenie and identify it with the manor named in Domesday Book
Hoimenen (now Harmony). But it is not likely that a manor should
be called a kingdom. The alternative identification which he suggests,
viz. with Hen-moniu, is not open to the same objection, but this, too,
is pure speculation.

It is to be observed, finally, that the Cornish names, Malpas,
Blanche Lande, Mark’s Gate, may be due to attempts at localization
of the Tristan story, suggested by the romances. As early as the
twelfth century such localizations of the story as we have seen, were
made about Dublin, and one of them, Chapelizod (name of a village
near Dublin), has persisted to this day. Cp. letters on the subject
in The Athenaeum Feb. 21 (p. 26), May 10, 17, 1913. The writers
naively cite these localizations as proofs of the actual existence of the
characters concerned, but they are, of course, like the localizations of
the Romeo and Juliet story at Verona, which are all recent and based
on Shakespeare’s play.

°° Cp. Bédier, II, 122f.


Go ogle


186 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


the names of Rivalin, Tristan’s father, and Hoel, his father-in-
law, are ummistakably Breton, whereas Blanchefleur, the name
of his mother, and Petitcru, that of his marvellous dog, are evi-
dently French. It is plain, then, that the Bretons acted as inter-
mediaries in the transmission of the story from Great Britain
to the French. The fact that one of the hero’s parents bears a
French name, the other a Breton name, is especially significant.
The inventor of this part of the legend must have been familiar
with both languages and he was, doubtless, a Breton from the
bi-lingual zone. According to Bédier, it was the Breton jongleurs
who were drawn to Great Britain by the Norman occupation that
brought the story of the lovers home withth@n across the channel,
but since the researches of Loth have shown that there was cer-
tainly, to say the least of it, an early localization of this story in
Cornwall, it would seem likely that it was transmitted directly
from Cornwall to Brittany by the ordinary processes of oral tra-
dition.®

Accepting, in general, the theory that the essential feature


°° T am assuming here that Riwelin (Riwelen) — which is Breton
(cp. Zimmer, Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt., XIII’, 58ff.) — was the name
of Tristan’s father in the legend in the form in which it first became
known to the French. This is the name of the hero’s father in Eilhart
and Gottfried. The early part of Thomas’s T’ristan is lost, but,
doubtless, Gottfried. derived the name from Thomas. In the prose
romance, the character is called Meliadus. This, however, is certainly
a late substitution. He is surnamed, still further, Kanelangres by
Thomas. Brugger, in his article, “Zum Tristan-Roman”, Archiv fiir
das Studium der neueren Sprachen, CXXIX, 134 ff. (1912) tries to
prove that Kanelangres is a mere corruption of Talergen (diminutive
of Talorch, the name of the eighth century Pictish king, whose son
was named Drust-Tristan), but his argument is not convincing. The
name still awaits a satisfactory explanation. Cp. Bédier, I, 2, note 2.

°** This is, on the whole, the most likely hypothesis, and Golther
{p. 70) has accepted it as such. But he believes that the Tristan
legend was among both Welsh and Bretons, mere heroic saga, not a
love-story and that the love motif was first introduced by the French.
Indeed, he sees in the Tristan story the influence of Geoffrey of Mon-
mouth and the narrative of the infidelity of Arthur’s wife with his
nephew, Mordred. But, as I have observed above, the balance of
probabilities seems against this supposition.
Tristan | 187


of the Tristan legend — the love-motif — was Celtic, and that
it reached the French poets in the manner that has been describ-
ed, I will conclude with an examination of those elements in
the story which we may regard as later accretions.

It has always been recognized that the various stratagems
by which the lovers elude the vigilance of King Marc were not
characteristically Celtic and were probably brought into the story
at a comparatively late stage. Thus the incident of the blades by
which Tristan is wounded, with the subsequent trick to deceive
the husband, has been shown to be a modification of a story as
old as Herodatus — the tale of the thief who robs a king’s treasury.®
Iseult’s oath that no one has touched her save Marc and the beggar
(really the disguised Tristan) is likewise a wide-spread folk-lore
motif. For instance there is a close parallel to the incident in the
Icelandic Grettissaga (end of thirteenth century).6 Take also
the episode in which Marc, concealed in a tree, listens to the lovers,
who, becoming aware of his presence, change their conversation
so as to deceive him. This was manifestly suggested by the pear-
tree story, so well known to folklorists and immortalized by Chaucer
in the Merchant’s Tale. The motifs, to be sure, are not the same,
for in the pear-tree tale the lovers persuade the husband that the
disgraceful scene which he has witnessed was the result of optical
illusion. Nevertheless, the situation is so similar — the husband
hidden in the tree and the lovers beneath — that we may safely
accept the Tristan episode as a mild adaptation of that story.

More important than these matters is the question of the
origin of the opening and concluding divisions of the romance —
Tristan’s birth and childhood, on the one hand, and the story of
Iseult of Brittany, on the other. There is no indication of these
features of the romance in the scanty Welsh tradition, and there
can be hardly a doubt that both episodes are later developments
in the story — doubtless, inventions of the author of the lost
primitive French Tristan. In the chansons de geste, nearly all


** Cp. G. Huet, “Sur un épisode du Tristan d’Hilhart d’Qberg”

‘Romania, XXXVI, 50ff..(1907) and G. Schoepperle, I, 213ff. (1913).

The latter gives, p. 214, note 3, the previous literature of the subject.
° Cp. Golther, p. 28.
188 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


the great heroes had enfances, including occasionally some ro-
mantic narrative concerning their parents, so that when the legend
of Tristan passed into the hands of a poet familiar with French
epical tradition, Tristan, too, was provided with a set of youthful
adventures. The name, for which the hero’s tragical fate sug-
gested a connection with French triste, set the poet’s imagination
to work, and we have as a result the sorrowful birth of the cha-
racter. Then for the last division of the romance — the elements
here also seem plain. The man loved by two wives was one of the
common themes of mediaeval romance, Hliduc, the lay by Marie
de France, being perhaps the most famous example of it. Combine
with this, now, the classical legend of Oenone, the jealous wife
of Paris, who is skilled in the healing art, but refuses to save
her wounded husband, from jealousy of her rival Helen, and we
have the essentials of the concluding episode in our romance,*
beginning with the expulsion of Tristan after his second detection
with Iseult.

To be sure, Iseult of Cornwall retains the knowledge of the
healing art which she had evidently possessed already in the Celtic
legend, so in this respect the conditions required that she, rather
than her rival, should resemble the nymph of the classical legend,
but the general situation is obviously the same, and I see no reason
for rejecting Golther’s identification of the stories. On the other
hand, with equal confidence we may accept the motif of the white
and black sails as derived from the legend of Theseus, in which
the hero’s father, Aegeus, perished in consequence of his son’s
forgetfulness in regard to this same signal. Servius’s commentary
on the Aeneid, doubtless, made this incident the common property
of the Middle Ages.®

** The author of the primitive French Tristan poem, doubtless,
transferred to Iseult of Brittany some traits that originally belonged
to Iseult of Cornwall. Cp., especially, the incident of the water which
splashes up under the latter's dress and which, she says, is bolder
than Tristan has been. Miss Schoepperle, II, 415, points out that this
incident occurs, also, in the Diarmaid and Grainne saga — so that
we may accept it as attached to the original of Iseult of Cornwall:
in the Celtic Azthed.


°° This was pointed out by Bédier, II, 138f. To be sure, Brugger,
Archiv fiir das Studium der neueren Sprachen, CXXX, 124 ff. (1913),


Go ogle


Tristan 189


It will be observed that even the central theme of the primi-
tive French Tristan, as outlined above, is a much more complex
affair than the Irish Aitheda (Diarmaid und Grainne etc.), from
which we have derived it. We have, in addition to the motifs of the
‘ Attheda, the combat with Morholt, the two voyages to Ireland,
the first of which involves the hero’s healing at the hands of an
enemy and the second his quest for the princess of the beautiful
hair, the part played by Bringvain, besides the series of inci-
dents, in which the lovers evade detection. Now, the combat with
the Irish champion, Morholt, and the voyage for healing mani-
festly belong together, and, inasmuch as the name of this strange
champion seems Celtic,** we may accept both combat® and voyage
as of Celtic origin, although the idea of a wound which can be


disputes Bédier’s conclusion. He cites especially (pp. 132ff.) a Gaelic
parallel (a tale written down by J. G. Campbell) as proving the Celtic
origin of the incident. But the Gaelic story is not recorded before
the nineteenth century and may very well be, itself, derived from the
Theseus legend. Miss Schoepperle, Revue Celtique, XXXII, 185t.,
and in her T'ristan book, Il, 437f. (1913) is more cautious than
Brugger. The fact that the white and black sail motif is here combined
with a classical motif (that of Paris and Oenone) points strongly, in
my judgment, to the conclusion that it, too, is of classical origin.

** The question one must acknowledge, is doubtful, since the name
is not found in Celtic, nor in exactly this form, indeed, anywhere
outside of the T'ristan poems. Mor, however, means “sea” in the
Celtic languages, and Loth, Revue Celtique, XXXII, 420, note 1,
(1011) has derived Morholt tentatively from an hypothetical Old
Celtic morispolto = “sea-splitter’’. Miss Schoepperle, II, 331, note 1,
seems to me to have misunderstood Muret, Romania, XVI, 606
(1888) when she imputes to him the idea (which is really Golther’s,
p. 17) that Morholt’s name was connected with that of the Fomori
(giants or marine monsters in Irish saga). Muret merely means that
originally Morholt was one of these Celtic giants. Like Miss Schoepperle,
loc. cit., I cannot regard the story from the Cuchullin saga (Cuchullin
frees a princess who has been offered as a tribute to the Fomorians)
which Deutschbein, Beiblatt 2u Anglia, XV, 16ff. (1904) and Studien
zur Sagengeschichte Englands, 172. (Céthen, 1906) cites, as having
any historical connection with the Morholt episode.

Morhold occurs as a Germanic name in eighth century documents
(Cp. E. Foerstemann, Altdeutsches Namenbuch, col. 1118), but the
similarity is probably accidental.


(6 ogle


190 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


healed only by an enemy is by no means confined to the Celts.®%
It has been suggested that this episode reflects early historical
conditions, when the Pictish population of Scotland were being
subjugated by Irish invaders.*9 This would seem to be a plau-
sible conjecture, and if Tristan was, indeed, in the beginning, a,
Pictish hero, no incident is so likely to have belonged to him in
that character as that of this combat and its sequel. The second
voyage in which Tristan goes forth on his indeterminate search
for the unknown golden-haired princess, owes its suggestion, too,
no doubt, to a favorite class of Celtic tales—the Imrama (tales of
fantastic voyages),’° one of which in its Christianized form, the
legend of St. Brendan, enjoyed a wide-spread popularity in the
Middle Ages throughout Western Europe. In the episode of the
Tristan under consideration, however, the object of the voyage
has no parallel in these Celtic tales,”1 and the imram motif seems
plainly combined with that of a hero’s quest of a bride for a king,??
and in a specific form which is apparently unknown to the Celts —
the search for the girl, the strands of whose hair have been brought
to the king by a bird.78 A distinguished scholar, indeed, once
regarded this adaptation of the well-known fairy-tale of the Fair
Maid with the Golden Locks as the fundamental theme of the


*? That the combat should take place on an island was once
regarded as a Scandinavian (Viking) feature of the story, another
example of the holmgang. Cp. Golther, p.16. Miss Schoepperle,
however, has shown that island-combats were stock features of the
Old French romances and that the combat in the Tristan does not
conform to the rules of the holmgang. Cp. her paper in the Rad-
cliffe College Monographs, No. 15, (1910) and her T'ristan and Isolt,
H, 338 ff.

** For examples from different parts of the world see Schoepperle,
Il, 377 ff.

*° Golther, Tristan und Isolde, pp. 15f. (1907).

7° For a discussion of the Imrama see A. C. L. Brown, Iwain,
566ff. For MSS. and editions cp. G. Dottin, Revue Celtique, XXXII,
26 (1912).

"2 Cp. Schoepperle, I, 188ff.

“® Miss Schoepperle, I, 188, note 3, gives a very full list of such
stories in the various literatures.

*® Miss Schoepperle’s list, just cited, contains no Celtic tale with
this particular feature.


Go ogle


Tristan 191


Tristan legend,’ but the fairy tale in question, beautiful as it is, 1s
too gossamerlike ever to have suggested the most passionate love-
story in literature, and, since the publication of Miss Schoepperle’s
researches, we may safely regard this adaptation as merely a later
embellishment — introduced, no doubt, by a French poet — of
what is, in itself, a secondary element in the legend, the second


voyage to Ireland.”


* Cp. W. Golther, “Die Jungfrau mit den goldenen Haaren”,
Studien zur Litteraturgeschichte, Michael Bernays gewidmet von
Schiilern und Freunden, p. 173 (Hamburg and Leipzig, 1893) —
also, Reinhold Kéhler, “Tristan und Isolde und das M&rchen von der
goldhaarigen Jungfrau und von den Wassern des Todes und des Lebens’’,
Germania, XI, 389ff. (1866) — reprinted in Kohler, Kleinere
Schriften, TI, 328ff. (Berlin, 1900). For additional notes on the
theme cp. Felix Liebrecht, Germania, XII (1867), and Kéhlers
Kleinere Schriften, I, 511. |

* This ends our discussion of the ZJ'’ristan romances; for the
endeavor of Zenker to connect the saga of this hero with the Persian
epic of Wis and Ramin has been generally pronounced a failure.
Cp. his Die Tristansage und das persische Epos von Wis und
Ramin (Erlangen, 1910) — also, Zs. f. rom. Ph., XXXV, 715ff.
(1912). Zenker, p. 326, cites Hermann Ethe, Die héfische und
romantische Poesie der Perser, p. 38 (Hamburg, 1887), as the first
to call attention to the resemblance of the stories. So, too, W. Hertz,
Tristan und Isolde von Gottfried von Strassburg, p. 478 (Stuttgart
and Berlin, 1907).

On other Tristans, besides the famous hero, see W. Hertz, ibid.
pp. 482ff. Of most interest, perhaps, is the “Tristanz qui onques ne
rist,” who figures in a number of romances, cited, loc. cit., by Hertz
— first of all, in Chrétien’s Erec, 1, 1713, in the well-known list
of Arthur’s knights. It has been customary to regard this character
as drawn from oral tradition, but he was, unquestionably, the invention
of a Frenchman — no doubt, a French poet — to whom the similarity
of Tristan and triste suggested the nickname. It occurred to the
author of L’Atre Perillos to make him play the part of a host
(cp. 1. 5892) in a brief episode of that poem — otherwise (in Chrétien
and the other romancers), he is a mere name. My own belief is that
the character is an invention for the nonce of Chrétien’s, who was
put to it to make out the long list of knights in the above-mentioned
passage and who, consequently, fabricated this new character, like
some other characters in the list. He derived the name primarily, of
course, from the renowned lover of Iseult, and the accompanying
nickname was supplied to him, partly, by an obvious play on words,
and, partly, by the necessity of finding a rhyme to sist.


Go ogle


Chapter VI.
Lancelot.


With no character of the Arthurian cycle, except Arthur and
Guinevere, is the modern reader so familiar as with Lancelot.
He does not appear, however, in the earliest Arthurian texts and
he is in everything but name purely a literary creation — more
clearly so, perhaps, than any other character of Arthurian ro-
mance. He is not mentioned in Welsh literature or in Geoffrey
of Monmouth and his derivatives; he does not figure in the bas-
reliefs of the cathedral at Modena. Indeed, the first we hear of
him is in Chrétien’s Hrec, (1. 1694) in the well-known list of
Round Table knights. As is always the case in the verse-ro-
mances, Chrétien in this passage gives Gawain the first place.
The second place he awards to Erec, because that character is the
hero of this particular romance. The third he gives to Lancelot
del Lac. Now we have not a trace of Lancelot in Celtic saga or
earlier Arthurian texts, and Chrétien himself does not allude to
the character again in this poem, so that it seems surprising that
he should in this off-hand way assign Lancelot so high a place
among Arthurian heroes.

In view of the circumstances just mentioned, however, this
Erec passage would hardly seem to justify the inference that Lance-
lot really occupied any very high place in Celtic tradition. In fact,
when Welshmen came to translate the Arthurian romances; they
thought that in Perceval they recognized their native Peredur and
they accordingly substituted the latter’s name-for Perceval; simi-
larly they substituted Gwalchmei for Gawain, Llacheu for Lohot,
etc. But they knew nothing of Lancelot, and consequently, they
kept the French form of his name in Welsh orthography: Lawn-
selot.1 As a matter of fact; there is no ground for believing that


* Cp. Foerster, Lancelot, pp. XXXIXf.


C50 ogle


Lancelot 193


the name is Welsh; more likely, it is a mere French adaptation
of Breton Lancelin, which is, itself, ultimately of Germanic
origin.2 The most probable explanation of the character’s promi-
nence in the above-mentioned list is that Chrétien was already
planning to make him the hero of a poem: the name had taken
his fancy or he was influenced by some chance circumstance in this
determination. In any event, a few years later he did make him
the hero of his well-known poem, Lancelot.

In the Cliges, which comes immediately after Erec in order
of composition, Lancelot still holds (by implication) the third
place,’ but Perceval, who was not mentioned in the Hrec list,
now holds the second place — for the same reason, perhaps, as
that which has just been suggested in the case of Lancelot; for
Perceval, too, was later on made the hero of one of Chrétien’s ro-
mances. In the passage of the Cliges just referred to Lancelot
is overcome by Cliges in a tournament — otherwise he does not
appear in the romance. He is, however, the hero of the next
poem composed by Chrétien — the Conte de la Charrette, or
Lancelot* — and it was this romance which ultimately established
his fame.

Now the main theme of this poem is the abduction of Guine-
vere by an evil prince named Meleagant and her rescue by Lance-
lot. We may summarize it briefly as follows:

Meleagant appears at Arthur’s court and boasts that he holds
many of the king’s subjects in captivity. Arthur, however, can
free them if he will commit Guinevere to the care of a knight
who will fight a single combat with him. If Meleagant loses, the
prisoners are to be freed; if he is victorious, Guinevere will re-
main his captive. Just then Kay, the seneschal, threatens to leave
the court and Arthur can only keep him by the inconsiderate pro-


> Cp. H. Zimmer, Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt., XII", 43 ff. (1891).

* Cp. 11. 4765 ff.

* Chrétien, 11. 24f. says: “Del Chevalier de la Charrete comance
Crestiiens son livre,’ but, for convenience’ sake, recent scholars have
been accustomed to cite the romance after its hero's name, and I shall
follow their example.


Hefperia, Ergangungsreihe: 8. 13
194 | Evolution of Arthurian Romance


mise that he will grant him any request he may proffer. To the
king’s dismay, Kay demands that he shall be the queen’s escort.
Nevertheless, Arthur is bound by his promise and so permits Kay
to ride off with Meleagant and Guinevere. He, himself, and his
knights follow later on. Gawain meets first the seneschal’s horse
riderless and bloody and somewhat further on Lancelot (not named
yet, however). Lancelot’s horse is tired out and Gawain lends
him a fresh one. Shortly after, Gawain finds his horse dead and
all the signs of a fierce combat about the spot — then, he comes
again upon Lancelot who, in his hurry to get forward after the
loss of his steed, had got into a cart — with some hesitation, it
is true, because that was contrary to the rules of chivalry. This
cart was driven by a dwarf. Now, Meleagant was the son of
a good king, Baudemagus, whose land was surrounded by a deep
water, and this water could be crossed by only two bridges —
one a sword, with the edge turned upwards, the other under the
water. Lancelot chooses the first. No account is given of his
crossing in the poem, but he gets over in safety, fights with
Meleagant, and delivers Guinevere, who, nevertheless, receives him
coldly, being offended at his momentary hesitation before moun-
ting the cart. Lancelot, in despair, tries to commit suicide; Guine-
vere, hearing a rumour of his death, is overwhelmed with grief,
and on his next appearance receives him with the greatest favour.
They pass the night together, Lancelot gaining access to the queen’s
chamber by means of a heavily barred window and severely woun-
ding his hands in wrenching asunder the bars. The traces of blood
on the bed-clothes causes the queen to be accused of a lzaison with
Kay, who, severely wounded, is sleeping in the ante-chamber.
Lancelot undertakes to prove Guinevere’s innocence by a combat
with Meleagant, which shall take place at Arthur’s court; but
having set out to seek Gawain, he is treacherously decoyed into
prison by his foe. Meleagant, by means of forged letters, per-
suades the queen that Lancelot has returned to court, whither
Guinevere repairs, escorted by Gawain, who has meanwhile arriv-
ed on the scene. Lancelot, who has been released on parole by his
jailor’s wife, to attend a tourney, and who acts there successively


Go ogle


Lancelot 195


the part of a coward and a hero, according to the queen’s injunc-
tion, 18 subsequently walled up in a tower by Meleagant. Here
Chrétien’s portion of the poem ends, but it was continued with
his approval and under his direction for about 1000 lines more
by a certain Godefroi de Lagny (Leigni).5 According to this con-
tinuation, he was released from prison by Meleagant’s sister, and,
reaching court at the last moment, overcomes and slays Meleagant.


Although in the subsequent history of literature it became
the most influential of Chrétien’s poems, with the exception of
the Perceval, critics generally have agreed that the Lancelot is
the poorest in construction of all the works of this author. He
tells us at the beginning of the romance (ll. 26ff.) that his
patroness, Marie de Champagne, gave him the matiere et san®
(matter and meaning) of the poem and that he took pains to put
into it nothing but sa painne et s’antancion (labor and thought).
Of the defects? just referred to the most notable perhaps are the
following: 1. Why should not Meleagant fight out at Arthur’s
court the question as to the possession of the queen, instead of
going off with his adversary to settle it at some indefinite time
later? The explanation, no doubt, is that the abduction originally
took place in a wood and the author here is simply making an
awkward attempt to connect the adventure with the court, which


* Foerster, Chrétien Wérterbuch, pp. 72*f.,, owing to linguistic
considerations, identifies this place with Lagny in the department of
Seine-et-Marne. Nothing is known of Godefroi, himself.


* For the interpretation of these words see, particularly, W. A.
Nitze, “San et matiere dans les oeuvres de Chrétien de Troyes”,
Romana, XLIV, 14ff. (1915). San is derived from Latin sensus,
which was used as a synonym of saptentia and scientia, when the
wisdom or knowledge was given by God. Nitze traces sensus with
this meaning back to the apocryphal Liber Sapientiae (accepted as
canonical during the Middle Ages), e. g., VII, 7. Chrétien adopted
it from the scholastic usage of his time, in which it was applied to
interpretation — especially, the allegorical interpretation of the scriptures.

7 In her Legend of Sir Lancelot du Lac, pp. 43f. (London
1901), Miss Weston has given a full summary of the defects of con-
struction in the romance.

13*


6 ogle


196 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


is the customary starting-point of his Arthurian tales? 2. We
are told that the kingdom of Gorre — that is, the kingdom of
Meleagant’s father — is surrounded by water which no one can
pass save by means of the two seemingly impossible bridges —
the sword bridge and the subaqueous bridge. Lancelot is said
to have chosen the former, but we hear no more of this striking
conception, and as if no explanation were necessary, we find the
hero next already in the kingdom of Gorre and pursuing his ad-
ventures there. One might add that it is strange that the cart
which Lancelot gets into should disappear from the story. It may
be that Marie’s own knowledge of the tradition of Guinevere’s
abduction was imperfect and that Chretien followed his mistress
too literally, without attempting to supply the deficiencies.

The matiére of Chrétien’s poem is simply the abduction and
rescue of the queen — the tradition to that effect being certainly
anterior to his Lancelot. Everything else in the romance, we may
confidently assert, is subsidiary to this theme. Some of the docu-
mentary evidence in regard to this tradition is independent of
Chrétien, beyond question. There is even a fourteenth century
Welsh dialogue between Arthur and his queen® that seems to hint
at an incident of this kind in which Kay plays the réle of ab-
ductor, but the piece is too obscure to be of much use. We have
indisputably, however, a record of Celtic tradition on the subject
in the Vita Gildae, attributed (rightly, it would seem) to Caradoc
of Lancarvan and written probably about 1150.1° Here it is said

* So Miss Weston, loc. cit.

” See the translation in J. Rhys’s Arthurian Legend, pp. 57f.

'° See the passages in Mommsen’s edition of Gildas and Nennius,
Monumenta Germaniae Historica (1894), p. 109 — also, G. Paris’s
article, Romania, X, 491, note (1881). In his Mélanges ad’ Histoire
Bretonne, pp. 267ff. (Paris, 1907), F. Lot has discussed the date,
authorship and sources of this (insular) Vita Gildae. The author,
(Caradoc, most likely) came originally from Nantcarvan (in South
Wales), it would seem, and afterwards was a monk at Glastonbury.
The work was anterior to 1166; for a MS. of it from that year is
extant. J. A. Herbert would place the Vita in the “middle of the


twelfth century, perhaps even a little earlier.” Cp. his letter quoted
by Lot, op. cit., pp. 275f., note 2.


Go ogle


Lancelot 197


that Gildas, having been stripped of his possessions by pirates,
came to Glastonbury, whilst Melvas (Melwas) was ruling in Som-
erset (aestiva regio). This wicked king carried off Guinevere
(Guennuvar) to Glastonbury, which was a difficult place to take,


1! Cp. on the subject of Melwas, especially, F. Lot, Romania,
XXIV, 327ff. (1895), XXVII, 553 (1898).

As Lot remarks in the first of these articles (‘“Melvas, roi des
morts et Tile de verre’), the author of the Vita Gildae makes Melwas
King of Somerset, simply because Glastonbury was in Somerset. For
a similar reason (the chief city of this shire being Bath), according
to Lot, Godefroi de Leigni, who doubtless knew in some form or
other the story concerning Melwas in the Vita Gildae, in his con-
tinuation of Chrétien’s Lancelot (1. 6255), made Bade (Bath) the
capital of the kingdom of Meleagant’s (Melwas’s) father (Baudemagus).
This conflicts, of course, with his acceptance of Gorre as Melwas’s
land, for whatever region Gorre is to be identified with (cp. the next
note), it was certainly not Somerset. Consistency, however is not to
be expected of a romancer.

Melwas is, doubtless, identical with Geoffrey of Monmouth’s
Melga (V, 16 and VI, 3) and Malvasius, rex Islandiae (IX, 12,
probably for Irlandiae. Cp. Zimmer, Zs. f. fre. Spr. u. Litt., XID’,
253) — according to Rhys (Studies in the Arthurian Legend,
p. 344), also, with Maelwys, son of Baeddan in Kulhwch and Olwen
(Loth’s Mabinogion*, I, 261), Baeddan being the same, according to
this scholar, as the Bademagus of Chrétien’s Lancelot. He regards
both Maelwys and Bademagus as ultimately of Irish origin. H. L. D.
Ward had already expressed this view in regard to Melwas. Cp.
Romania, XII, 512 (1883). More plausible, to my mind, is Lot’s
derivation (loc. cit.) of Melwas from Maelvas (= Prince of Death).
Brugger, Zs. f. fre. Spr. u. Litt., XXVIII", 6, note 10, thinks that
Ward’s hypothetical Irish prince may have been confounded with Lot’s
Maelwas, “Prince of Death”. All of this about an Irish Melwas,
however, is pure speculation. So, too, with Brugger’s attempt to
prove (ibid., pp. 15ff., 26ff.) that Bademagus is of Pictish origin,
which is a corollary of his theory (see next note) that Gorre was
in Northern Scotland.

The story of Guinevere’s abduction has been compared by Rhys
and others with the Irish Wooing of Etain. For the literature of
the subject, cp. Miss Schoepperle’s T’ristan and Isolt, II, 528, note 3.
I do not believe, however, that there is any historical connection
between the two.


Go ogle


198 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


owing to the river and marsh that protected it. Arthur besieged
it with an immense host, and a great conflict was about to ensue,
‘when the Abbot of Glastonbury and Gildas intervened and, on
their advice, Melwas restored the queen to Arthur. The two kings
then gave much land to the abbey. In this text — the Vita
Gildae — Glastonbury is represented as a rendering of the British
name for the place — Ynys witryn (Ynisgutrin) or City of Glass
but this absurd etymology was invented by some monk of the
local abbey about the middle of the twelfth century — doubtless,
by the author of the Vita Gildae, himself.12 The name is really


1 The passage (p. 110 of Mommsen’s edition) runs as follows:
“Ynisgutrin nominata fuit antiquitus Glastonia et adhuc nominatur a
Britannis indigenis; ynis in Britannico sermone insula Latine; gutrin
vero vitrea. Sed post adventum Angligenarum et expulsis Britannis,
scilicet Walensibus, revocata est Glastigberi ex ordine primi vocabuli,
scilicet glas Anglice vitrum Latine, beria civitas, inde Glastiberia id
est Vitrea Civitas.”
= In the De Antiquitate Glastoniensis Ecclesiae of William of
Malmesbury (Migne, Patrologia Latina, vol. 179, cols. 1682ff.)
“Ynisuutrin” again appears as a name for Glastonbury, along with
“insula Avalloniae”’. Following is the text of this oft-quoted passage:

“Legitur in antiquis Britonum gestis, quod a Boreali Britanniae
parte venerunt in occidentem duodecim fratres, et tenuerunt plurimas
regiones. Venedociam, Demetiam, Buthir [for Guhir], Kedweli, quas
proavus eorum Cuneda tenuerunt: nomina eorum fratrum inferius anno-
tantur Ludnerth [for Ludnerth], Morgen, Catgur, Cathmor, Merguid,
Morvined, Morehel, Morcant, Boten, Morgen, Mortineil [for Mormeil],
Glasteing [for Glastenig]. Hic est ille Glasteing [for Glastenig],
qui per mediterraneos Anglos, secus villam quae dicitur Lscebtiorne,
scrofam suam usque ad Wellis, et a Wellis per inviam et aquosam
viam quae Sugewege, id est Scrofae via, dicitur, sequens porcellos
suos, juxta ecclesiam de qua nobis sermo est, lactentem sub malo
invenit, unde usque ad nos emanavit, quod mala mali illius Hald-
eyrcenes epple, id est Veteris Ecclesiae poma vocantur: sus quoque
ealdcyre (sic) suge idcirco nominabatur, quae cum ceterae sues quatuor
pedes habeant, mirum dictu, ista habuit octo. Hic igitur Glasteing,
postquam insulam illam ingressus, eam multimodis bonis vidit affluentem,
cum omni familia sua in ea venit habitare, cursumque vitae suae ibidem
peregit. Ex ejus progenie et familia ei suecedente locus ille primitus
dicitur populatus, haec de antiquis Britonum libris sunt.
Lancelot 199


Anglo-Saxon and means the “‘city of the Glaestings’’ — Glaesting
being, of course, a family name. Nevertheless, Gaston Paris has


“Haec itaque insula primo Yniswitrin, a Britonibus dicta, demum
ab Anglis, terram sibi subjugantibus, interpretato priore vocabulo, dicta
est sua lingua Glastinbiry; vel de Glasteing, de quo praemisimus.
Etiam insula Avalloniae celebriter nominatur, cujus vocabuli haec fuit
origo. Supradictum est, quod Glasteing scrofam suam sub arbore
pomifera juxta vetustam ecclesiam invenit, ubi quia primum adveniens
poma in partibus illis rarissima reperit, insulam Avalloniae sua lingua,
id est insulam pomorum nominavit. Avalla enim Britonice poma inter-
pretatur Latine; vel cognominatur de quodam Avalloc, qui ibidem cum
suis filiabus, propter loci secretum, fertur inhabitasse.”’

W. W. Newell, however has shown, PMLA, XVIII, 474ff., 492f.
(1903), that, like all other Arthurian passages in the De Antiquitate,
this passage is due to an interpolator. His results are accepted by
F. Lot, Mélanges d’histoire bretonne, pp. 277 ff. (Paris, 1907), although
the latter previously in his “Glastonbury et Avalon”, Romania, XXVII,
564 ff. (1898), had regarded it as genuine. Moreover, Lot is disposed
(Mélanges, p. 283) to identify this interpolator with the author of
the insular Vita Gildae. Since the publication of Newell’s paper,
however, it is hardly open to question that the identification of Glaston-
bury with Avalon was simply the consequence of the fraud of 1191,
when the monks of Glastonbury pretended that they had discovered
there the tomb of Arthur and his consort. The interpolator, accordingly,
used the Vita Gildae, but was not its author.

In “Zu Wilhelm von Malmesbury”, Zs. f. rom. Ph. XX, 316ff.
(1896), R. Thurneysen has pointed out that the story of Glasteing and
his son is of Irish origin, being developed out of an incident in the
legend of St. Patrick, and Newell, op. cit., p. 476, notes that the
incident of the pigs and appletree, which guide the founder to the site
of the new city, is imitated from Virgil’s Aeneid, (story of Aeneas and
the founding of Alba Longa). The fanciful etymology which connects
Avalon with the Welsh word for apple, “aval (afal)”’, is, at least,
as old as the Vita Merlim (middle of the twelfth century), ascribed
to Geoffrey of Monmouth; for there (1. 908) the island (Celtic Elysium)
to which the wounded Arthur is borne is called ‘“Insula Pomorum”.
Hence Glastonbury, having been identified with Avalon, is here also called
“insula pomorum”’. .

The alternative derivation of Avalon, suggested by the interpolator,
viz., from a supposed Avalloc, who once lived at Glastonbury with
his daughters, was accepted as correct by F. Lot, Romania, XXIV,
327ff. (1895). Lot expresses there the belief that this Avalloc was
200 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


argued justly, no doubt, in his classical articles on Lancelot,}*
that the narrative of the Vita Gildae here preserves a bit of Celtic
mythology, though the localization is arbitrary. The author of
that work, being a Celt, would naturally be familiar with the
Celtic conception of the Otherworld as a Tower of Glass, and
having hit upon the etymology for Glastonbury, just cited, and
being essentially a romancer, he might very easily locate at Glas-
tonbury this story of an Otherworld king. “Isle de Voirre’ —
the name of the kingdom of this same Melwas (Maheloas), accor-
ding to Chrétien’s Hrec, ll. 1940ff. — represents a confusion
of two Celtic conceptions of the Otherworld — first, as the Is-
land of Avalon, secondly, as a Tower of Glass.1* In this passage
of the Erec, Maheloas (Melwas) is represented as king of an ideal
land — plainly, the Celtic Elysium — where there is no winter,
yet where it is never too warm — an aestiva regio, in short, be-
yond the bounds of mortal ken. It is still further obvious that


a god and that his daughters were the women of the Celtic Elysium.
(Cp. too, J. Rhys, Arthurian Legend, p. 335). The derivation, however,
from Avalloc is, doubtless, just as fanciful as the derivation from “‘aval’’.
In any event, the placing of Avalloc at Glastonbury is simply another
consequence of the arbitrary identification of that locality with Avalon.

For the origin of Cuneda and his descendants see Thurneysen
and Newell in the passages referred to above. J. Rhys, Arthurian
Legend, ch. 14, has discussed all the matters dealt with in this note,
but he goes on the erroneous assumption that the Arthuriana in the
De Antiquitate are really by William of Malmesbury.

The passage about Glastonbury in the Speculum Ecclesiae, II,
9 (Rolls edition, pp. 49f.) of Gerald of Wales is paraphrased from the
above-quoted passage of the De Antiquitate — only it is that author's
own invention when he suggests that the name, Inis Gutrin (so he
divides it), came from the color of the stream nearby.

** Romania, X, 491 (1882), XII, 512 (1884).

‘* On the Irish Tower of Glass, cp. F. Lot, Romania, XXIV,
328 (1895). The Otherworld is often imagined as a Mountain of
Glass in the myths of the most widely separated races. Cp. Léon
Pineau, Les viewx chants populaires Scandinaves, I, 272 (Paris,
1901). For the conception in German folktales see, especially, Hans
Siuts, Jenseitsmotive im deutschen Volksmdrchen, p. 43 (Leipzig,
1911).
Lancelot 201


the Melwas of the Vita Gildae and the Maheloas of the Erec are
identical with the Meleagant™ of the Lancelot, whose chief city
is Bath (in Somerset), and the Otherworld character of the ab-
ductor’s realm1¢ is plainest of all in the last-named work, for
in the Lancelot (ll. 645ff.) it is called the country from which
no one returns. Moreover, the conception of the strange bridges as
the only means of access to Meleagant’s land is found far and
wide in the mythology of various peoples connected with the king-


1® In Foerster’s edition of Chrétien’s Lancelot, pp. xxxiii ff. (1899),
he and Zimmer dispute the identity. Their criticism of the supposed
Welsh sources for the Melwas-Guinevere story which G. Paris had
cited is searching and shows that the passages in question did not
have the value that the French scholar ascribed to them. It is idle,
however, to deny that the Melwas of the Vita Gildae is identical
with Maheloas and Meleagant.

In Romana, XII, 499ff., G. Paris notes differences between the
accounts of the Rape of Guinevere by Meleagant (Mellyagraunce) in
Chrétien’s and Malory, respectively, and explains them as due to in-
dependent Welsh (ultimate) sources of Malory. Foerster (edition of
Chrétien’s Lancelot, pp. xxxff.), however, rightly disputes this.


© The name of this realm ‘“Gorre’ (“Goirre’) occurs twice
(ll. 643, 6141) in Chrétien’s Lancelot. (Brugger, Zs. f. frz. Spr. u.
Litt., XXVIII", ascribes the second instance to Godefroi de Leigni,
but cp. Foerster’s edition of Lancelot, pp. XVf.) In the first passage
it is described as the kingdom “Don nus estranges ne retorne” (1. 645).
It is evidently in Great Britain, but no wholly satisfactory identi-
fication of it with any specific part of that island has ever been
proposed. Rhys, Studies in the Arthurian Legend, pp. 3291. (1891)
believes that it is the peninsula of Gower (Modern Welsh Gwyr,
Goer) in Southwest Wales and that Bath (Bade) is made its capital
through confusion. One need not assume with Rhys that this confusion
is due to the contamination of two different Celtic conceptions concerning
the realm of the dead. It is sufficient to observe that the single
mention (1. 6255) of Bath (Bade), as the capital of Gorre, occurs in
the continuation of Chrétien's poem by Godefroi de Leigni. Now,
whatever one may think concerning Chrétien’s sources, there is no
reason to believe that Godefroi was drawing upon any Celtic traditions,
and, as Brugger remarks, Zs. f. fre. Spr. u. Litt., XXVIII", 7 (1905)
(although he fails to observe that this name occurs only in Godefroi’s
portion of the poem), the name (Bade = Bath), of King Bdaemagus’s


6 ogle


202 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


dom of the dead.17 We may accept, then, the conception of Me-
leagant’s abduction of Guinevere as of Celtic origin, although there


capital was, no doubt, suggested to the poet by the name of the king
himself.

In Romana, XXIV, 332 (1895), F. Lot conjectures that Gorre
may not have been a place-name, originally, but derived simply from
Old Welsh guir (= glass), the kingdom of Gorre being then merely
the “Isle of Glass’ (Celtic Elysium). Jbid., 327ff., he had been
inclined to accept Rhys’s views.

In Brugger’s long article on Gorre, just cited, he concludes that
it is to be identified with Strathmore (a name which he would extend,
it seems, to the whole of ancient Scotland, north of the Clyde and
the Forth). For the stages which he supposes Strathmore to have
traversed in becoming Gorre, cp. loc. cit., pp. 63ff. He reaches his
conclusions, however, through such a maze of hazardous speculations
that his results inspire little confidence. I may say, in general, that
it is highly improbable that the romancers in their fantastic composi-
tions have preserved geographical accuracy, as Brugger’s hypothesis
assumes. P. Paris (Romans de la Table Ronde, II, 111), says with
truth: “On ne peut trop répéter que nos romanciers ne se rendaient
pas compte des localités: ils n’inventaient pas les noms, mais ils n’en
recherchaient pas la valeur exacte.’’ In other words, they made about
the same use of place-names (and, I might add, of other kinds of
names, as well) as, according to Brugger, himself, Zs. f. fre. Spr.
u. Litt., XXXII*, 127 (1908), Geoffrey of Monmouth did with the
names which he derived from Welsh traditions, viz. attach to them
any fiction he chose. Brugger (op. cit., XXVIII‘, 14) acknowledges
the correctness of P. Paris’s observation, but proceeds on the opposite
principle.

In the consideration of names in the romances, one has to keep
in mind always the possibilities of manuscript corruption. The number
of apparently new names in these works that have come into existence
in this manner is enormous.

*7 Cp. G. Paris, Romania, XII, 508. The literature concerning
these bridges by which, in the myths and legends of various peoples,
the Otherworld must be reached is truly immense, and for publications
on the subject I will refer the reader, above all, to the notes to Miss
Laura Hibbard’s article, “The Sword Bridge of Chrétien de Troyes
and its Celtic Original”, RR, IV, 166ff. (4913) — also, to H.R.
Patch’s “Some Elements in Mediaeval Descriptions of the Otherworld”,
PMLA, XXXII, 601 ff. (1918), more particularly, the notes to pp. 635 ff.
For instances in German folktales, not mentioned by these scholars,


Go ogle


Lancelot 203


is no similar incident in extant Celtic stories of the Otherworld,
but in Chrétien’s description this conception appears to have been
profoundly influenced by classical and oriental myths concerning
the kingdom of the dead. The translator of Ovid would, of course,
have been familiar with the stories of Proserpine and Eurydice
and with Hercules’s rescue of Alcestis from Hades.!® On the other
hand, the idea of the sword-bridge, doubtless, came to him ultima-


cp. Hans Siuts’s Jenseitsmotive 1m deutschen Volksmédrchen, pp. 411.
(Leipzig, 1911). Although taking Chrétien’s sword-bridge as Celtic
in origin, Miss Hibbard denies (p. 184) that it ever had mythological
significance. She regards it (cp. loc. cit., pp. 177ff. and notes) as
simply one of the marvellous bridges that appear in the narratives of
fantastic exploits performed by Celtic heroes — narratives that are
without mythological connections. If the sword-bridge were really
Celtic, Miss Hibbard’s derivation would be preferable, for, as Patch
has observed (p. 637), there is no real place for a bridge in the Celtic
scheme of the Otherworld. An ocean voyage is there the essential
thing. Patch, himself, regards it as derived from the Otherwold bridge
either of Norse mythology (ec. g. Gylfaginning, ch. 49) or Oriental
vision. Marvellous Otherworld bridges (derived from the East, no
doubt) are common in the vision literature of Western Europe in the
Middle Ages. Cp. the examples cited by Miss Hibbard in her article,
notes 14—21, from the Dialogues of Gregory the Great, the Visio
S. Pault, etc. It did not require any great invention to add a sword-
bridge to this collection of wonderful bridges. For the human automata
that often guard such bridges in the romances, cp. J. D. Bruce “Human
Automata in Classical Tradition and Mediaeval Romance’, MPh., X,
511 ff. (1913) and M. B. Ogle, “The Perilous Bridge and Human Auto-
mata’, MLN, XXXV, 129f. (1920). Ogle cites from William of
Malmesbury’s Gesta Regum Anglorum, II, 170 (Stubbs’s edition in
the Rolls Series, 1887) an example of the motif earlier than any
reference to it in Celtic tales.


*® Foerster, Lancelot, p. LXXI, goes so far as to contend that
these classical myths were Chrétien’s sole source for the abduction-
story. Even more radical is G. Baist, ibid., LXXIIff., who denies that
this story contains any mythical elements at all. For example, he
quotes striking parallels to Chrétien’s description, Hrec, 11. 1946ff.,
of Maheloas’s ideal kingdom from a description of Ireland in the To-
pographia Hibermae of Giraldus Canibrensis. But Giraldus here is
probably merely ascribing to Ireland characteristics of climate, etc.,
that are really derived from Otherworld conceptions.


(50 ogle


204 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


tely from some Eastern source, for this feature of his description
of the mysterious realm, too, is not found in Celtic texts, save
those of ecclesiastical origin — Christian visions of the Other-
world, like the Visio Tnugdali, etc.19 — which probably, likewise,
derived it from the Orient. Lastly, the bridge under the water
is probably Chrétien’s own invention, to provide for Gawain’s pas-
sage to the land of the captor.?°

It may be observed that this abduction story had doubtless
already gained entrance into Arthurian literature in the episode
of Geoffrey’s Historia (Book X, ch. 13), where Mordred, who
had been left regent during his uncle’s absence on the continent,
violated his troth — had himself crowned and took possession of
Guinevere. To be sure, according to Geoffrey, Guinevere is a
partner in his guilt, but that is probably an innovation of Geof-
frey’s own. Now, there are no valid grounds for believing that
Lancelot was ever thought of as the rescuer of the queen until
Chrétien wrote his poem,?! and so there can be no reasonable doubt
that it is either he or his patroness, Marie dé Champagne, that
first assigned this part to the character. Indeed, in all likelihood,


*® Chrétien’s immediate source for this detail belonged, I believe,
to this class of literature.


*° Cp. Foerster, Lancelot, p. LXIX.


*t On the controversy as to the priority of the French original
of the Middle High German Lanzelet, see pp. 213ff., below. Golther,
Zs. f. fre. Spr. u. Litt., XXII*, 2 (1900), expresses the belief that
the Bretons introduced Lancelot into the Welsh saga of Melwas and
that Lancelot already was the hero of an independent saga with them.
The first of these opinions, however, is unsupported by any evidence
and the second is of little importance, as far as the sources of Chrétien’s
poem are concerned; for, 2bid., Golther ascribes rightly the spirit of
the amour courtois which distinguishes it to the influence of Marie
de Champagne and the following features to Chrétien himself: the cart,
Gawain’s réle, the kingdom of the dead (probably drawn from ancient
mythology, since Chrétien knew Ovid), Lancelot’s love and Guinevere’s
adultery. Finally the relations between Lancelot, Guinevere and Ar-
thur are imitated, even in detail, from those of Tristan, Iseult and
Mark to each other. If we subtract these elements from Chrétien’s
story, there is little left for the Bretons.


Co ogle


Lancelot 205


Arthur was the original rescuer,?? as in the Vita Gildae. At the
court of Champagne, however, permeated with the ideas of love
which had been recently developed in Provence, it would not do
for the husband to play this rdle — only a lover could fill it —
hence Lancelot has taken the part of the king. Moreover, his
relations with the woman whom he has rescued must be regulat-
ed according to the rules of the amour courtois, or Minnedienst, as
it 1s called by the Middle High German poets, and so we have
the preposterous servitude of Lancelot to the queen which was
destined to have such success — especially, after it was adopted
into the prose Lancelot. He swoons almost when he sees a comb
with some of his mistress’s hair in it; when she appears indiffe-
rent, he is ready to commit suicide; in the tourney he acts the
part either of a coward or of the invincible champion, in obe-
dience to her nod. In fact, his humility is grovelling.®

In framing this story there can be no doubt that the poet
or the countess, if it was really she that invented it, was consciously
ordering it, so that it might present a direct contrast to the loves
of Tristan and Iseult. The love-conventions which we associate
with the fictitious Courts of Love — Minnedienst, in short —
were to take the place of the natural passion which is the soul
of the earlier story. In Cliges Chrétien had already composed
what was, in a sense, an Anti-T'ristan, but in his Lancelot we
have something to which the title applies far more exactly. A
just retribution has followed on this attempt to exalt convention
above nature, for the Lancelot leaves us cold, whilst the Tristan
poems embody one of the immortal love-stories of literature. In
fact, it was not until the author of the Mort Artu breathed his
genius into the new conception that these later lovers secured
something of the immortality which was assured for the old. The
source of the Lancelot-Guinevere story was evident to the author
of the prose-romance, and in composing his narrative of their
love-affairs in its last phase he constantly reverted to this source
— the Tristan poems — and exploited them even in detail.”

** Cp. G. Paris, Romania, XII, 513ff. (1883).


** Cp. Miss Weston, Legend of Sir Lancelot du Lac, p. 112.
** Cp. Bruce, Mort Artu, pp. 282f. and 286.


Go ogle


206 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


There was, however, another thirteenth century romance be-
sides Chreétien’s with Lancelot as its hero. The French original
has been lost, but the poem survives in the form of the German
paraphrase by Ulrich von Zatzikhoven, called the Lanzelet,® and
in order to determine the true position of Chrétien in the develop-


*> Whilst arguing, Romania, XII, 507, that Chrétien was the
first to make Lancelot Guinevere’s lover, G. Paris, Romania, X, 493ff.
endeavors to prove that there are French romances, or works based on
French romances, that reflect an earlier form of his story, when his
name was not connected with the queen’s, and still others that connect
his name with Guinevere’s, but not as a lover — in other words, that
there were French romances concerning Lancelot before Chrétien de
Troyes. But there are no convincing instances of the former and at
the end of his discussion of two of the romances in question (all of
them later) — viz: the tale of the stag with the white foot in the
Dutch version of the prose Lancelot and Rigomer he has to acknowl-
edge himself that the argument has little force. It is really no better
with his other two instances — Durmart and the Créne (Kréne) of
Heinrich von dem Tiirlin, — for, if Durmart and not Lancelot is made
the rescuer of Guinevere in the romance of that name, it is simply
because he is the hero of that particular romance. In the Créne we
have the episode of Lancelot’s rescue of Guinevere from Meleagant, but
there are some other passages concerning him in which Guinevere does
not appear — he was accustomed to read concerning adventures —
his strength, like Gawain’s grew with the growth of the day — his
amie cannot stand the test of chastity. But the Créne, as is uni-
versally recognized, belongs to the period when the Arthurian romances
had begun to decline and these are simply old motifs attached now
to Lancelot.

Doubtless, in later life Paris would not himself have attributed
any importance to these passages. It is different, however, with the
other set of romances — those that connect Lancelot und Guinevere
but not as lovers. The romances that he takes here into consideration
are the Middle High German Lanzelet by Ulrich von Zatzikhoven and
the abduction episode of the Créne. Now, the first of these, as will
be seen below, presents a real problem, but the Créne episode has
little force. The point which Paris makes is that the Crdne and
Malory’s Morte Darthur, Book XIX, show in the narrative of this
affair certain coincidences which distinguish them from Chrétien’s Lan-
celot and which go back to their common source, a hypothetical Che-
valier du Chariot (Chrétien’s source, too). As Foerster, however, has
Lancelot 207


ment of the Lancelot tradition, we shall have to consider this
German poem.

According to its author’s own statement, it is a translation
of a French book brought to Germany by Hugo de Morville, one
of the hostages who in 1194 replaced Richard Coeur de Lion in
the prison of Leopold of Austria.2* In view of the methods of
most Middle High German poets in handling French material,
there can be little doubt that we have here substantially a faithful
rendering of the lost French original. Scholars are of one mind as
to the poor quality of Ulrich’s poem, its immature construction,
etc., which, no doubt, reflect the same defects in its source. It
is on the question of whether this source was late or early that


observed in his Introduction to the Lancelot, p. LIX, none of these
matters are important — for instance, the Créne and Malory make
Lancelot ascend the cart, because he was tired, which, however, is a
detail that might easily have occurred to any number of poets inde-
pendently. In general, one may say that a writer like Malory who
wrote some three hundred years after Chrétien and nearly three hundred
years after the authors of the prose romances can be used only with
the greatest caution in the study of Arthurian sources. His work is
based largely on late modifications of the old standard romances, and,
as far as has been shown, it is not available in a single instance for
the study of early Arthurian sources.

°° He was, also, one of the slayers of Thomas & Becket. I agree
with Golther, Zs. f. fre. Spr. u. Litt., XXII*, 1 (1900) that the
Lanzelet shows the influence of Chrétien’s Yvain and Perceval, and,
hence, that it was, doubtless, written after 1180. Ulrich is probably
to be identified with the priest “Uolricus de Cecinhoven plebanus Lon-
- meissae [i. e. Lommis in Thurgau (Switzerland)]”, who is named in a
Latin document (dated March 29, 1214) from the monastery of St.
Peterzell in Toggenburg. The document in question has been printed
by J. Baechtold, Pfeiffer’s Germania, XIX, 424ff. (1874). That a
churchman should concern himself with romances in an age when those
works were universally popular is not strange.

Hugues de Morville and his fellow-hostages arrived in Austria in
February, 1194, and left that country in December of the same year.
Hence Lot, Etude sur la Lancelot en prose, p. 166, note 3, says
that Ulrich must have written his Lanzelet between these dates; but
Hugues may have made a present of the book to Ulrich, or the latter
may have copied it then and executed his paraphrase later.
208 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


the doctors disagree. Let us glance hastily, however, at the con-
tents of the romance:

Lancelot is the son of King Pant of Gennewis and his wife
Clarine. By a revolt of his people Pant was driven from his
kingdom with his wife and child. He died during the flight,
and a water-fairy stole his infant boy from the mother and carried
him away to Maidenland (the Celtic Otherworld). He is brought
up there ignorant of his name and rank and of knightly accomplish-
ments. The fairy, however, finally lets him go forth to try his
valor. She will not tell him, however, of his name and parentage
until he has overcome the strongest knight in the world, Iweret
of Beforet.27 Though provided with the best equipment, when he
starts out, he does not know how to use it, until in the course of
time he meets a knight, Johfrit de Liez, who gives him proper
instruction in these matters.

He next comes with two knights to the castle of a certain
Galagandreiz, who has condemned his daughter to perpetual vir-
ginity. She manages, however, to offer her love to each of the three
knights. Lancelot accepts, slays the father, and weds the girl.
Wandering forth on adventure, he is attacked at a castle named
Limors and would have been killed, but for the intervention of
Ade, niece of the lord of the castle. He is thrown into prison, but
escapes after fighting successively with a giant, two lions, and
the lord of the castle. He now becomes the lover of Ade. Whether
he marries her is not said, but, at any rate, his wife, the daughter
of Galagandreiz, drops out of the story.

Lancelot is now famous and Arthur sends Gawain to bring
him to court. They meet (not knowing each other’s identity),
fight an undecided combat, which is terminated by news of an
impending tournament between King Lot and Gurnemanz. Lance-


*? This witholding of the hero’s name, which is so common a
motif in the romances, is connected ultimately, no doubt, with the
widespread superstition among primitive peoples to the effect that to
disclose one’s name puts one in the power of another. Cp. on the
subject Edward Clodd’s interesting book, Magic in Names and in
Other Things (London, 1920).


Go ogle


Lancelot 209


lot betakes himself thither, fights three days, and each day in
armor of a different color, overthrows many knights including
Lot, whom he sets free out of friendship for Gawain, and still
incognito, rides away to Ade and her brother.

They come to a castle, Schatel le Mort (Castle of Death), the
master of which is Mabuz, a magician — the son of the fairy who
brought Lancelot up. Lancelot rides to the castle, which has this
property that whoever crosses its drawbridge at once loses all cou-
rage. He falls under the spell and is made prisoner. His amie,
Ade, rides off in dismay with her brother and disappears from
the story. The territory of Mabuz is often raided by his neighbor,
Iweret of Beforet. The magician is, himself, a coward, but makes
Lancelot his champion — has him carried outside the castle-walls,
so that he may again be free from the spell. Lancelot rides to
a fountain beside which hangs a brazen cymbal on which he must
strike three times with a hammer to summon his foe. In the
meanwhile, Iblis, daughter of Iweret, has a dream of an unknown
knight. She finds this dream realized in Lancelot and she wishes
him to fly with her, but he first slays the father and then marries
the girl, becoming master of Beforet.

At this point a messenger from Lancelot’s fairy doataensthes
informs him of his name and parentage, and it turns out that she
stole him in the original instance to raise up a deliverer for her
son, Mabuz.

Lancelot now decides to seek Gawain. On his way he meets
a squire, who informs him that King Valerin (Falerin) has ap-
peared at Arthur’s court and laid claim to Guinevere, on the
ground that she had been betrothed to him, previous to her mar-
riage with Arthur. If no champion offers, he will carry off the
queen. Lancelot undertakes the combat and defeats Valerin.

Following .this, Lancelot has another adventure at a castle
named Pluris — defeats in succession one hundred knights, and,
forgetful of Iblis, marries the queen of the castle. During his
absence from court Iblis successfully stands the chastity test (by
means of a mantle). Gawain, Karyet (Gaheriet) Erec and Tristan
go in search of Lancelot and by a ruse succeed in delivering him

Hefperia, Ergdnzungsrethe; 8. 14
210 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


from the castle of Pluris, whose queen, like Lancelot’s previous
wives, now vanishes from the story.

But on their way back to court the knights hear that Valerin
has carried off Guinevere and imprisoned her in a castle sur-
rounded by serpents — in a magic slumber, as it turns out. At
Tristan’s suggestion they seek the aid of the enchanter, Malduc,
in liberating the queen. Erec and Gawain, however, have to be
given up to Malduc, who has a grudge against them, before he
will render assistance. The two knights themselves consent to this
and Malduc, by his magical powers, rescues the queen.?® Lancelot
and a giant now free Erec and Gawain from Malduc and they
all return to Arthur’s court. Here Iblis tells him of a knight
who had recently been confronted with the adventure of the fter
baiser — he is solicited for a kiss by a dragon, who speaks with
a human voice. Lancelot undertakes the adventure and the seem-
ing dragon is transformed into a woman. She has been put under a
spell, because she had transgressed the laws of Minne — that is
the conventions of the amour courtois.

In conclusion, Lancelot wins back his father’s kingdom and
retires with Iblis to Beforet, where they entertain Arthur and
his consort. The pair are blessed with four children. They live
to old age and die on the same day.

Now, there are different views held in regard to the relations
of Chrétien’s Lancelot and Ulrich’s original. On the one hand,
we have what to the present writer seems the true view — namely,
that this latter romance was a biographical romance of the weakest
sort, comparatively late and built up in a considerable mea8ure
on motifs derived from Chrétien’s poems.2? On the other hand,
Gaston Paris and others have regarded Ulrich’s original as derived


*® Miss Weston points out, Legend of Sir Lancelot du Lac,
pp. 15 ff. that, contrary to the statement of both G. Paris and Foerster,
Lancelot has nothing to do with the rescue, his name even not being
mentioned.

*° Such is the view defended by Foerster, Lancelot, pp. XLV Tft.,
and by Golther in his review of Foerster’s edition of the Lancelot,
Zs. f. fre. Spr. u. Litt., XXII*, 1ff. (1900). Golther calls the Lan-
zelet “geradezu eine Erginzung der Karre” (i. e. of Chrétien’s Lanclot).


Go ogle


Lancelot 211


from the same source as Chrétien’s Lancelot — that is, from a
biographical romance concerning Lancelot — only the great French
scholar thought that Ulrich’s original was more primitive than
Chrétien and reflected better their common source.%

In an effort to answer the question at issue, let us examine now
more closely some of the motefs of Ulrich’s Lenzelet which are
found also in Chrétien’s poems or other early romances.

1. The trait of Lancelot’s being brought up in the wilder-
ness, ignorant of his name, parentage and all knightly accom-
plishments. For the source of this feature of the Lanzelet there
is no need of seeking any further than the story of Perceval’s
youth as related in Chrétien’s poem on that hero. So, too, with
the instruction which Johfrit de Liez gives Lancelot.

2. The Three Days’ Tournament motif. We have a similar
episode in Chrétien’s Cliges, ll. 4575ff., and certain scholars*
contend that the motif in the Lanzelet is derived from that source.
Chrétien, however, makes Cliges fight four days (each day in armour
of a different colour), which is an expansion of the motif as we
find it not only in the German poem, but in a great number of


°° Cp. Romania, X, 472 (1881). Miss Weston’s view, Legend
of Sir Lancelot du Lac, pp. 17ff., of the matter is akin to that of
G. Paris — except that she regards Ulrich’s original as drawn not
from a biographical romance, but from a number of floating lays con-
cerning Lancelot. Most of the episodes, however, which Miss Weston
supposes to be based on hypothetical “floating lays” have parallels
elsewhere, and there is no reason to believe that Lancelot ever had
any monopoly of these motifs in oral tradition — so her theory is,
in the opinion of the present writer, untenable — and, similarly, that
of G. Paris, in so far as it assumes a basis of Lancelot lays for his
hypothetical common source of Chrétien and Ulrich’s original.

Similar to Miss Weston’s theory is A. C. L. Brown’s (in his “The
Grail and the English Sir Perceval’, MPh. XVI, 559 ff. (1919), XVII,
361ff. (1919). He supports this theory by an endeavor to prove
that Sir Perceval and the Lanzelet draw upon a “body of tradition”
older than Chrétien (p. 563). Brown’s method in these discussions,
however, is open to the same criticism that I have expressed elsew-
here.


8! Foerster and Golther.


Go ogle


212 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


folktales. Accordingly, it has been urged,®? on the other side, that
the passage in Ulrich came from oral tradition and not from Cliges.
There remains, however, the possibility that Chrétien’s example
may have led the author of Ulrich’s original to employ the moftsf,
although in a form nearer to that which it assumes in the folk-
tales. But it seems even more likely that the author of this ori-
ginal was imitating here the romance of I[pomedon, which contains
the motif in the same form as Ulrich’s poem.*? As we have seen,
Hugh of Morville brought the French book to Austria in 1194,
but it may have been then quite new — possibly the latest sen-
sation.** If it was composed after 1190, it was certainly later
than I[pomedon, for we know that this romance was written before
that date.


3. Lancelot’s challenging of Iweret by striking on the brazen
cymbal at the fountain may very well have been suggested by the
episode of Yvain and the fountain in Chrétien’s Yvain (ll. 800ff.).


4. The folk-tale motif of the feer baiser — a knight, by a kiss,
undoes the spell which has transformed a beautiful woman into
a serpent — here attached to Lancelot, is generally attached to
Gawain’s son in the Arthurian romances, and seems as distinctive
of that character as the features of Perceval’s youth, enumerated
above, are of Perceval. The earliest of the romances dealing with


** By Miss Weston in her The Three Days’ Tournament (Lon-
don, 1902). A much better discussion of the motif in its manifold
occurrences will be found in C. H. Carter’s article on Ipomedon, Haver-
ford Essays, pp. 248ff. (Haverford, Pa., 1909).

** Miss Weston, op. cit., pp. 3ff., notes this herself.

In her treatise, named above, Miss Weston has entered into a
long argument — to the present writer unconvincing — that this
three tournament motif belonged to Lancelot in oral tradition. Neither
she, however, nor Carter have taken into account the fact that Ulrich’s
original may very well have been later in date than [pomedon and,
consequently, may have drawn from it. There is no way of settling
the question of whence the author of Ulrich’s original derived this in-
cident, but, in any event, there is, pace Miss Weston, no reason for
believing that its connection with Lancelot belonged to oral tradition.

** Cp. Foerster’s Lancelot, p. XLVI.
Lancelot 213


Gawain’s son, viz. Li Biaus Descouneus, dates from the latter part
of the twelfth century.*

5. The episode of Guinevere’s abduction, which constitutes
the main crux of the whole controversy. Is Ulrich’s account of this
affair more primitive than Chrétien’s? Miss Weston thinks that
it is.36 The description of Guinevere’s prison, she remarks, her
magic slumber in a fair dwelling, surrounded by a dense thicket
infested with serpents, is the sleeping beauty story in its oldest
Otherworld form. The identification with the sleeping beauty
motif is admissible; but who can say that this motif was not im-
ported into the story of Guinevere’s abduction by the author of
the lost French romance which Ulrich was following? In any case,
the element in question is no more Celtic in character than Chré-
tien’s description of Guinevere’s captivity, for in the numerous
descriptions of the Celtic Otherworld there is none that represents
it in this light. |

That Ulrich’s original was independent of Chrétien’s Lancelot
seems at first blush manifest, stnce here Lancelot is not the lover
of Guinevere. He has four love affairs in the course of the poem
— three of them ending in marriage — but none of them are with
her. If he had known Chreétien’s Lancelot, would the author of
the poem have ventured to discard the conception of the love-affair
which is embodied in that work? Considering the renown to which
this love-affair has since attained, one 1s inclined to answer “‘no’’.


*° According to Miss G. P. Williams, — see her edition (Oxford,
1915) of the romance, p. XXXVIII — it was written between 1185 and
1190. The fier baiser episode will be found, ll. 3114ff., in Miss
Williams’s edition. For an analysis of the episode in the various ro-
mances of the cycle, cp. W. H. Schofield, Studies on the Libeaus
Desconus, pp. 47 ff., Harvard Studies and Notes in Philology and
Literature, no. 4 (Boston, 1895). For the fier baiser motif in the
literature of folktales, in general, cp. Bolte and Polivka, H, 271ff.
In “La légende de la fille d’Hippocrate”, Bibliotheque de ’ Ecole des
Chartes, vol. 79, pp. 45 ff. (1918), G. Huet defends the antiquity of
the localization of this motif on the island of Cos in the Aegean Sea
— the birth-place of the great physician, Hippocrates — which is
found in The Travels of Sir John Mandeville, ch. 4.

** Cp. her Legend of Sir Lancelot du Lac, p. 19.


Go ogle


214 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


But it is to be remembered that for Chrétien’s contemporaries this
feature of Guinevere’s story was a new thing — a quite recent
innovation — and did not possess the authority that it now pos-
sesses; So, if a writer wished to introduce into a romance about
Lancelot the abduction incident, in which the queen had long fi-
gured, he would not feel it necessary, as a modern poet, doubtless,
would, to connect the episode with Lancelot as the lover and rescuer.
Above all, however, it is to be observed that the narratives of their
predecessors had no sanctity for the mediaeval romancers. If the
author of the Queste del Saint Graal could displace Perceval by
Galahad as the Grail hero and still retain the former as a pro-
minent actor in the story, there is, surely, no reason why the author
of the French original of the Lanzelet should not have displaced
Guinevere by Iblis (the most prominent of Lancelot’s lady-loves
in the Lanzelet), say, and still have kept the hero as the queen’s
rescuer, although he is no longer her lover. An adequate motive
for the change would be that the romances regularly end with
the marriage of the hero and the heroine, yet this, of course, would
have been impossible, if Arthur’s consort had continued to be
Lancelot’s lady-love.’? Thus, the French poet whom Ulrich trans-
lated may, after all, have been attracted to Lancelot by Chrétien’s
poem, although he chose to ascribe to him a new set of adventures,
gathered, for the most part, here and there, from traditions or
contemporary romances relating to other heroes. In any event,
there is only one feature of Lancelot’s story, as we find it in the
various Arthurian romances, of which we can assert that it was


*" The considerations here advanced meet sufficiently, I believe,
Brown's critieism, MPh. XVII, 363. Important in this connection,
also, are the instances of violent departure from Arthurian tradition
which I have cited elsewhere in the present work. Furthermore,
despite Brown’s objection, loc. cit., I cannot regard the parallel of
Escanor, for example, as without value. The author of this poem uses
as one of his sources the prose Lancelot, in which the great theme
is the hero’s passion for the queen, yet he not only ignores that famous
love-story, though retaining Lancelot as a minor character in his poem,
but says explicitly, 1. 7344, that Guinevere loved Gawain most of
all men, except her husband.
. Lancelot 215


unquestionably connected with him in oral tradition — namely,
the one according to which he was stolen when a child and brought
up by a water-fairy. This account is first found in an explicit
form in Ulrich’s Lanzelet, but the name given the character in
Chretien’s poems — Lancelot del Lac — presupposes this feature.
From the French source of the Lanzelet it passed into the great
Lancelot in prose, and thence into general tradition.

It was through this prose Lancelot — composed in its earliest
form, it would seem, near the end of the twelfth century — that
the fame of Lancelot was spread far and wide. Although so im-
portant in the development of the history of the character, Chre-
tien’s poem does not seem to have been much read, if we are to
judge by the paucity of allusions to it in mediaeval literature.®®
It was otherwise, however, with the prose-romance, which, as we
shall see, was destined to exercise a profound influence on the prose-
fiction of Europe. To separate this romance, as it was originally
written, from the additions and interpolations with which it has
been overloaded in our relatively late cyclic MSS. is a difficult
task.‘° Nevertheless, it is virtually certain that even in its un-
encumbered form the prose work was based, to a considerable ex-


*° Cp. Sommer, Il, 14. Foerster, Lancelot, p. XXXIX, ascribes
to Lancelot, also, in popular tradition the réle of Guinevere’s rescuer,
but as Miss Weston, pp. 15f., has shown, this is due to an erroneous
interpretation of Ulrich’s poem. The German scholar has remarked,
moreover, that the temporary release of Lancelot from captivity, in
order that he may attend a tourney, occurring in both Chrétien and
Ulrich, was probably in the oral tradition; but one cannot shut out
the suspicion that Ulrich’s original was here borrowing from Chrétien.

Miss L. A. Paton, Studies in the Fairy Mythology of Arthurian
Romance, pp. 188f. (Boston, 1903) suggested that the lake-fairy was,
doubtless, originally not Lancelot’s foster-mother, but his amie. A.C. L.
Brown, MPh. XVII, 361 ff., adopts this hypothesis, which figures lar-
gely in his discussion of the Lanzelet. It has, however, no support
whatever in the extant texts and, in my own opinion, should be rejected.


*° Cp. Foerster, Lancelot, pp. XLVI ft.


“° The present writer has attempted this in his study, “The
Composition of the Old French prose Lancelot’. Romanic Review,
vols. IX, (1918) and X, (1919).


6 ogle


216 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


tent, on earlier romances in verse‘! — most of them lost — and
there is no reason to believe that it drew at all from oral tra-
dition. We shall return, however, to the prose Lancelot in a later
chapter of the present treatise.


*? Miss Weston’s assumption (cp. her Legend of Sir Lancelot
du Lac, pp. 89ff.) that her hypothetical body of oral tradition con-
cerning Lancelot affected independently the Arthurian romances like
the prose Merlin and Tristan is baseless. The romances, just named,
know nothing about this hero, except what they derive from the prose
Lancelot. Equally groundless is the notion, first advanced in her book
on The Legend of Sir Gawain (London, 1897) and repeated here,
that Gawain was originally Guinevere’s lover in Celtic tradition and
that features of his story have descended to Lancelot. In the scores of
Arthurian texts there is not a trace of any such relation between
Gawain and Guinevere.


rn ng ee


Go ogle


PART I.


THE HOLY GRAIL.
Original from


Digitized by Google UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA


Chapter I.


Chrétien, Robert de Boron, and the Theory
of Christian Origin.

It would materially facilitate the investigation of the origin.”
of the legend of the Grail, if we could fix indisputably the relative
dates of the various mediaeval romances that deal with the theme.
Unfortunately here, as so often in Arthurian matters, the data
are meagre, and even those who are most convinced of the correct-
ness of any particular theory as to the chronological order of these
works must acknowledge that an uncertainty which cannot be
wholly dispelled must still hang over their conclusions. The two
earliest romances that treat of the Grail are the Conte del Graal
of Chrétien de Troyes and the Joseph of Robert de Boron. Let us
look at the evidence regarding the date of composition in each
case. First, as regards the Conte del Graal, as Chrétien named
it, or the Perceval, as, following the example of modern scholars,
it will be more convenient for us to call it. At the beginning of
his poem Chrétien eulogizes Count Philip of Flanders, at whose
command he was composing the romance — his source being a
book given him for the purpose by this same Count Philip.t The


* The eulogy takes the form of an argument to prove that his
patron, Philip, is superior to Alexander the Great. Despite this ar-
tificial form, his praise of Philip’s justice, liberality, and charity pro-
duces an impression of greater sincerity than is usual in such cases.
But, after all, the impression is probably due merely to Chrétien’s art,
for these encomiums are hardly borne out by the historical evi-
dences as to Philip’s life. With such a patron the poet continues in
the oft-quoted lines (62ff.):


Done avra bien sauve sa peine
Crestiens qui antant et peine
A rimoier le meillor conte,
220 The Holy Grail


nobleman in question was Philip of Alsace, who was born about
1143 and who succeeded his father as Count of Flanders in 1168.
In 1190 he went to the Holy Land and died there the following
year. So the only positive limits within which Chrétien may be
said to have written his poem are 1168—1190, i.e. the limits
of the rule of Philip of Alsace before his departure for Palestine,
which would surely have been mentioned by Chrétien, had he al-
ready gone. At the same time there are certain considerations
which make the earlier part of this period more probable than the
latter. In the first place, the romance which, according to general
agreement, must have immediately preceded the Perceval in order
of composition, 1.e. the Yvain, was written, as seems manifest from
an allusion in it, not later than 1174. Now, Perceval was the only
one of Chrétien’ s works of later date than this. Is it likely that
this romance was separated from the Yvain by any wide interval .
of years, so that its composition would fall, say in the eighties
of the twelfth century? It is possible, of course, but his previous
works, Erec, Cligés, Lancelot, Yvain, had followed each other in
fairly close succession; consequently, the weight of probability,
on the whole, would seem to lie on the other side. In any event,
Perceval was the last poem from Chrétien’s pen, for one of his
continuators, Gerbert, tells us that he died whilst he was com-
posing it, and this accounts, of course, for his leaving it a fragment,
tempting others to continuations.

Let us now examine the evidence as to Robert de Boron’s
Joseph. The question is somewhat complicated by the fact that
Robert’s poem is preserved to us in what some scholars regard,
though wrongly, I believe, as only a second redaction. The epi-
logue at the end of the Joseph in our unique MS. was plainly a
late addition to the original poem, and, according to these scho-


Par le comandement le conte,
Qui soit contez an cort real;
Ce est li contes del graal,
Don li cuens li baille le livre,
S’orroiz comant il s’an delivre.


Then begins the story of Perceval.
The Theory of Christian Origin 221


lars, in adding the epilogue the author made changes in the poem,
itself. In this epilogue the poet remarks that it would be desirable
to know the subsequent adventures of the principal characters in
his poem and declares his intention of treating these subjects,
if he can ever discover a book which might tell of them. But no
one, he says, can assemble such a narrative who has not heard
told the most high history of the Holy Grail (i.e. the Joseph)
which is without doubt entirely true. Then, in this connection
he makes the following statement, which bears on the question
of date: ‘At the time that I treated it (ie. the story of the Grail)
in peace, (when) with my lord, Gautier, who was of Mont-Belyal,
the great history of the Holy Grail had never been treated by any
man that was mortal.’”’ Now, this Gautier of Montbéliard went
to Palestine in 1199, became Constable of Jerusalem there, then
Regent of Cyprus, and died in 1212. Inasmuch as Gautier’s
elder brother (Richard of Montbeliard) died so late as 1237, it
it not likely that Gautier himself was born before 1150, or more
probably 1160.2 On the other hand, Gautier’s father, Amadeus,
died in 1183 and the same year Gautier became independent for
the first time on receiving the county of Montfaucon. The pro-
babilities are that he would hardly have become the patron of
a.poet that year. In any event, he must have been a grown man,
so that Robert’s connection with him could not have begun before
about 1180.

It will be seen that the evidence as to the upward limit for
the date of Robert de Boron’s romance does not enable us to fix
upon a precise year. But the range is not great; it was in the
early eighties of the twelfth century. As regards the downward
limit, we are better off. Robert states that he was with Gautier
when he first composed his poem. Now, Gautier took his departure
for Italy in 1199 and thence for Palestine in 1201, so that the
composition of the Joseph in its original form, it is virtually cer-
tain, must have antedated 1199. With regard to the existing
form, which, of course, may have undergone changes, as compared


* For these dates cp., respectively, Birch-Hirschfeld, p. 239, and
G. Paris, Huth-Merlin, p. 18, note 1


6 ogle


222 The Holy Grail


with the original form, this would seem at first sight to date
from a period subsequent to Gautier’s death, i.e. subsequent to
1212, since the author speaks here of Gautier as one “who was
of Montbéliard.”? But I agree with Professor Heinzel that these


* This was Gaston Paris’s interpretation, Huth-Merlin, vol. I,
p. IX, note 1. On the other hand, Heinzel, pp. 113f, suggests that
we have the past, estoit (1. 3491, Qui de Mont-Belyal estoit),
because retreis (1. 3489, A ce tens que je la retreis — i.e. “at
the time that I related the history of the Grail”) was in the past.
I believe that this is the correct explanation, and that we have here
simply a case of grammatical subordination. So, too, Brugger, Zs.
f. fre. Spr. u. Litt., XXIX*, 65, note 13. That this form of ex-
pression might give rise to misunderstandings would, of course, never
occur to so careless a writer as Robert de Boron. And, after all,
when I say: “At the time that I wrote my book in 1910, I was
closely associated with John Johnson, who was the professor of history
in the University of Chicago,’ I do not imply that Professor Johnson
is no longer professor in the University of Chicago or that he is now
dead. Moreover, if G. Paris’s interpretation is the true one, Robert,
after an interval of at least thirteen years (1199—1212) — in all
probability, more — took up his work to continue it and apparently
on a very large scale (although we have no reason to believe that he
ever carried out the full plan). But this seems incredible. More likely
would be an interval of not half that duration. On the other hand,
I see no reason for believing with Heinzel that the epilogue (or the
hypothetical redaction of the original Joseph) was composed after 1201.
Heinzel is evidently influenced by his identification of Dou Graal la
plus grant estotre (1. 3487) with the so called Grand St. Graal
(Estoire del saint Graal) of the Walter Map cycle, which, owing
to an erroneous interpretation of the well-known passage in the Chro-
nicle of Helinandus, he placed some years before 1204.


Birch-Hirschfeld, p. 239, interpreted 1. 3491 as referring to the
time when Gautier was merely of Montbéliard and before he became
Count of Montfaucon in 1183. But this is not satisfactory, since he
was called Gautier de Montbéliard long after he became Count of Mont-
faucon. See on the subject Foerster, Wérterbuch, p. 173.*

G. Paris, Mélanges, p. 45, speaks of Robert as standing in re-
lations, not only of friendship with Gautier, but of “collaboration”,
whilst F. Lot says, Bibliotheque de l’Ecole des Chartes, LXX, 565,
note 4 (1909), “Je n’accorde, au surplus, aucune créance a J’assertion
de Robert qui n’'invoque |’autorité de Gautier de Montbéliard que parce


Go ogle


The Theory of Christian Origin 223


words do not necessarily imply that Gautier was dead. The poet.
used the past tense simply because he was speaking of a connection
which at the time that he composed his epilogue belonged to the
past.

To sum up, then, Chrétien’s Perceval was written between 1174
and 1190 and Robert de Boron’s Joseph between 1180, say, and
1199. For Chrétien, the years from 1174 to 1180, as we have seen,
seem more probable, though not certain. As regards Robert de
Boron, there 1s no evidence that would enable us to draw the limits
more narrowly.

I will now give an analysis of each of these poems — the
earliest works concerning the Holy Grail, so that we may have
the materials for determining their relations, as far as possible,
and for settling the question of priority which the external data
are insufficient to settle.

And first for Chrétien’s Perceval. After the dedicatory pro-
logue which I have already indicated, the narrative begins:

It was in the spring when the son (Perceval, as he is sub-
sequently called) of the widowed lady went forth to the hunt in the
Waste Forest. He hears the rattling of weapons and believes that
the sounds are caused by devils, from whom his mother had warned
him to protect himself by making the sign of the cross. But he


qu'il est mort et en Terre-Sainte.” But the text does not warrant
either of these extreme views.

The words en peis (1. 3490, O mon seigneur Gautier en peis)
have been interpreted as equivalent to 1 pace, i.e. dead, but this is
not a necessary interpretation.

* I use Baist’s Crestien’s von Troyes Contes del Graal (Per-
cevaus li galois): Abdruck der Handschrift Paris, frangais 794,
mit Anmerkungen und Glossar (Freiburg i. B). This publication,
which appeared in 1912, is undated, like the earlier impression, which
did not bear Baist’s name. The earlier impression (printed for private
circulation in 1909) is very incorrect. Cp. R. Weeks’ review of it,
Romanic Review, Il, 101ff. (1911).

The only other edition of the poem is C. Potvin’s in vols. 1 and
2 (Part 2) of his Perceval le Gallois ou le Conte du Graal (6 vols.,
1866—1871). The Mons MS, which constitutes the basis of Potvin’s
edition, is inferior. Cp. P. Meyer, Revue Critique, Sept. 1, 1866.


C6 ogle


224 The Holy Grail


decides that he will not do this, rather he will wait and strike down
the strongest of them with a dart, so that the rest will not venture
to attack him. Soon, certain knights, in brilliant harness, come
into sight and the young man is so filled with admiration at their
appearance that he concludes that the first of them is God and the
others angels. A dialogue follows in which Perceval learns from
the strangers that they are knights, that King Arthur confers
knighthood — moreover, in reply to his eager questions, they
tell him the use of each piece of their equipment. It is an amusing
feature of this dialogue that, instead of answering the inquiries
of the strange knights, the forest-bred youth seeks the gratification
of his own curiosity by counter-questions as to their armor and
other matters which his native war-like instincts suggest. He goes
back home and relates his encounter with the knights to his mother.
She falls into a swoon at the recital, for his father and brothers
had fallen in combat and she had endeavored to keep the boy
ignorant of deeds of war. He insists, however, on becoming a
knight and on the third day after the encounter he departs for
Arthur’s court. Before he leaves, she gives him good advice, viz.
to aid and do service to ladies, and as a reward of service to ask
for a kiss or a jewel — moreover, always to seek the name of the
companions whom he might join on the road, to keep company
only with worthy men, and to pray, whenever he came to a church.
Clad like a Welsh peasant and armed with a dart, he rides forth to
obtain knighthood at Arthur’s court. On the way he comes to a
splendid tent which he mistakes for a church. There is a girl
asleep inside, and he snatches from her a kiss and a ring, thinking
that he is thereby fulfilling his mother’s injunction. Before the
gate of the king’s castle he meets a knight in red armor with a
golden cup. He now rides into the hall. Everybody there takes
him for a fool, although they are struck with his beauty. Arthur
sits in dejection, his principal knights being away and the Red
Knight having just carried off the cup. Perceval acts like a rustic,
but the king treats him kindly — and he now asks to be made
a knight, demanding also the red armor which he had just seen.
The seneschal, Kay (Kai) laughs at him and bids him seek it
The Theory of Christian Origin 225


himself from the Red Knight, which Perceval hastens to do. As
he rides out, a damsel who is present predicts his future prowess,
which so enrages Kay that he knocks her down (1. 1030) and
kicks into the fire a fool who had been wont to repeat that the
damsel would not laugh until she beheld the best of knights. Per-
ceval follows the Red Knight and bids him give up his arms and
armour. They fight and Perceval slays his adversary with a dart.5
Yonés who has followed him finds him put to it to remove the
knight’s armour. He is preparing to burn the dead body in order
to get this armour, when Yonés shows him how to disarm the
dead man and to arm himself. Perceval sends the cup back to
the king and also a message to the effect that he would return
to avenge the blow which Kay had given the damsel. He goes
on and reaches a castle whose lord is an old knight named Gor-
nemant of Gohorz. Gornemant entertains him and teaches him
the use of arms and all knightly practices. In especial, he is
to avoid over-readiness in speaking and in asking questions and to
give up his habit of always quoting his mother’s counsels. Gor-
nemant then dubs him knight and sends him forth to return to
his mother. After a day’s journey he comes to Beaurepaire, a
town defended by a castle, and, on entering it, finds it deserted.
The lady of the castle, who is a damsel of surpassing beauty, wel-
comes him and bids him to her table. Being mindful of Gorne-
mant’s counsels, he remains silent and she must speak to him
first. The girl turns out to be Gornemant’s niece, Blanchefleur.
That night she comes in distress to Perceval’s bedside, and, in
reply to his questions, tells him how the forces of King Clama-


° Ll. 1090ff. In “The Death of the Red Knight in the Story
of Perceval’, MLN, XXXI, 53—55 (1916), R: B. Pace calls attention
to the fact that in the corresponding passages of Sir Perceval, Pere-
dur and Wolfram’s Parzival there is nothing to represent the line,
“Le sane et la cervelle espant” (1. 1095) in Chrétien’s account of the
killing. He argues, from this that the three versions are not based
on Chrétien, but on a common source. The works in question, however,
are, on no theory, literal translations of Chrétien; consequently I cannot
ascribe to this omission the importance that Pace does. Pace cites
other instances of the same phrase in Chrétien’s romances. . i

Hefperia, Ergdngungsreihe: 8. 15


Go O gle eit ‘


226 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


deus encompass the castle and how on the morrow she must yield,
but rather than be Clamadeus’s she will slay herself. He promises
her help, and they spend the night together.¢ The next day he
vanquishes Clamadeus’s seneschal and sends him to Arthur’s court.
Clamadeus presses the siege without success and then challenges
Perceval to single combat. Perceval vanquishes him, also, and
sends him to Arthur’s court. Clamadeus and his seneschal relate
wonders there of the Red Knight (Perceval). After remaining
awhile with Blanchefleur, Perceval takes leave of her, as he longs
to see his mother again. Now comes the Grail episode. On his
journey the young knight comes to a river upon which there is
a boat with two men in it. One of them, in reply to his questions,
directs him for a night’s shelter to his own castle hard by. Per-
ceval starts for it, and, being at first unable to find it, reproaches
the fisher. Suddenly he perceives the castle before him, enters
it, is disarmed, clad in a scarlet mantle and led into a great hall.
Therein is a couch upon which hes an old man; near him is a
fire around which some four hundred men are sitting. Perceval
tells his host that he has come from Beaurepaire. A squire enters,
bearing a sword, and on it is written that it will never break save
in one peril, and that known only to the maker of it. It is a
present from the host’s niece to be bestowed where it will be
well employed. The host gives it to Perceval, ‘to whom it was
adjudged and destined.”” Hereupon enters another squire, bearing
in his hand a lance, from the head of which a drop of blood runs
down on the squire’s hand. Perceval would have asked concerning
this wonder, but he remembers Gornemant’s counsel not to speak
or inquire too much. Two more squires enter holding each a
ten-branched candlestick, and with them a damsel, a’? “graal’’ in
her hands. The Grail (to use the English form of the word)


* It has been sometimes maintained that the relations of the
pair during the night they spend together (cp. Baist’s edition, 1]. 2030 ff.)
are wholly innocent, but there is not the slightest suggestion of as-
ceticism in the description and the language is like that of other des-
criptions of similar situations in the romances.

* Observe that the indefinite, not the definite, article is used in
the passage.
The Theory of Christian Origin 227


shines so that it puts out the light of the candles as the sun
does that of the stars. Thereafter follows a damsel holding a
(silver) plate. All defile past between the fire and the couch,
but Perceval does not venture to ask wherefore the Grail is used.
Supper follows and the Grail is again brought in with each course
and Perceval was curious to know the use of the vessel, but he
again refrains from inquiring when he thinks of Gornemant and
finally puts off his questions till the morrow. After supper Per-
ceval is led to his chamber and, on the morrow, awakening, finds
the castle deserted. No one answers his calls. Issuing forth, he
sees his horse saddled and the drawbridge down. Thinking to
find the inhabitants of the castle in the forest, he rides forth,
but the drawbridge closes so suddenly behind him that, had not
the horse leapt quickly forward, it would have gone hard with
both steed and rider. In vain Perceval calls: no one answers.
He proceeds on his way and comes to an oak, beneath which
there is a girl sitting who is holding a dead knight in her arms
and lamenting over him. She asks him where he has passed the
night, and on learning it tells him the fisher who had directed
him to the castle and his host were one and the same person.
Wounded by a spear thrust through both thighs, his only solace
is in fishing, whence he is called the Fisher King. She asks
Perceval whether he had seen the bleeding lance, the Grail and
the silver plate and whether he had asked their meaning. He
replies, no. She asks him his name and, according to the strange
statement of Chrétien’s poem, he answers (1. 3537) rightly that
it was Percevax li galois (Perceval the Welshman), although he
really did not know his own name and this was a mere guess. She
replies that it ought to have been Perceval the Caitiff, for had he
asked concerning what he saw, the good king would have beem
made whole again, and great good would have sprung therefrom.


* In “The Drawbridge of the Grail Castle’, MLN, XXXIII, 399 ff.
(1918), Esther C. Dunn cites a perilous bridge from the Irish saga,
The Wooing of Emer, as a parallel. Both authors, however, were


describing fairy-tale adventures and the similarity —- such as it
is — between the two passages is, doubtless, purely accidental.
| 15*
228 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


She tells him too that he has been guilty of his mother’s death,
for she had died of grief after he left her — moreover, that she
herself is his cousin and had been brought up with him. Perceval
offers to revenge the death of her lover upon his slayer. She
warns him, however, about the sword which he wears and which
one of the nieces of his host at the Grail Castle had sent him
the evening before. This sword easily flies to pieces, but, to mend
it, he should take it to the smith, Trabuchet, who made it and who
lives near the lake, Cotovatre. Next follows an encounter between
Perceval and Orgellous de la Lande, the jealous husband of the
lady of the tent from whom Perceval had snatched a kiss and
a ring. The young knight overcomes this adversary, too, and
sends him to Arthur’s court with the same message as his pre-
decessors. When he hears of Perceval’s exploits, Arthur sets forth
with his whole court to seek him. They come upon him plunged
in meditation under the following circumstances: Snow had fallen,
and a flock of geese blinded by it had one of its number wounded
by a falcon. Three blood drops had fallen upon the snow and
Perceval beholding them was plunged in deep thought on the red
and white in his love’s face. Sagremor addresses him and bids
him come, and when he does not answer, tilts against him, but
is overthrown. Kay fares even worse, for he has an arm and a
leg broken. Thus Perceval’s vow to take vengeance on him has
been unconsciously fulfilled. Gawain guesses that love must be
mastering the strange knight’s thoughts. Accordingly, he ap-
proaches Perceval courteously and the latter is brought to Arthur
and received by him with honour. On the morrow he returns to
the court at Caerleon (Carlion) with Arthur and his train. The
next day at noon a hideous damsel appears at court, riding on
a yellow mule. She curses Perceval for having omitted to ask
concerning the lance and the Grail; if he had done so, the king
would have been healed of his wound and ruled his land in peace;
now maidens will be put to shame, many will be made orphans
and widows, and many knights slain. She then tells of the adven-
tures to be achieved at the Castel Orgellous where there are 566
knights, each with his lady — all ready to joust, with the best


Go ogle


The Theory of Christian Origin 229


estate in the world as the prize — still further, of the adventure of
Montesclaire, where there is a captive maiden awaiting deliverance.
Whoever liberates her will receive not only praise but l’espée as
estranges ranges® (1. 4674), which was destined to play an im-
portant part in the later Grail romances. Gawain undertakes this
last adventure, Gifflet (Gifles) undertakes that of the Castel Or-
gellous, and Perceval vows that he will not rest two nights in the
same place until he has learned the meaning of the Grail and the
spear. — The next 1466 lines (4709—6175) are devoted to ad-
ventures of Gawain; but despite the literary excellence of the
episode of the dametsele as petites mances (the damsel with the
small sleeves), this part of the poem has nothing to do with the
Grail theme, save that at the end Gawain is released from a dan-
gerous situation in Guigambresil’s castle, on condition that he
will bring back the bleeding lance within a year’s time (6160).
— The tale next returns to Perceval who has wandered about for
five years without thinking of God, yet performing many feats.
He meets three knights accompanied by ladies, all clad in penitents’
dress. Perceval did not know it, but the day was Good Friday and
the eldest knight rebukes him for riding fully armed on such a
day. He must confess himself to a holy hermit who lives hard by.
Perceval goes thither and accuses himself of having forgotten God
through his great grief at not having learned the use of the Grail.
The hermit reveals himself to the penitent as his uncle — tells
him that he is in sin as having caused his mother’s death and
that for that reason he could not ask concerning lance and Grail —
indeed, that but for her prayers he would not have lived till now.
Perceval remains two days with his uncle, receives absolution, and
rides forth. The remainder of Chrétien’s poem (6476—9198)1°


° Sword with the Strange Hangings.

*° In Ein Namenbuch zu den altfranzdsischen Artusepen.
Teil I, pp. 25ff. (Greifswald diss. 1882) Fritz Seiffert has made a
futile effort to prove that Chrétien’s division of the Conte del Graal
only stops with 1. 34934 (generally regarded as the end of Wauchier’s
section of the poem). He admits, it is true, that there are some in-
terpolations in this division. No one, however, has accepted his ar-
guments.


Go ogle


230 Evolution of Arthurien Romance


deals exclusively with adventures of Gawain that are independent
of the Grail story.

Now for the analysis of Robert de Boron’s Joseph: Before
the coming of Christ everbody, including the patriarchs and pro-
phets, went to hell, but He, born of the Virgin Mary, like a rose
from the rose-bush, came in order that He might deliver them
from hell. Christ was incarnated when Judaea was subject to
Rome and Pilate governed a part of it. Now, a soldier of Pilate’s,
Joseph of Arimathea, loved Christ, but dared not show it for
fear of the Jews. Of Christ’s disciples one — his seneschal, Judas
— was bad, and he betrayed him to the Jews, according to a
bargain concluded at the house of Caiphas. Joseph of Arimathea
was there and grieved at the bargain. On Thursday Jesus gathers
his disciples together at the house of Simon and tells them that
He is to be betrayed. Then we have Judas’ question as to who
was to betray Him; next, our Lord’s washing of His disciples’
feet and His betrayal by Judas. When the Jews carry off Jesus,
one of them discovers in Simon’s house the vessel in which He
made His sacrament, and after judgment had been passed on Jesus,
gave it to Pilate, who kept it until he learns of Jesus’ “death.
Joseph is angry at this and claims from Pilate pay for the five
years’ service of himself and his five knights. Pilate says that
he will give Joseph whatever he desires and Joseph then asks for
Christ’s body. Pilate thinks it insignificant payment and grants
it him, and Joseph hastens to the cross, but the guards will not
surrender the body to him, whereupon he complains to Pilate,
who sends Nicodemus to see that he obtains it. At the same time,
Pilate also gives Joseph the vessel, for he does not wish to have
anything pertaining to Jesus about him, for fear of accusation.
Joseph and Nicodemus take down the body and the former washes


*" Edited by Francisque Michel, Le Roman du Saint Graal
(Bordeaux, 1841). M. le comte de Douhet reprinted Michel’s edition
of Robert’s Joseph and Merlin in the Dictionnaire des légendes du
christianisme, cols 454ff. (Paris, 1855), published by Abbé Migne.

There is a Modern French (prose) paraphrase of the Joseph in
P. Payis’s Les romans de la table ronde, I, 123ff. Paris, 1868).


Go ogle


The Theory of Christian Origén 231


it, which makes the blood flow afresh from the wounds. Joseph
brings the vessel and catches the blood in it, wraps the body in
a fine cloth and entombs it. Then follow the descent into Hell
(with the liberation of the saints there) and the Resurrection. The
Jews are frightened by the report of the Resurrection and they
are particularly incensed against Joseph and Nicodemus as res-
ponsible for the disappearance of Christ’s body; the latter es-
capes, but Joseph is beaten and thrust into a horrible and dark
dungeon. To him Christ appears with His vessel in a great light,
and a long dialogue ensues. He tells Joseph that God had per-
mitted him to serve Pilate, in order that he might (after the
crucifixion) care for His body. He tells Joseph, moreover, that
because of his love to Him he shall have the symbol of His death
and give it for keeping to whom he would. He then gives Joseph
the great, precious, vessel, in which was His most holy blood.
Joseph wonders how it came there, for he had hidden the vessel
in his house. Joseph is to entrust the vessel to three persons only,
who are to take it in the name of the Trinity. [ By the “three
persons” Robert really means Joseph, Bron, and Bron’s grand-
son. The mode of expression is clumsy, beyond measure.] No
sacrament shall ever be celebrated but that Joseph shall be re-
membered. At Joseph’s request, Christ instructs him concerning
the Sacrament: repeats what He had said at Simon’s house, viz.
that the bread and wine were His flesh and blood, then adds
that the tomb is the altar, the grave-cloth the corporal [ i.e. the
“cloth, usually of linen, upon which the consecrated elements are
placed during the celebration of the mass, and with which the
elements or the remnants of them, are covered after the cele-
bration”: New English Dictionary |; the vessel in which the blood
was put shall be called the chalice and the paten signifies the
tombstone. All who see Joseph’s vessel shall be of Christ’s com-
pany and have fulfillment of their heart’s desire and joy eter-
nal. Those who shall be able to understand these words cannot
be made the victims of false judgment in court or be cheated
out of their rights or be vanquished “‘en court de bataille”’, if they
are in the right. [The author adds: I dare not, nor could not,


Go ogle


232 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


tall this even if I would, had I not the great book wherein are
written the histories made and related by the great clerks; therein
are the great secrets written that are named and called the Grail.” |]
Christ gives the vessel to Joseph and leaves him. Joseph remains
in prison, no man heeding him, until, when Vespasian, the em-
peror’s son, was a leper, a pilgrim who had been a witness of Christ’s
miracles, comes to Rome and, hearing of Vespasian’s affliction,
tells his inn-keeper of Our Lord’s marvellous cures. The inn-
keeper tells the emperor, who summons the pilgrim before him.
The latter pledges his head that Vespasian could be healed, if only
something of Christ’s could be brought to Rome. The Emperor
sends messengers, who hear Pilate’s story of the Crucifixion and
of Joseph. The Jews, being called together, confirm Pilate’s story
and take the blame for Christ’s death upon themselves. When
the messengers inquire whether there is any one who possesses
something belonging to Christ, they are told of Verrine [1.e. Ve-
ronica |, who is brought before them and she finally relates how
at the request of the Jews she wiped Christ’s face as he was being
led forth bound, and thus got the likeness of Him. They take her
to Rome, and the pilgrim and Verrine are both richly rewarded.
The emperor and his son now set forth for Judaea, in order to
revenge Christ’s death. On their arrival there, Pilate suggests
a trick by which the Jews, believing that they are pleasing Ves-
pasian, make full confession of their guilt in putting Christ to
death. Vespasian consequently kills many Jews and proclaims that
he will kill them all, if they are not able to produce Jesus alive.
One Jew, to save his own life, offers to bring Vespasian to Joseph,
and tells the story of why the latter was imprisoned. Vespasian
is let down into the prison and finds Joseph alive, although for
so many years he had had neither food nor drink. To his amaze-
ment, Joseph welcomes him by name and expounds to him the
history of the fall of the evil angels and of our first parents and
of the redemption of man by Christ. Vespasian is converted to
Christianity and sells the Jews at the rate of thirty for a penny.
Joseph proclaims salvation to all who believe in Christ and in-
vites those who accept his word to leave their possessions and go
The Theory of Christian Origin 233


with him into exile. Among those who go are his sister Enygeus
and her husband, Hebron (Bron). He sets off with his company
and they dwell for a long time in far-off lands. For a while
things go well, but then all that they do turns to naught — on
account of carnal sin. The host complains to Hebron that they
and their children are dying of hunger. Hebron reports this to
Joseph, who, weeping, goes and kneels before the vessel and asks
Christ, in prayer, why his followers suffer. A voice from the
Holy Ghost answers that Joseph is not at fault, but that he is
to set the vessel which contains the blood of Christ quite openly
before the people and to recollect how He had been betrayed and
beaten and how at the Last Supper the false disciple, perceiving
that he was detected, withdrew and left a seat vacant. No one
will occupy it before Joseph. In the name of the table at which
Christ last ate, Joseph is to prepare another, and then to call
his brother-in-law, Bron’? (as Hebron is henceforth generally cal-
led) and make him go into the water to catch a fish, and the
first he catches Joseph is to put it on the table and then to take
the vessel, set it in the middle of the table, cover it with a towel
and then place Bron’s fish opposite it. The people are now to be
called, and they will soon see whose sin has caused these calami-
ties to befall them. Joseph is to sit where Christ sat at the Last
Supper, with Bron at his right hand. And Bron is to draw back the
space of one seat, to signify the seat of Judas, and the place thus
left empty is not to be filled until Enygeus shall have a child
by Bron, her husband, and when the child in question is born,
that shall be his seat. Let Joseph then bid all the people who
have faith in the Trinity and have kept the commandments of
Christ to sit down to the grace of Our Lord. Joseph does all this.
Part of the people sit down, part do not. The sitters are so filled
with sweetness and the desire of their heart that they forget their
companions; the others feel nothing. One of the sitters, Petrus,
asks the latter if they feel nothing, and when they answer that
they do not, tells them that it is because they are defiled with
sin. The sinners then depart, but Joseph bids them come back


** The nominative form is, of course, Brons.


(0 ogle


234 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


each day. Thus Joseph detects the sinners and thus is the vessel
first proved. The fortunate ones tell the others of the delight
and joy which fills them and inform them that the vessel severs
them from those that sin, as it holds no company with and bears
no love towards any sinner. The sinners ask the name of the
vessel. The reply is that it is called the Graal, for it is agreeable
to all who see it. [ This is, of course, a rough-and-ready etymology
— Graal and agreer — such as mediaeval literature abounds in. |
A few lines further down (ll. 2671ff.) the author again rings
the change on this etymology. Since all this is true, says the poet,
“‘we call it the story of the Grail and it will bear the name of the
Grail everywhere.”


One sinner does not depart with the rest. He is Moyses by
name, a hypocrite, and with much weeping begs the people to
intercede with Joseph, so that he may share the delights of the
Grail table. Joseph says that Moyses must be a hypocrite and
undeserving, since he could not sit at the table. — At this point
there is a lacuna in the MS.; the sequel, however, shows that
Moyses tried to occupy the empty seat, but the earth opened and
swallowed him up. — Joseph prays to Christ to show him what
has become of Moyses. The voice tells Joseph again about the
empty seat and how the one at Joseph’s table was not to be filled
until the third man, who will be of Joseph’s line, should come —
the son of Bron and Enygeus — and that his son should fill the
seat. [So Alain here is “the third man.” This is, however, a
blunder, for 1. 3375, it is Alain’s son, as is required by the whole
plan of the poem.| Moyses had stayed behind only to deceive;
he had got his deserts and no more should be heard of him until
the man who was destined to fill the empty seat should come.
Joseph repeats to Bron what the Holy Spirit had said of Moyses.
— In the course of time, Bron and Enygeus have twelve sons and
are greatly troubled about them and, on the advice of his wife,
Bron asks Joseph what should be done with them. Joseph prays
before the vessel for enlightenment. God sends an angel to tell him
that they will all be dedicated to God’s service, and that eleven
will marry, if they wish to, but one of them, the twelfth, named
The Theory of Christian Origin 235


Alain (Alein),!8 will remain single. Joseph must bid Bron and his
wife bring him this son, who is to obey Joseph. Furthermore,
when Joseph consults the vessel about Alain, the voice directs him
to relate to his nephew all about Christ’s sufferings, and death,
and about his [ Joseph’s | imprisonment and the vessel and to show
him the vessel and the blood therein, to give him also religious in-
struction, which he must impart to others, and to tell him that from
him shall issue an heir who is to keep the vessel; Alain is to take
charge of his brethren and sisters and go westwards to the furthest
point possible, preaching Christ. An angel will bring a letter for
Petrus to read, directing him to go whither he lists. Petrus will
say, that he wishes to go to the vales of Avaron [ a mistake, doubt-
less, for Avalon). [ Here again, |. 3112, a blunder; for ll. 3132,
3193 ff., it is to remain unread until Alain’s son reads it to him. |
Thither shall he go and wait for the son of Alain, (who is here,
]. 3128, first named) and he shall not pass away until the one
shall come who will read him his letter and teach him the power


** In the prose-rendering of Joseph in one passage (Weidner’s
ed., p. 127), the epithet, “li gros” is attached to Alain’s name, for
what reasons no one can say. Inasmuch, however, as Alain was a
common name in the ruling house of Brittany and that circumstance
may very well have suggested to Robert the name for the character
in the first instance, as Heinzel, p. 99, remarks, it is most likely (as
Heinzel, p. 122, has still further suggested) that the author of the
prose redaction derived his epithet from the same source — more
particularly, from the Breton prince of the ninth century called Alan
Mor (in French histories, Alain le Grand). Heinzel’s alternative con-
jecture that the epithet originated with the Grand St. Graal (really
a later romance) is not admissible. To be sure, the prose-rendering
of Robert’s Merlin shows contamination with the Grand St. Graal,
e. g. Sommer, II, 19, where Nascien, who belongs to the Galahad
Early History, usually takes the place of Alain in the MSS., it seems.
But “Alain li Gros’ is apparently the authorized reading at p. 127
of the prose Merlin, and the Grand St. Graal (like the Didot-
Perceval, Perlesvaus, etc.), no doubt, borrowed from it. After all,
the question has little importance, since the epithet does not occur
in Robert. Brugger’s discussion of Alain, Morf Festschrift, consists
so entirely of a chain of hazardous speculations that it seems to me
valueless.


Go ogle


236 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


of the vessel and tell him the fate of Moyses. After that he will
die. All these things Joseph must repeat to his nephews. This
Joseph does and tells Bron and Enygeus that Alain is to govern
his brothers and sisters. — The next day, whilst they are at the
Grail service, a heavenly letter appears. Joseph gives it to Petrus,
who declares his intention of departing for the vales of Avaron
and awaiting there God’s grace. Bron calls his children and again
warns them to ve obedient to Alain. So Alain goes forth with his
brothers into distant lands and preaches everywhere the name of
Christ. Petrus wishes to depart also, but he is petitioned to stay,
and, inasmuch as this is the will of Heaven, as is declared by an
angel, he consents. He is to see something more of the vessel. The
angel continues: “The Lord knows Bron for a worthy man and
it was therefore his will that he should go fishing. He is to keep
the vessel after Joseph, who must instruct him properly, especi-
ally concerning the holy words which God spake to Joseph in the
prison, which are sweet and precious, gracious and merci-
ful, and which are properly called the Secrets of the Grail.” Jo-
seph must then give the vessel to Bron and warn him to hold it
in high regard — else he will pay dearly for it. Hereafter, Bron’s
right name is to be “The Rich Fisher.” Huis honor will con-
tinue to increase on account of the fish which he caught when
this grace began. Bron, too, is to go westward and dwell where
he pleases. There he must wait for his son’s son, and when the
latter has arrived, the vessel and the grace (that accompanies it)
are to be given to him. Then the meaning and significance of the
blessed Trinity will have been fulfilled by the division among the
three. With the third one [ here, ]. 3373, Alain’s son, not Alain,
himself, as in |. 2790] Christ will deal as it pleases him. After
the vessel has been given to Bron, Petrus is to go, as he may then
truly say that he has seen Bron, the Rich Fisher, put in possession
of the vessel, and God will have him in his keeping. When all
this is done, Joseph is to go to perfect joy and life everlasting.
His descendants will be safe. On the morrow Joseph at the ser-
vice transfers the Grail to the Rich Fisher, and repeats to the
people everything, as the voice commanded, save the words spoken


Go ogle


The Theory of Christian Origin 237


to him by Christ in the prison. These he confides to the Rich
Fisher alone. He committed them to him in writing, also, and ex-
pounded to him the secrets. The people were touched at the sight.
They knew that Joseph had surrendered his authority, but did
not exactly know how. Amid weeping and prayer, the Good Fisher
left the assembly. He stayed three days longer with Joseph and
then went forth. Joseph, however, remained in the land where
he was born. — The poet adds now that it will be fitting to tell
the subsequent fortunes of Alain, Petrus, Moyses, and the Rich
Fisher. As already stated, he expresses, moreover, the intention
to treat these themes, if he can find them in a book. For the pre-
sent, however, he will leave aside these four branches and take
up a fifth — that is to say, the Merlin which follows immedia-
tely after, but of which only a fragment in its original verse-form
has been preserved. The object of the Merlén, of course, was to
attach the story of the Grail to the popular Arthurian cycle.

Now, in discussing the origin of the Grail legend, whatever
conclusions we may reach ultimately concerning this question, it
seems advisable to take up first the sources of Robert de Boron’s
Joseph, for Birch-Hirschfeld1* has, in my judgment, fixed these
sources in the essentials beyond reasonable doubt, whereas the mat-
ter is not so clear in the case of Chrétien’s Perceval. To be sure,
eminent Celticists have endeavored to prove a Celtic connection
for Robert’s poem, but, as it seems to me, in vain.

First, as for Robert’s idea of the Grail, it is to be noted that
the Grail, in his conception, is not a vessel to which appertains
the marvellous power of supplying food and drink, youth, health,
and strength. Such a conception of its power is found in some Grail
romances later than his. With Robert, however, it is a vessel of
‘‘grace” in whose service only the good and pure can remain. The
delights which the Grail imparts to those that sit at the Grail table
are purely spiritual. Sinners are excluded from these delights,
and the hypocrite, like Moyses (Moses), who tries to partake of


* Sage vom Gral, pp. 215ff. See further on this subject the
interpretation of the Grail wanderings in Robert's Joseph which I offer,
Part IV, below.


C30 ogle


238 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


them is stricken with punishment. This last idea was suggested
by Judas’s connection with the Last Supper in St. Matthew,
AXVI, 21ff: “21. And as they did eat, he said, Verily I say
unto you that one of you shall betray me. 22. And they were
exceeding sorrowful and began every one of them to say unto him,
Lord, is it [? 23. And he answered and said, He that dippeth
his hand with me in the dish, the same shall betray me. 24. The
Son of man goeth as it is written of him: but woe unto that man
by whom the Son of man is betrayed! it had been good for that
man if he had not been born. 25. Then Judas which betrayed him
answered and said, Master, is it I? He said unto him, Thou
hast said.”


‘When Joseph in Robert’s poem founds the Grail table, it
is modelled completely after the table of the Last Supper — only
here the Fish, the symbol of Christ, takes the place of Christ. The
sinners who sit down undeservingly at the sacred table suffer the
punishment which their prototype, Judas, suffered. But how did
the dish of the Last Supper become connected with Joseph of
Arimathea? This did not happen in any oral tradition. It was
the invention of Robert, who took here as his starting-point va-
rious hints in certain uncanonical writings of Early Christianity,
viz. the Vindicta Salvatoris, which contains the legend of St. Ve-
ronica — furthermore, a Latin composition on Pilate (Narratio
Josephi), and the famous apocryphal Evangelium Nicodemi,
more especially, the First Part, called the Gesta Pilati. From
the first of these Robert learned of Vespasian’s supposed expe-
dition to Judaea to revenge on the Jews the death of our Saviour.
To be sure, Tiberius is represented here as the Roman emperor and
Vespasian merely as a general. But Joseph of Arimathea ap-
pears in the Vindicta as a contemporary of Vespasian’s — that is
to say, as still living some forty years after the death of Christ —
for in that work he tells the messenger of the Emperor Tiberius
of his former imprisonment from which Christ had delivered him.
Robert learned from the Latin poem on Pilate that Vespasian was
emperor. He makes him also Joseph’s deliverer. This last fea-
ture may have been purely of Robert’s invention; on the other hand,


Go ogle


The Theory of Christian Origin 239


it may possibly have been suggested by a passage in Suetonius’s
life of Vespasian (Ch. 5), where it is said that ‘‘one of the noble
captives, named Joseph, when he was put in chaims, kept affirm-
ing that he would soon be freed by Vespasian.”” What Robert owed
to the Gospel of Nicodemus was the fuller information regarding
the imprisonment of Joseph of Arimathea and Christ’s visiting
him in the dungeon. He preferred, however, to interweave the
legend of St. Veronica with that of Joseph and so postpone the
liberation of the latter until the time of Vespasian. So all that
Robert tells about Vespasian’s connection with Joseph and Christ’s
visit to Joseph in the prison was derived from or suggested by
these sources.


‘Now, in the history of the Holy Grail, as given in Robert’s
poem, we have an undeniable parallelism with the history of Christ
in his closing days. The Grail is present with Christ at the Last
Supper; like Christ it is brought to Pilate; Joseph of Arimathea
receives it, as he receives the body of our Lord; it 1s present at the
entombment, remains then concealed and at last reappears with
the risen Christ. It is plain, then, that we have in Robert’s histo-
ry of the Holy Grail a characteristic piece of mediaeval symbolism.
The Grail is the symbol of Christ’s body. A passage in the Gesta
Pilati, ch. 15, which describes the visit of Jesus to Joseph in the
prison, furnishes the basis for still further symbolism in Robert’s
poem. In the Gesta after describing the appearance of Jesus to
him in the prison, his consternation, and the manner in which Jesus
revived him, Joseph is made to say: “Rabbi, thou art Elias?”’
And he replied: “I am Jesus, whose body thou didst seek from
Pilate and didst wrap it in clean linen and thou didst put. a nap-
kin over my face and didst place me in thy new monument and
didst roll a stone to the door of the monument. Then [I said to
him who was speaking to me: Show me, O Lord, where I placed
thee! And he led me and showed me the place where I had laid
him and the cloth which I put upon him, and the napkin which
I wrapped his face with, and I recognized that it was Jesus.”

Now, all the chief points of this passage recur in Robert’s
poem, in some respects amplified. But when Jesus comes to. men-


Go ogle


240 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


tion the Last Supper we have the following symbolical identi-
fication of the Eucharist with the Entombment, Christ saying to
Joseph: ‘When you took me down from the cross and laid me in
the sepulchre, that is the altar on which those who will sacrifice
me will put me; the cloth in which I was wrapped will be called
the corporal; the vessel in which you put my blood, when you
received it from my body, will be called the chalice; the paten
which will go on top, will mean the stone which was placed over
me, when thou hadst laid me in the sepulchre.”’ The detailed identi-
fication here of the different objects that figure in the interment
of Christ is found elsewhere in the Middle Ages! — only in these


** The mass, it is to be recollected, is, according to the Catholic
conception, a sacrifice.


7® Cp. Heinzel, p. 103, for a list of mediaeval writers who offer
such allegorical interpretations of the objects used in the mass. Hertz,
p. 425, points to the Greek treatise of doubtful authorship, printed by
Migne in vol. 98 of his Patrologia Graeca, cols. 383ff., among the
writings of Germanos, Arcbbishop of Constantinople (who died in 733),
as the earliest allusion to a vessel in whicb the blood that flowed
from Christ’s side was received. The work is entitled (in Migne’s
Latin translation) Historia ecclesiastica et mystica contemplatio and
is certainly not later than the tenth century. The allusion occurs
cols. 400B and 421D, and the vessel is identified with the cup of
the Eucharist. In these passages, and, also, in 397A and B, the
other objects used in the Byzantine mass are, likewise, interpreted in
allegorical fashion. Hertz does not note what, however, is well worth
observing, that in 397B the author of this treatise interprets the
paten [Greek diskos] which bore the holy bread in the mass as ‘the
bed [Kline] in which the body of the Lord is prepared by the priest
and deacon, who are [i. e. represent] Joseph and Nicodemus.” These
two names are again connected with the allegorical interpretation of
the diskos at 421D, as, indeed, they occur in the Eucharistic liturgy
of the Eastern Church.

For the symbolical interpretations in Robert, especially, see Birch-
Hirschfeld, pp. 219ff., and W. W. Newell, Journal of American Folk-
Lore, X, 22ff. As a very instructive example of these allegorical
interpretations of the mass and the objects connected therewith I would
add Durandus, Rationale Divinorum Officiorum, Book IV, Ch. 51
(Naples, 1859). He was the leading writer on Christian ritual in the
twelfth century.
The Theory of Christian Origin 241


other interpretations the chalice is said to be the tomb (se-
pulchrum), whereas here it is said to be the vessel of the Last
Supper which Joseph had used to collect the blood of Jesus in.
It would seem, then, that by a confused symbolism this vessel
— 1.e. the Holy Grail — is taken as the tomb in which Christ was
laid. In the Gesta, as we have seen, Jesus took Joseph to the
tomb and showed him the objects which have just been inter-
preted symbolically. In the poem he simply gives him the Grail,
which he expressly declares is the symbol of his death as well as
of the Eucharist. Just as the Mediaeval Church commonly inter-
preted the Last Supper in terms of the Burial of Christ, Robert
took’ now the vessel of the Last Supper (the Grail) as the symbol
of both the Burial and the Eucharist. In fine, Joseph, who laid
Christ’s body in the gave, is the natural guardian of the symbol
which commemorates that event; thus, too, the Grail is the natural
centre of all the symbolism of mass and sacrament, and we have,
consequently, the intimate union of the Joseph legend with the
story of the Grail.


Furthermore, as we have endeavored to prove elsewhere in
this work,!? Robert, in the last division of his poem, which deals
with the peregrinations of the Grail and its company, through
a new act of symbolism, has expressed in narrative form what
Jesus himself insisted on as the object of his mission on earth
and the very foundation of the Christian Church — namely, the
establishment of the New Covenant, symbolized by the cup of
the Holy Communion (that is to say, the Grail in Robert’s con-
ception) to take the place of the Old Covenant.

The interpretation of the events of the Old Testament as a
sort of allegorical adumbration of those of the New Testament?®
was still a vital element in the Biblical exegesis of the age, and
so there was no new departure in Robert’s employment of this
method. It is to be observed, too, that in no other period of the
Church has the doctrine of transubstantiation been so immediately


** Cp. Part IV.


*® Aecording to the well-known doctrine of types.
Hefperia, Ergadnzungsreihe: 8. 16


C30 ogle


242 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


the centre of theological interest and discussion as in the latter
part of the twelfth century and the early decades of the thirteenth.’9
It became so, especially, through the mystical writings of Hugh
of St. Victor, Bonaventura, and others, and in 1215 was finally
adopted, on the initiative of Pope Innocent III, by the Fourth
Lateran Council of the Church as a part of the orthodox Christian
faith, being directly attached to the mysteries of the Trinity and
Incarnation in the canons which promulgated it, very much as


*® This has been emphasized especially by M. Gaster, Folk-Lore,
II, 55 (1891) and by Miss L. A. Fisher, The Mystic Vision in the
Grail Legend and in the Divine Comedy, pp. 9ff., Columbia Studies
in English and Comparative Literature (New York, 1917). As far as
the Grail is concerned, the main thesis of Miss Fisher’s book — a
study that deserves the careful attention of all Grail students — may
be stated in the author’s own words (p. 55): “that the Celtic vessel
of increase and plenty, adapted to Christian purposes, became the
symbol of the miracle of transubstantiation and that any accessory of
the mass (i. e. ciborium, chalice, paten, or even altar-stone) intimately
connected with the miracle, might be described as that symbol, in
other words, might be the Grail.”


Miss Fisher starts out by accepting, without argument, the theory
that the Grail is ultimately of Celtic origin, but, as she goes on, her
faith in this theory evidently weakens. Cp. pp. 74, 81, 123f. I would
like to call attention, especially, to Miss Fisher’s refutation, pp. 63 ff.
(including notes), of what Miss Weston had said, Legend of Sir Perce-
val, II, 232f. in regard to the “secrets” of the Grail (cp. the Joseph,
ll. 935, 3336). Miss Weston objected to interpreting (as, for example,
Heinzel, p. 87, does) the term as referring to the words which the
priest speaks in consecrating the bread and wine and which were
supposed to convert them into bread and wine, respectively, on the
ground that “the formula of consecration is not and never has been
secret.” But Miss Fisher shows by examples that in mediaeval usage
these words were actually called ‘secret’? — no doubt, because in
that period, as in other periods, “secret’’ was applied not only to what
is not known, but to what is not understood. Miss Fisher has been
equally successful, pp. 63, note 1, in refuting by quotation from a
contemporary writer Miss Weston’s idea (I, 333) that between Robert
and the Queste the interest had shifted “from contenu to container’’
— i.e. from the holy blood to the Grail. It is really a mere question
of metonomy.


Go ogle


The Theory of Christian Origin 243


we see this done in the looser form of a narrative in Robert’s
Joseph.?° :

The relation of Robert to Chrétien will probably always re-
main a subject of debate. The advocates of a non-Christian origin
for the Grail legend assume that both were drawing independently
from lost sources.*! As a matter of fact, the only feature which
these two poems on the Grail have unmistakably in common is the
term “The Rich Fisher” (Robert, 1. 3387) or “Good Fisher’ (1.
3456) as applied to the keeper of the Grail.?? To be sure, that feature
is a very distinctive one. Neither the lance nor the tailleor (paten ),?°
however, of Chretien’s procession appear in the Joseph, and the
whole interest is centred on the Grail. But, after all, there is
nothing inconsistent in these facts with the view that Robert deriv-
ed the suggestion of his poem from Chrétien and not from any


*° In the light of the canons of 1215, it is interesting to read
what Heinzel remarks, pp. 87f., on the close association of the Trinity
and the Grail in Robert’s Joseph. It may be that Robert had some
definite treatise as the source of his ideas about the intimate association
of the Trinity and the Eucharist which was taking shape in the
theological thought of the time.


"! This was, also, in part, the opinion of Heinzel (pp. 92ff.),
one of the most eminent advocates of the Christian origin of the Grail
legend. Birch-Hirschfeld (pp. 195ff.), who imagined — wrongly, as
I have tried to prove — that the Didot-Perceval was a prose rendering
of a lost poem by Robert de Boron, regarded that romance as the
source of Chrétien’s Perceval. More recently, Foerster in his Chrétien
Worterbuch (pp. 158*ff.) has tried to identify the “livre” given to
Chrétien by Count Philip with Robert’s Joseph. Neither of these
theories, however, have attracted any adherents.


** One might be inclined to add the quality of luminosity, which
Robert, ll. 719, 2032, as well as Chrétien, 1. 3188, ascribes to the
Grail. Apart from the fact, however, that this is a common feature
of talismans in folk-lore, Robert may very well be transferring to the
Grail here the dazzling light which in one of his sources, the Kvan-
gelium Nicodemi (Part I, ch. 15), marked the appearance of Jésus in
Joseph’s prison. See Hvangelia Aprocrypha, pp. 359f. (Leipzig, 1853),
edited by C. Tischendorf.


** The paten is mentioned in Christ’s speech quoted p. 231,
above, but it does not figure in the story.
16*


Go ogle


244 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


hypothetical lost sources concerning the Grail.24 It was not neces-
sary that he should have any intimate knowledge of the Perceval.
It was sufficient if he, knew of the Grail and the Fisher King.
Just as romances relating the adventures of a mature hero in the
Middle Ages awakened curiosity about his early history, and so
stimulated the poets to the production of narratives concerning his
youthful exploits (enfances), so it may well have been in regard to
the Grail. Chrétien’s Perceval had, undoubtedly, created a wides-
pread interest in this mysterious vessel,?* and yet, being unfinished,
it left the field open to the invention of other poets who might
handle the theme. The only thing which his poem had fixed was
that the Grail, since it contained the host (sacramental wafer),
was the vessel so used in the eucharistic ritual — the ciborium,
as it is called. But in the Middle Ages there was not a clear
distinction in form nor in part (from doctrinal motives) even in
function between the vessel that contained the wine in the Eucha-
rist and the one that contained the holy wafer.?? The latter, as


** This is true, too, I believe, of the apparent contradiction, when
it is said in Robert, 1. 3032, that none of the Grail people, if sinless,
can be maimed, although in Chrétien both the Grail keeper (Fisher
King) and his father are maimed.

7° Newell, who also believed that Robert derived the suggestion
for his poem from Chrétien, remarks, Journal of American Folk-
Lore, X, 225 (1897): “He may have been acquainted with the poem
of Chrestien only by rumor, and have had no distinct idea, either of
its contents or of Arthurian history.’ This, however, I think, is going
too far.

*° This is sufficiently attested by the continuations of Chrétien’s
Perceval. Newell, ihid., 220f. interprets, also, as referring to Chrétien’s
poem, the “meintes paroles contées, ki ne sunt pas foles,”’ which,
according to Robert, ll. 3457f., were told of the Good Fisher (Rich
Fisher), after he went westward.

*? Miss Fisher has made this plain in her The Mystic Vision
in the. Grail Legend and in the Divine Comedy, pp. 58ff. (New
York, 1917).

The commixture of the elements (bread and wine) in the Holy
Communion seems universal in the Eastern Church even to-day. Cp.
re hie i Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics under Eastern
thurch.
The Theory of Christian Origin 245


well as the former, had the shape of a cup, as it still has in the
Catholic Church of today, and it was also not infrequently called
the ‘‘chalice’’ (calix) — indeed, down into the eighteenth cen-
tury. As to function, Durandus (Guillaume Durand, Bishop of
Mendo), the leading writer of the twelfth century on matters
of ritual, expressly directs that the host in the sacramental ser-
vice shall be broken over the real chalice, (i.e. the chalice, con-
taining the wine which typified the blood of Christ) and a portion
of it be dropped into that vessel, “‘primo ad notandum quod Christi
corpus non fuit sine sanguine nec sanguis sine corpore. Secundo
ad designandum quod unum sacramentum conficitur ex speciebus
panis et vini. Tertio, corporis et sanguinis post trinum crucis
signum permixtio est animae ad corpus reditio.’’ 28

These conditions perhaps help to explain why Robert (Il.
395 ff., 483ff., 507ff£., 563ff.) identifies the Grail, on the one
hand, with the dish of the Last Supper (which would naturally
correspond with the ciborium) and, on the other, with the chalice
of the sacrament (ll. 907ff.).


*° I owe the reference to Miss Fisher, p. 58, note 3. I quote
from the edition of the Rationale Divinorum Officiorum which was
published at Naples in 1859. The passage will be found at p. 304
of that edition, Book IV, Ch. 51 (De fractione hostiae). According
to this quotation and other evidence which Miss Fisher adduces, as
she remarks, “both species contain the whole Christ.” Consequently,
either could symbolize Christ and either of the containing vessels
indifferently could be identified with the Grail. Cf. her remarks, also,
p. 62.

A similar stress on the unity of the functions of the two elements
of the sacrament seems to me intended in the lines which Miss Fisher
quotes, in another connection, p. 75, note 4, from Versus de Mysterio
Missae, Migne, Patrologia Latina, vol. 171, col. 1180, especially,
in the following:

Oblati panis dextra tenet calicem

In cruce pendentis quoniam latus Omnipotentis

Dextrum sanguineam vulnere fudit aquam.
“Callicem” here, it will be observed, means the ciborium. Even the
paten (small flat dish covering the chalice), Miss Fisher (tbid.) thinks,
might have been taken as the symbolical vessel (the Grail), since, at
least, in the earlier periods the host was broken over it and Innocent
III identifies it with the dish of the paschal lamb.


Go ogle


246 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


Having once conceived the idea of relating the early history
of the Grail, which he recognized as identical with a vessel of the
eucharistic ritual in Chrétien, he would, of course, turn to Bibli-
cal and legendary materials that would furnish him with hints
to give body to this conception. We have seen what these materials
were and how he has used them.

As regards the Merlin, which follows upon the Joseph, this
is mainly drawn from Geoffrey of Monmouth or Wace — or,
possibly, some other verse-chronicle derived from Geoffrey — and
shows no connection with Chrétien. In the Didot and Modena
MSS. a Perceval in prose follows prose renderings of Robert’s Jo-
seph and Merlin, and, if it were really the work of Robert, this
would show that he used Chrétien; but, despite the contentions
of some scholars, we shall see later on”? that the work is not his.
So, altogether, Chrétien is only in a limited sense a source
of Robert. - Besides, Robert’s poem, as will have been obvious
from the analyses given above, is in a wholly different style from
Chretien’s Perceval. Compared with the latter, the style 1s home-
ly, awkward and often obscure, without colour or spirit. As re-
gards the incidents, furthermore, we are moving here in the atmo-
sphere of Christian legend (Joseph) or pseudo-chronicle (Merlin),
not of folk-tale and romance, such as is found in Chrétien’s poem.

Let us turn now to an investigation of Chrétien’s sources and
endeavor to isolate, as far as we can, the Grail theme from the
other elements which he may have chosen to interweave with it
after the manner which had distinguished his methods of com-
position in earlier works. ;

In the beginning of his Perceval Chrétien speaks of exerting
himself to “‘put in rime the best tale... that was ever related in
a royal court” (“‘a rimoiier le meillor conte . . . qui soit contez
an cort real’’). ‘That is the story of the Grail of which the
Count gave him the book.” At first blush, it would seem, then,
that he was merely putting into verse a prose-romance that the
Count gave him. But this is impossible, for there were no prose-
romances so early as this. They first began about 1200, or not


** Cp. Part IV, below.
The Theory of Christian Origin 247


long before. Some of the writers of romances, it is true, like Hugh
of Rotelande in his Ipomedon, refer to Latin books as their sources,
but this was simply a trick to impart an air of authority to
their works, and certainly no Latin romances from this early time
are extant. Indeed, as far as the Grail is concerned, Helinand
of Froidmont, in a well-known passage written early in the
thirteenth century, declares expressly that he had been unable te
discover any Latin version of the Grail story.

Still further, the other productions of Chrétien afford no ex-
ample of his merely working over in verse some tale that he had
before him, whether in prose or in verse. He always makes up his
romances by combining elements drawn from different sources.
As we have seen before, this is particularly clear in the case of
the Cligés, where (as in the Perceval) he similarly declares in the
opening of his romance that he had found the story in a book
in the cathedral library at Beauvais. He means by this simply
the main theme, and with this theme he unites other elements at
pleasure. Now, what are the main elements of the Perceval?

1. The Grail motif, to which the motif of removing a spell
by putting a question is attached.

2. What is known in the study of folk-tales as the Great
Fool motif % — the Great Fool (i.e. rustic or simpleton, who
proves himself more than a match for the most renowned war-
riors), in this instance, being identified with the hero of the Grail-
Quest.

3. The Arthurian setting of the whole.

Through this last element the Great Fool, who is also the
Grail-quester, becomes a knight of Arthur’s court and is brought


*° Brugger, Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt., XLIV*, 145ff. (1917),
cites an Icelandic tale as parallel to that of Perceval. We have,
however, in this tale six “Great Fools” (brothers), instead of one, and,
altogether, I do not think that the parallel in question throws any
new light on the subject. Jbid. pp. 183ff., Brugger disposes effectively
of G. B. Wood’s theory, “A Reclassification of the Perceval Romances,”
PMLA, XXVII 524ff. (1912), that the Perceval story is merely a
combination of two other types of fairy-tales, viz. The Fated Prince
and The Male Cinderella.


Go ogle


248 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


into contrast with the famous knights of that court—especially with
Gawain, the model of worldly courtesy and prowess. This gives
an opportunity for variety, and, as a matter of fact, in the Perce-
val, as far as Chrétien carried it out, the number of lines given
to Gawain’s adventures is not so very much smaller than the number
of those given to Perceval’s.


What, then, did the book which Chrétien refers to contain?
Certainly, the Grail motif — for Chrétien expressly terms it the
Story of the Grail. But how about the two remaining motifs?
If we trust to the analogy of his other romances, there is no pro-
bability that these additional motifs were associated with the Grail
story in his book. That analogy would suggest to us that he,
himself, was the first to combine these other motifs with the motif
of the Grail. As far as the Arthurian setting is concerned, this
is obvious on the face of it. In making Arthur’s court the centre
from which the action radiates, he would be merely doing precisely
the same thing that he had done in all of his previous romances —
notably, in the Cligés, where no one has ever pretended that the
story had any connection originally with Arthurian tradition.
Geoffrey of Monmouth and Wace had established the fame of
Arthur’s court, and in his Perceval, as in his other romances,
Chrétien was simply availing himself of the fame of that court
to give éclat to his own heroes and their exploits. There can be
very little doubt that the same thing is true of the Great Fool
motif. In virtually every country and tribe in the world we have
these stories of the apparent simpleton or rustic who is able to
achieve adventures that have baffled the most celebrated warriors
or knights, very much as in our present-day circuses the clown
usually turns out to be the most skilful acrobat of all. But nowhere
else is the Great Fool the hero of a Grail quest — so that the
probabilities are that Chrétien was the first to combine the two
motifs.


*" In his review of Nutt’s Studies on the Legend of the Holy
Grail in the Géttingische Gelehrte Anzeigen for June 10, 1890,
H. Zimmer says (p. 520) of Cuchullin’s first adventures in the Old
Irish epic, Tain bo Cualnge: “Die Aehnlichkeit mit Percevals Jugend-


6 ogle


The Theory of Christian Origin 249


Apart from these general considerations, the numerous motifs
which Chrétien repeats in the Perceval from his previous romances
show how large a part of this romance is due to his invention and
not to his source.5? Most obvious among these examples of repeat-
ed motifs is the réle that Gawain plays. This is found in every
one of the author’s works without exception. In Geoffrey of Mon-
mouth and Wace this nephew of Arthur figures as the best knight
at his uncle’s court, so that in Chrétien’s romances, which cele-
brate the exploits of other heroes — Erec, Cliges, Yvain, Lance-
lot — Gawain always plays a part — an increasingly important
one in the successive romances. In the Hrec, his réle is smaller,
although he is even there spoken of as the best of Arthur’s knights
(ll. 2288ff.). In the Cliges (ll. 4916ff.) and Yvain (ll. 6106ff.)
he is used as the touchstone of the hero’s prowess. In the Lance-
lot his adventures rival those of Lancelot, himself. In the Per-
ceval, we have him filling the same function as in the Lancelot


geschichte springt in die Augen.” Cuchullin, too, is brought up by
his mother far from the court of Conchobar (his uncle), hears of the
life there, and, despite his mother’s warnings, insists on going to
Conchobar and distinguishes himself at once. The two stories, however,
are alike only in the general motifs, and I do not believe that they
have any actual historical connection with one another.

In his article, “The Aryan Expulsion- and Return - Formula,’
Folk-Lore Record, IV, pp. 1ff. (1881), A. Nutt pointed out some
general resemblances between the story of Perceval in the Middle
English Sir Perceval of Gales and the Irish Boyish Exploits of
Finn. In “Sir Perceval, and The Boyish Exploits of Finn.”, PMLA,
XXXII, 598ff. (1917), R. B. Pace has listed systematically the points
in question, but they amount to nothing, even if we allow that the
English poem is independent of Chrétien. The Irish tale was formerly
assigned by scholars to the fifteenth century, but latterly to the tenth
(John Macneill) or the twelfth (Kuno Meyer).

In the same year (1897) a comparison between the story of the
youthful Perceval and Barlaam and Josaphat was made independently
by W. W. Newell, Journal of American Folk-Lore, X, 131, and
L. Clédat, Revue de Philologie Frangaise et de Littérature, XI, 14,
note. Clédat, however, wisely regarded the resemblance as accidental.


*? Cp. W. Foerster’s list, Kristian von Troyes: Wérterbuch zu
seinen sdmtlichen Werken, Introduction, pp. 163¢f.


Go ogle


250 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


— only he occupies an even larger place here, and he is a foil
to Perceval: that is to say, he is the type of the perfection of
worldly knighthood, devoted to arms and ladies, as contrasted with
the knight who has a mystic function to perform.

More important, however, among these repeated motifs than
the réle of Gawain even is the quest motif. Just as in the novels
of Le Sage, Fielding and Smollett, the author starts his hero
on a journey, the adventures of which make up the materials of
the story, so, from the Hrec on, a quest was the main device which
Chretien employed for the development of his romances. In the
Erec, we have first the search for the strange knight with the
dwarf, etc. (2576ff.); later the hero sallies forth in quest of ad-
ventures, in general, to re-establish his reputation for valour. This
last motif is found again in Yvain (ll. 2539ff.). In the Lance-
lot, Lancelot and Gawain have the more definite purpose of re-
scuing Guinevere from her captor, Meleagant. In Perceval it is
again an indefinite search for adventure, although one incident
of this quest is destined to assume an importance above all the
rest — namely, the visit to the Grail Castle.3s

Besides the two points just discussed, the Perceval posses-
ses many minor features in common with Chretien’s earlier poems
which considerations of space prevent us from enumerating here.*+

Finally as another indication of Chrétien’s free treatment of
his theme — an indication that he is not merely versifying a
story that lay before him — it is to be observed that he plunges
in medias res here with his narrative, as he does in his other poems.
He does not begin with the history of the misfortunes of Per-
ceval’s mother and how she was led to seek refuge in the forest.
He simply speaks of her as the widowed lady, takes the previous


** In his A Study of Gawain and the Green Knight, p. 80
(Harvard University Press, 1916), G, L. Kittredge calls attention to a
class of popular tales in which the hero can only escape death or
disgrace by meeting certain tests, but “does not know in what the
tests consist”, or, perhaps “does not know thero is any test at all”.
He puts the Grail-question in this category. This feature of the
Grail story is, undoubtedly, of folk-lore origin.

** Cp. Foerster’s list, just cited.


(0 ogle


The Theory of Christian Origin 251


history of his hero for granted, and starts off at once with this
hero’s adventures.

It seems plain from this discussion, therefore, that the book
which Chrétien refers to merely gave him the conception of the
Grail, but that the character of the Grail knight and the conception
of the quest are Chrétien’s additions. What was it that deter-
mined him in the choice of Perceval as the Knight of the Quest?
Naturally, the hero of the quest had to be an Arthurian knight.
Apart from the general fame of Arthur, this was, of course, a
necessity with Chrétien, the Arthurian poet. It was not desir-
able, however, to use for this purpose any of the well-known Ar-
thurian knights. Their characters would not have suited the new
theme — the quest of a holy, mystic vessel — but, in any event, in
the interests of novelty a new knight was required. Furthermore,
in the interests of novelty he confers on this new knight the
character of the hero of the Great Fool tale. In the chansons de
geste, as in the only one of Chrétien’s own romances where he
had related the enfances of his hero — viz. Cligés — the knight
is always brought up in the familiar environment of feudal society.
It was a happy thought now to vary the theme — to introduce
a hero who, though of noble origin, had grown up in the wilder-
ness, outside of the conventional life of the noble classes of the
time, and whose consequent awkwardness and naiveté would render
his prowess only the more piquant. It mattered very little what
name was given him. The one, actually selected, was “Perceval
li Galois” which we find already in the list of Arthurian knights
in the Erec (1. 1526). There is no reason, however, to think
that before Chrétien any definite story had ever been attached
to his name any more than to that of Lancelot. Indeed, the
name, ‘‘Perceval’”’ is, on the face of it, French, and the epithet,
“li Galois” was added, merely to give it the Arthurian colouring.®

°° The fullest discussion of the name “Perceval”, its variants in
the different languages and the derivations which have been proposed
for it, is to be found in W. Hertz’s Parzwal von Wolfram von
Eschenbach, neu bearbettet, pp. 490ff. It is, as he says, an “Imperativ-


name” (“Pierce the valley” “Press on through the valley”) like German
“Springinsfeld.”” We have a parallel formation in “Percehaie” (‘‘Pierce-


(0 ogle


252 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


From the Catalogue of the Ships in the Iliad down, the epic has
always delighted in such lists of names, and the immediate model
for those of the Erec may very well have been similar lists in the


hedge”), the name given to a son of Reynard the Fox (EK. Martin,
Le Roman de Renart, Supplément, Strasbourg, 1887, 118). The
same name appears in the eleventh century as that of a Norman
(Radulf Percehaie) in the Doomsday Book, the well-known register of
English landholders which William the Conqueror had prepared. Cp.
F. Hildebrand: “Uber das franzésische Sprachelement im Liber Cen-
sualis,’” Zs. f. rom. Ph., VIII, 341 (1884). Jbid., I, 309 (1878),
K. Bartsch had already ited aaa parallel, “Percetorest,” name of the
hero of the romance, Perceforest (fourteenth century); but this was, no
doubt, a mere imitation of “Perceval.” Another parallel formation, “Passe-
lande”, is cited by Golther, Zs. f. vergleichende Intteraturgeschichte
und Renaissance-Litteratur, Neue Folge, Il. Hertz takes the name
“Perceval,” 420 (1890) (p. 493), as an “Umdeutung”’ of Welsh “Peredur,”’
whilst Wechssler (Sage vom Gral, p. 135) and J. Loth (Les Mabinogion,
I, 56, 2nd ed. Paris, 1913) regard it as substituted for “Peredur.” It is
much more likely, however, that ““Peredur” (the Welsh tale of that name,
as we have seen elsewhere being a mere adaptation of the French
Conte del Graal) is substituted for Perceval.” This very substitution
shows that “Perceval” was unknown to the Welsh, in whose records,
for the rest, the name does not occur. Inasmuch as “Perceval,” then,
is plainly a French name, one cannot feel sure that the epithet, “‘li
Gallois,” which Chrétien attaches to it already from its first recorded
occurrence (rec, 1. 1536), is not an invention of the French poet,
who desires to give everything in his poem a Celtic coloring. W. W.
Newell, Journal of American Folk-Lore, X, 125 (1897), interprets
it as meaning “rude and rustic,” since Welshmen were regarded by
the Anglo-Normans in that light or even worse, and as applied here
to Perceval with reference to his rusticity at the beginning of the
tale. This interpretation, however, is, no doubt, erroneous. The name
“Perceval,” according to Foerster, Chrétien Worterbuch, p. 162*,
Chrétien’s own invention; according to Brugger, Zs. f. fre. Spr a. u.
Titt., XXXII", 145, note 32, it was originally an epithet which later
supplanted the hero’ s real name. We have no data for deciding the
question, but it seems to me most likely that the name came to
ae from some lost French tale that embodied the Great Fool
motif.

Hertz, p. 483, 486, cites parallels to show that in his attire and
equipment Chrétien’s Perceval was a genuine Welsh peasant of the
day. There is nothing, however, really distinctive about the details


Go ogle


The Theory of Christian Origin 253


Celtic tales which gave their first impulse to the Arthurian ro-
mances — such a list, for example, as that in the Welsh tale,
Kulhwch and Olwen, or, perhaps, similar lists in the chansons de
geste or romances of antiquity.

Chrétien’s book gave him, then, merely the materials for his
conception of the Grail. What was the nature of this book? Did
it belong to the literature of Christian legend, was it a Celtic tale,
or was it of some other origin still? In other words, what was
the origin of the conception of the Holy Grail? There are three
theories on the subject: 1. that this conception originated in Chris-
tian legend; 2. that it was originally a Celtic conception which
has been imperfectly Christianized by the French poets; 3. that
it sprang from some ritual of the Vegetation Spirit, which sur-
vived the fall of the ancient world of paganism and continued down
into the Middle Ages. The first two theories have confronted
each other for seventy years or more — the third, though sug-
gested by Simrock as far back as 1842, has only appeared in the
field as a formidable rival since the beginning of the twentieth
century.

In discussing this question of the origin of the Grail, natu-
rally, the first step to take is to consider the etymology of the


in question, although Chrétien (ll. 1694, 1796) speaks of the lad’s
being appareled in the Welsh manner.

The French poets, probably, as a rule, interpreted “Perceval” as
made up of “perce-+ val.” In the oft-quoted passage (cp. Foerster’s
large edition of Chrétien’s Cligés, p. xx), from the metrical prologue
to a prose version of the Vie des Péres, where the author warns his
readers against reading romances, he uses a play on words: “Laissiez
Cliges et Perceval, Qui les cuers perce et trait a val.” So, too,
Wolfram 140, 15: “der nam is rehte enmitten durch.’ The author
of the prose romance, Perlesvaus, likewise, plays (pp. 19, 87, 105)
with the etymology of the name. This had, no doubt, become traditional.

On French names formed in this manner (Brise-fer etc.), which
are also found in French folktales, cp. E. Brugger, Zs. f. frz. Spr.
u. Litt., XLIV*, 149, note 9 (1917). Ibid. in the text Brugger
offers speculations as to when the name Percevaus became attached
to the hero — i. e. at what stage in the development of the Perceval
tradition.


(50 ogle


254 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


word itself — graal or greal (the later form), as it is written in
the Old French — grazal in Provencal. According to some philo-
logists, 1t 1s derived from an hypothetical Low Latin word, cra-
talis, which, in turn, was a derivative of Greek crater (bowl). Ac-
cording to others, it is derived from a Low Latin *gradalis or
*gradale, which is actually recorded in a Spanish will as early
as 1010, and, again, in the early part of the thirteenth century
in the Chronicle of Helinand of Froidmont in the passage where
he alludes to the Grail romances.*¢ This passage is a famous
one in many ways and so is worth translating in part. Under the
years 717—719 Helinand says: “‘At this time a wonderful vision
was shown to a certain hermit by an angel — a vision concerning
a noble decurion, Joseph, who took down the body of our
Lord from the cross, and concerning the bowl or dish (“‘de catino
illo vel paropside’’) in which the Lord supped with his disciples,
in regard to which a history which is called the Grail has been
written by the same hermit. [We have here an allusion to the
Old French prose-romance, called the Estotre del Saint Graal or
Grand St. Graal. | The Grail [ Gradalis autem vel gradale | is the
French name for a broad and rather deep dish in which precious
viands are accustomed to be set before the rich in different rows
(gradatim), one piece after the other on different levels. It is
also called by the vulgar name greal, because it is grateful and
acceptable to the person who eats in it, both on account of the
containing vessel, because, perchance, it 1s of silver or some other
valuable material, and on account of the contents — that is, the
various order of the precious viands.’’ |

The wild etymological guess in this last sentence is quite in
the mediaeval style and is really identical with the one which
Robert had already offered on the subject. At the present day,


_** W. Golther, it is true, in a private communication (dated
5 January, 1920) which I have received from him, has expressed the
opinion that this passage is a late thirteenth century interpolation.
He acknowledges, however, that he has “keine unmittelbaren Beweise
dafiir.” In the meanwhile, until such proofs are adduced, it seems
to me desirable to take the passage as genuine, as has hitherto been
done by scholars of all shades of opinion.


(0 ogle


The Theory of Christian Origin 255


the word is still current in Provence and in Southeastern France,
but there is no reason why in the Middle Ages its use may not
have extended to Northern France — where Chrétien, for instance,
resided. On the other hand, for phonetic reasons, the forms graal
and greal, which we find in the French romances, could not have
been drawn from the French of Western France or of England.
As far as immediate derivation, then, is concerned, the word is
apparently of Latin origin, but its etymology throws no light on
the origin of the legend.*"

If only Robert’s poem were involved, there could be no doubt
about the question: the Grail there, as we have seen, is the vessel
of the Last Supper which was also used to catch the blood of the
dead Christ in, and its subsequent history grew out of a combi-


*? For the etymology of the word graal (greal) see, especially,
Foerster, Chrétien Worterbuch, p. 174* and Nitze’s article, “Concer-
ning the Word Graal, Greal,”’ Modern Philology, XIII, 681 ff.
(1916). In the latter the various etymologies that have been proposed
are tested critically. The etymon suggested by Diez, viz. *cratalis,
as Nitze concludes, has most in its favor. Helinand’s attempt to con-
nect greal with agreer is obviously a mere guess, and, no doubt, as
Baist (quoted by Nitze) surmises, his attempt to connect gradalis with
gradatim is equally valueless. Nitze, too, is, doubtless, right (p. 188)


‘in regarding gradalis as a mere variant of *cratalts. — The word
is still in use in parts of France (south, southeast) — also, in Por-


tugal (gral = wooden mortar). For the Portuguese cp. A. Bonilla y
San Martin, Las leyendas de Wagner en la literatura espanol a,
p. 67 (Madrid, 1913).

“Saint Greal” (Holy Grail) in the later development of the ro-
mances (fifteenth century), owing to a false division of the two words,
came to be misunderstood as “Sang Real’ — i. e. “Blood Royal,”
meaning the Blood of Christ, which the Grail was supposed to contain.
For the French, cp. Godefroi, Complément, under Sang, and for the
English the New English Dictionary under Sangrail and Sang royal.
We find in English sometimes the spelling, Sank/(e) royall.

After what I have said elsewhere in this volume, it is hardly
necessary for me to add that I do not admit, with Nitze, the existence
of a Latin book on the Grail to which Helinand, Robert de Boron,
and the respective authors of the Grand St. Graal and Perlesvaus
may have had access. To be sure, Nitze seems latterly to have receded
from his former position on this subject. Cp. MPh., XVI, 162f. (1919).
256 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


nation of uncanonical writings with certain passages in the Bible
— especially, the passage in St. Matthew’s Gospel that describes
the Last Supper. According to Robert, then, the Grail is of
Christian origin and its wonder-working powers are lke those
that were ascribed to many relics in the Middle Ages. But even
in Chrétien is not the Grail really again merely a Christian relic?
The trouble here is that the Perceval is unfinished. Consequently,
we have not the early history of the sacred vessel told. That was re-
served for the portion which was never composed. All that Chrétien
actually gives us, then, is the account of the procession in the Grail-
castle (ll. 4891 ff.). The Grail is borne through the brightly
illuminated hall where Perceval sits at the table. A damsel, splen-
didly clad, bears the vessel, which is ornamented with jewels and
which sends forth a light that eclipses the lights of the hall. There
follow then a silver platter (paten) and the lance. The Grail is
expressly declared to be a holy thing in the passage (I. 7793)
where it is said that the Fisher King maintained his life merely
with a holy wafer in the Grail. The words are as follows: ‘Such
a holy a thing is the Grail and so completely spiritual that for
his [i.e. the Fisher King’s] life nothing more is necessary than
the holy wafer which comes in the Grail.”%’ So here, too, we
** The lines (6384 ff.) run as follows:

D’une seule oiste ce savons

Que l’an an ce graal aporte

Sa vie sostient et conforte:

Tant sainte chose est li graax

Et tant par est espiritax

Qu’a sa vie plus ne sostient

Que l’oiste qui el graal vient.
Oiste here is Latin hostia = host, eucharist. The passage leaves
no doubt that in Chrétien’s conception the Grail was a Christian relic
— indeed, for my own part, I would say boldly, the plate of the
eucharist. Even Brugger, Zs. f. fre. Spr. u. Litt, XXIX’, 58f.
(1905), XXXI*, 137 (1907) and Miss Weston, Legend of Sir Per-
ceval, I, 154 (1906), although they believe that the Grail is of non-
Christian origin, acknowledge that in Chrétien it is a Christian relic,
and the former, ibid. XXXVI*, 187 (1910), justly criticises Brown
(PMLA, XXV, 7) and Baist (Parzwal und der Gral, p. 41) for
denying this.


Go ogle


The Theory of Christian Origin 257


have a Christian relic and the whole procession seems a Christian
ceremonial — the procession of the Eucharist. The lance is the
lance of the Roman soldier who pierced the side of Christ with
his spear (St. John, XIX, 34), and for whom the name Longinus
(from the Greek Aéyxn= spear) was invented by early Christian
legend. The Grail being the dish which received the blood that
flowed from the wound made by that spear, it was natural that
Chrétien should have added it to the Grail procession, and, in
accordance with the general conception,®® made the blood flow down
to the hand of the bearer. The wounded Rich Fisher who is sus-
tained by the marvellous food contained in the Grail — that is,
the dish of the Last Supper — is naturally Christ. Indeed, the
various objects#® in the Grail procession all figure in the cere-
monial of the Byzantine mass, and, accordingly, the most eminent
advocates of the Christian origin of the Grail, adopting a sug-
gestion of Konrad Burdach’s,*! have latterly been inclined to take


** Cp. R. J. Peebles, The Legend of Longinus, Bryn Mawr
College Monographs. Monograph Series, IX, 185ff. (1911).

“° One of these objects, the ¢tailleor d’argent (1. 3193), which
a girl bore after the Grail, no doubt represented the paten. It was
misunderstood by Wolfram von Eschenbach, who translated it wrongly
by messer (knife), though it means platter. It was comparatively in-
significant in the Grail procession, and so does not appear at all in
Pseudo-Wauchier and Wauchier, nor in the narrative of the Grail castle
episode in Gerbert, although he mentions it at another point (Potvin,
VI, 177, 243). Manessier, however, restored it (ll. 44700, 45243ff.)
to a place among the talismans of the Grail procession. He borrowed
it, of course, from Chrétien.

*) See especially Deutsche Literaturzeitung, XXIV, cols. 3050ff.
(Dec. 12, 1903). Tho article is a review of Willy Staerck’s Uber
den Ursprung der Grallegende (Tiibingen, 1903), but presents new
views as to the origin of the Grail legend. Burdach had already given
some indications of his theory in the Archw fir das Studwm der
neueren Sprachen, vol. 108, p. 31 (1902), and in the article men-
tioned above, he speaks of having in preparation a comprehensive work
on the origin of the Grail, but up to date no such work has appeared.
— Heinzel, p. 9, had noted the use of the spear in the Byzantine
mass, but did not draw the same inference therefrom as Burdach. So,
too, Paulus Cassel, Der Gral und sein Name, p. 10 (second edition,


Refperia, Ergdngzungsreihe: 8. 17
os


} Evolution of Arthurian Romance


this as the model of Chreétien’s procession. There was, as we know.
constant intercourse between Constantinople and the West in the
twelfth century — especially owing to the conditions which the
crusades produced —and Chretien’s source may well have contained a
description of the Byzantine mass which some crusader had brought
home. In this form of the mass, along with the candles and, of
course, the chalice and the paten, appears the lance which 1s used
to pierce the bread with. To be sure, this lance has been reduced
now to the form of a knife with a lance-like blade, but it retains
its original name of the lance (Aéyxn). Moreover, in the allegorical
interpretation of the objects that figure in the mass which we
find in writers of the Eastern Church we have it expressly identi-


Berlin 1878), identifies Wolfram’s Messer with the hagia logche of the
Byzantine mass. Throughout this little book (28 pages) Cassel con-
stantly appeals to the rites of the Greek church for analogies to the
Grail rites.

It is from Christian litargy — more specifically, of the Eastern
Church — and not from Christian legend, according to Burdach, that
the Grail legend sprang. He thinks that it assumed literary form
during the period of the Crusades in Provence or nearby. There is
no evidence, however, to support this view. As Burdach points out,
in the Byzantine mass which goes under the name of St. John Chry-
sostom, in the Introitus the lance gives the symbolical wound in the
eucharistic bread; it is borne about with the cup and the paten; it
is present at the symbolical entombment; and in the consecration and
“conversion” of the bread it is used again to heal and resurrect.


The Greek text of the liturgy of Chrysostom is accessible in
C. A. Swainson’s The Greek Inturgies, 101 ff. (Cambridge, 1884). Cp.
especially, pp. 104ff. A picture of the lance (holy spear) will be found
in J. M. Neale’s History of the Holy Eastern Church, I, 342 (Lon-
don, 1850). It is hardly a knife, but merely a shortened spear, with
a cross-piece on the handle to suggest a crucifix.

Burdach sees a similarity between the scenes in the hall of the
Grail Castle in the romances and the adoration of the holy spear des-
cribed by Constantinus Porphyrogenitus, Migne, Patrologia Graeca,
vol. 112, col. 421, as taking place in Constantinople. But the ceremony
in the latter case is, evidently, in a church, and the lance is a definite
relic which was regarded as the actual spear with which Christ’s
side was pierced.
The Theory of Christian Origin 259


fied with the spear of the Roman soldier and interpreted accord-
ingly.*

It has been objected, however, to the theory of the Eucha-
ristic origin of Chrétien’s Grail procession that it takes place in
a castle and not in a church — moreover, that the bearer of the
Grail is a damsel, not a priest. Such things, it is argued, would
have seemed blasphemous to the Middle Ages in the highest degree.
On the other hand, as a matter of fact, such processions are not
- confined in Catholic countries to the churches — and, besides,
it is to be remembered that we are dealing with poetry and not
with a theological work. Chrétien is fitting a religous concep-
tion into a romance of chivalrous adventure. The general tone
of his works is thoroughly mundane, and there is no reason to
believe that he would have shrunk from making use of a Christian
theme in the manner that we find the Grail used in the Perceval.
As regards the second point, it was, of course, irregular in Western
Europe for a woman to bear the eucharist, but it was allowed in
the East and the custom was brought thence to Ireland and Brit-
tany.4® A ninth century instance in the reign of Louis the Pious
has also been cited.“* It is not necessary to assume that this fea-
ture of Chrétien’s Grail procession was derived directly from some
such heterodox usage.** That may have been the case, but, in
any event, the fact that such usages are recorded sporadically in
the Middle Ages proves that the conception of a girl bearing the


“? Cp., for example, the Greek treatise attributed to Germanos
which I have quoted above. Jbid., 397, A—C, we find the “lance’
of the mass, the plate (diskos) that contained the corpus domim
and the chalice that contained the wine, all explained in this succession’
one immediately after the other. The “lance” is said to represent
“the spear that pierced the side of the Lord,” and “to be purified by
the lance means [the same thing as] “As a sheep he was led to the
slaughter’’’ etc.

Heinzel, pp. 9f., cites from Marténe, De antiquis ritibus, IV,
443, the description of a procession of a Western church (Fleury-sur-
Loire) in which the lance also figures.

*° Cp. Miss Peebles, p. 209.

“ By B. Fehr, Beiblatt 2u Anglia, XXIV, 295 (1913).

*® So Miss Peebles, Joc. cit.

17*


GO ogle


260 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


eucharist was not out of the question for a mediaeval writer —
especially, for the author of such fantastic compositions as the
Arthurian romances. This adaptation of sacred materials to the
purposes of romance would not be more profane than similar adap-
tations which we find in the prose romances. For example, we
have in the prose Lancelot the conception of Christ, the most
sacred of all subjects, parodied in the account of Galahad’s con-
ception, and in the Queste and Estoire del Saint Graal the same
knight is supplied with ancestors taken from the genealogy of
Christ.** If the identifications which we have adopted are correct,
viz., of the lance of the Grail procession with the lance which
was thrust into the side of Christ on the cross, the Grail with a
vessel of the eucharist and the ¢ailleor (platter) with the paten,
it is plain that the Rich Fisher or Fisher King, who has been
wounded through both thighs by a dart in battle and who, con-
sequently, has to resort to fishing in a boat for diversion (Il.
3471 ff.) is the crucified Christ, himself, who is present at the
eucharistic celebration (his symbolical feast).

In the allegorical exegesis of the Middle Ages the commen-
tators regularly interpret the scenes in the Gospels where the apost-
les are engaged in fishing on the basis of Christ’s words to Peter
and Andrew, St. Matthew, IV, 19, when he summoned them from
their nets to become his disciples: ‘‘Follow me, and I will make
you fishers of men.” Accordingly, the fish in these scenes are
men, the commentators declare, those that are caught by the
apostles being Christians and the remainder heathen.‘’ It was na-
tural thatthe epithet, “fisher,” in this allegorical sense of


“© See, respectively, my articles in RR, IX, 368f. (1918) and
MLN, XXXII, 129ff. (1918). Miss Fisher, pp, 124f., cites in this
connection the procession of the hermits in the Perlesvaus, who mar-
ched into the hall in white garments with a red cross on their breasts
and then “annorerent Deu nostre Seingnor et batirent lor coupes,” as
if they were before an altar. The romancer, she observes, had no
feeling of irreverence here.

“7 On this subject, cp. Hans Achelis: Das Symbol des Fisches
und die Fischdenkmdler der rémischen Katakomben, p. 8 (Mar-
burg, 1888).


Go ogle


The Theory of Christian Origin 261


“‘one who saves the souls of men” should be applied not only
to the apostles, but to Christ, the Saviour, par eminence. And
so we actually find Christ called the Fisher by Early Christian
Fathers — especially, it would seem, in the East.‘* Far more
common, it 1s true, is the symbolization of Christ under the image
of a fish,4® which persists even today, as the fish symbols that
often appear in the decoration of our churches still testify. This
latter piece of symbolism would always render a transition to
the related conception of Our Lord as the “Fisherman” easy,
and, doubtless, we have such a shifting of the conception in the
Fisher King of Chrétien. Doubtless, it was a fancy of Chrétien’s
that this Fisher King who was lame should be represented as
seeking diversion in fishing.5°

The father, or “double,” of the Fisher King in Chrétien’s
poem, the mysterious king who is likewise lame and who has not


*® Cp. Achelis, tbid., pp. 8f. He cites Clement of Alexandria,
Gregory of Nazianzene and Nilus. Jerome, however, remarks (to
Habakkuk, 1, 15) that the Devil and heretics can also be fishermen.


‘° For numerous examples of this from the early Christian era
down see J. B. Pitra, Spicelegium Solesmense, Ill, 522 ff. (Paris, 1855).
This was due, in part, to the fact that the initials of the Greek words,
Incots Xpiotds Oeod bids owthp (= Jesus Christ, Son of God, the
Saviour), make up {y@0s (= fish), in part, perhaps, to the place
filled by the fish in earlier Asiatic religions. On the subject of the
fish in these religions see Miss Weston’s From Ritual to Romance,
ch. 9 (Cambridge, 1920), where, in the notes, the authorities on the
question are cited.


°° This is suggested by Heinzel who says (p. 13) that we must
assume “Crestien oder seine Quelle . . . habe entweder, da er den
Namen riche pécheur nicht verstand, wohl aber von der Krankheit
dieses Mannes wusste, die T&tigkeit des Fischens aus freier Erfindung
mit der Krankheit in ursiéchlichen Zusammenhang gebracht — oder die
Vorstellung von der Krankheit des Fischerkénigs aus dem _ unver-
standenen Ausdruck roi pécheur abgeleitet. Er ist ein Fischerkinig,
weil er fischt, und er fischt weil er krank ist.” The first of these
alternative suggestions, however, seems to me preferable. The wounds
which Jesus suffered on the cross would account for the conception
of his representative in the legend as maimed or sick. It is the fishing
activities of the character that require explanation.


(50 ogle


262 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


left his room for fifteen years, being sustained exclusively by the
holy wafer, would, under this interpretation, be the Holy Ghost.5


It is most convenient to discuss in connection with the origin
of the Grail legend the theory which has been often advanced
that this legend first took shape in Glastonbury Abbey (in Eng-
land). The only item of evidence that might furnish an argu-
ment for such a notion is a passage in William of Malmesbury’s
De Antiquitate Glastoniensis Ecclesiae, where it is said that the
apostle Philip “duodecim ex suis discipulis . . . misit in Britan-
niam, quibus, ut ferunt, charissimum amicum suum Joseph ab
Aramathia, qui et Dominum sepulivit, praefecit.”’ 5?

With regard to this passage, it should be observed that the
story of St. Philip’s having founded Christianity in Britain was
virtually an invention of William’s, who was desirous of establish-
ing for the English a direct apostolic origin and a consequent
independence of Rome. The desired result he achieved by draw-
ing a convenient inference from a statement in the ninth century
chronicle of Freculf, that St. Philip had converted the Gauls and
neighboring peoples, and combining it with a fiction of Geoffrey
of Monmouth’s concerning the conversion of Britain.5® Even if
the allusion to Joseph in the above-quoted passage was really
inserted by William of Malmesbury, himself, it would not prove
the existence of any legend that would connect Joseph with Glas-
tonbury. As a matter of fact, however, there is the strongest
reason for believing that the words are a late interpolation, made
under the influence of the French Grail romances, which had ren-
dered Joseph, as a converter of the heathen, famous. William


°? The character, which is as difficult to interpret under one
theory of Grail origins as another, may have sprung, after all, from
some misunderstanding of his original, on Chrétien’s part. In any event,
it is not fundamental in the Grail story, as is shown by the circum-
stance that it was dropped by all the continuators of Chrétien’s
Perceval.

** Migne’s Patrologia Latina, vol. 179, col. 1683 (Paris, 1855).

‘ This has been proved clearly by F. Zarncke, PBB, Ill, 327 ff.
(1876


(0 ogle


The Theory of Christian Origin 263


nowhere else mentions him and he does not fit in with the account
of the conversion of Britain which this writer gives. According
to his narrative elsewhere, it is twelve of St. Philip’s disciples
that effect the conversion. The theory of interpolation is strength-
med by the fact that there was no Grail legend among the local
legends of Glastonbury. Only the late prose-romance, Perlesvaus,
pretended to be based on a Latin book at Glastonbury.5¢ There


** When W. A. Nitze wrote his “Glastonbury and the Holy Grail”,
Modern Philology, 1, 247ff., he believed in the Latin book to which
the author of the Perlesvaus, Potvin, I, 306, 348, appeals as his
authority, but recently, in Studies in Philology, XV, 12, note 12
(University of North Carolina, 1918), he appears to renounce this idea.
G. Baist, however, supposes this hypothetical Latin book to have been
written by a Glastonbury monk, about the time of the pretended dis-
covery (in 1191) there of Arthur’s and Guinevere’s bodies, and it is
the cornerstone, so to speak, of his theory of the evolution of Grail
conceptions. Through this book (written after Chrétien), as Baist thinks,
the stories of Perceval and Joseph of Arimathea were woven together
for the first time. Robert de Boron wrote his J oseph (later) as a
Vorgeschichte to this liber Glastoniensis, and the other writers con-
cerning the Grail, also, drew their matter partly from the hypothetical
Latin romance and partly from Chrétien. For these views of Baist,
cp. Literaturblatt, XIII, col. 160 (1892), “Zu Robert de Boron,” Zs.
f. rom. Ph., XXXII, 231 (1908), and Parzival und der Gral, p. 39,
(Freiburg in Br., 1909). In none of these places (or anywhere else),
however, has the author supported his views by evidence. ‘There is,
in fact, every reason for rejecting the hypothesis. In the last-named
reference Baist assumes that the legend about the founding of Glaston-
bury abbey by Joseph of Arimathea was a genuine early tradition at
Glastonbury, but Newell, as we shall see, has proved that this is not
so. The Latin book, moreover, (written, it is declared, by Josephus)
which the author of the Perlesvaus invokes as his source, it is safe
to say, never existed. The only Arthurian romances in Latin that
we know of — the Historia Meriadoct and De Ortu Waluuanti —
are not earlier than the second quarter of the thirteenth century. See
my edition of these romances, pp. XVIff. Arthur and Gorlagon,
edited by Kittredge from the unique MS., Rawlinson B 149 (end of
the fourteenth century, at the earliest), is merely a Welsh folk-tale in
Latin dress, but we have no ground for dating that (in its Latin form),
either, earlier than the two romances I have named. — Still further,
it is, in the highest degree, questionable whether Robert de Boron


Go ogle


264 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


was an attempt to connect the abbey with Arthur, but this was
separate from the Grail legend, and, likewise, of late origin. The
motive for this attempt was political: On the one hand, the monks
had no objection to their abbey being glorified by being con-
nected with so renowned a hero as Arthur, and, on the other, the
early Plantagenets were anxious to obtain a hold on the Celtic
population. Consequently, Glastonbury was identified with Avalon,
the place to which Arthur was reported to have been taken after
receiving his fatal wound. Avalon was, of course, an island, and
Glastonbury was not — but this discrepancy was explained on the
ground that marshes lay about the place, so that, after all, it
might be called an island. A comedy was then arranged in the
year 1191, when it was announced that the tombs of Arthur and
Guinevere had been discovered at the abbey. The supposed coffins
were dug up and then reinterred before the altar in the church in
solemn fashion. This pious fraud had the effect of weakening the
inconvenient Celtic tradition that Arthur would one day return
to rule over his people and of fixing on English soil the most
precious relic of the Celtic race. Accounts of the transaction are given
by Giraldus Cambrensis in two of his works, Speculum Ecclesiae,
II, 8—10, and De Principis Instructione, 1.5 The fraudulent


ever intended to introduce Perceval into the cycle of romances which
he outlines at the end of the Joseph. On this subject and the author-
ship of the Didot Perceval see, Part IV, below.

In this connection I will say that, whatever one may think in
regard to the Wolfram-Kyot question, Nutt is undoubtedly right when,
in reviewing Baist’s Parzival und der Gral, in his article, “Recent
Grail Literature,” in The Academy for May 7, 1910, he condemns
(p. 446) the view to which the author inclines and which is, indeed,
the inevitable conclusion of his preceding criticism of the respective
theories of Christian and heathen origin of the Grail — the view which
is summed up in his words (p. 43); “dass der Gral in seiner ersten
Gestalt ohne jede wunderbare Eigenschaft war und nur die Regel
exemplifizieren half, dass unter Umstinden auch Reden Gold sei.” That
the whole Grail story should be as meaningless as this is impossible.

°° There is a mediaeval Welsh version of the transaction based
primarily on the Speculum Ecclesiae, but with some sentences taken
from the De Principis Instructione. The text has been edited with
translation and notes by Timothy Lewis and J. D. Bruce, “The Pre-


Go ogle


The Theory of Christian Origin 265


tradition which was thus started was buttressed still further by
the falsification of William of Malmesbury’s treatise on the anti-
quity of the Glastonbury abbey — De Antiquitate Ecclesiae Glas-
toniensis. This treatise, composed in the first half of the twelfth
century, did not originally contain the passages which in the exist-
ing text connect Glastonbury with Arthur. These passages were
interpolated at the end of the twelfth or beginning of the thirteenth
century as a part of the fraud which the monks of Glastonbury
were then engaged in foisting upon the world.5¢ The forging of


tended Exhumation of Arthur and Guinevere”, Revue Celtique, XXXIII,
432 ff. (1912). The Welsh preserves a few sentences which have been
lost in the unique (defective) MS. of the Speculum.

°° In Germania, XII, 276ff. (1867), A. Holtzmann maintained
that the Arthurian passages in the De Antiquitate Glastomensis
Ecclesiae (composed between 1125 and 1139) of William of Malmes-
bury were late interpolations and drawn from Geoffrey of Monmouth
and the French romances, and this was the view of F. Zarncke in his
“Zur Geschichte der Gralsage,”’ PBB, I, 331 ff. (1876), with reference
to the passage about Joseph of Arimathea. G. Baist, however, in
“Arthur und der Graal,” Zs. f. rom. Ph., XIX, 326ff. (1895), with
supplement, XX, 320f. (1896), presented an elaborate defense of the
authenticity of these passages, which seemed convincing to G. Paris,
Romania, XXIV, 611 (1895). Baist admitted (pp. 328f.) that the work
contained interpolations, but denied that these Arthuriana belonged in
that category. F. Lot, in his article “Glastonbury et Avalon,” Ro-
mama, XXVII, 529ff. (1898), also accepted the Arthurian passages
as genuine and believed (pp. 567 ff.) that they were invented by Ca-
radoc of Llancarvan, author of a Vita Gildae, which is likewise full
of fabrications, and that they were communicated by him to William
of Malmesbury, who adopted them without suspicion. W. W. Newell,
however, in “William of Malmesbury on the Antiquity of Glastonbury,”
PMLA, XVII, 459ff. (1903), subjected the whole question to re-
examination, and proved condusively that the Arthuriana in the De
Antiquitate were certainly late interpolations. F. Lot has accepted
Newell’s results in his Mélanges d’Histoire Bretonne, pp. 277 ft.
(1907). So, too, Nitze, it would seem, in “The Glastonbury Passages
in the Perlesvaus,” Studies in Philology, XV, 7Tff. (University of
North Carolina, 1918), who in a previous article, “Glastonbury and
the Holy Grail,’ I, 254ff., had assumed the authenticity of the Ar-
thurian materials in the De Antiquitate. In a communication to
Nitze, summarized by the latter in Modern Philology, I, 248, note 2,


(50 ogle


266 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


documents for the purpose of securing wealth or prestige for a
monastery was one of the most ordinary transactions of the Middle
Ages — and there is no occasion for surprise at these so-called
pious frauds of religious men, when it is remembered that the
Papacy itself had set an example to the whole church by making
the forged Constitutions of Constantine, as they are called, the
basis of its claims to the possession of the Papal States.

The whole connection of Joseph of Arimathea with Glaston-
bury, then, is a late invention — a localization which may be com-
pared with the localization of the Tristan romance at Dublin ag
early as the twelfth century,*’ only that in the latter case there is
no reason to believe that any fraudulent purpose was involved in
the localization. The identification of a village on the outskirts
of Dublin with the site of a chapel of Iseult — the village is
still called “Chapelizod” — was, doubtless, simply the fancy of
some high-born lover of the old romance. As regards the connection
of Joseph, and hence of the Grail, with Glastonbury, none of the
earfy romancers know anything of it. In Chrétien’s Perceval, of
course, neither Joseph nor Glastonbury appear. In Robert de
Boron, Joseph never comes to Britain, and he is consequently never
brought into any sort of relations either with Arthur or with
Glastonbury. Indeed, the only allusion in this poem to anything in
Arthurian tradition is where it is said that Bron, the second
guardian of the Grail is to go to the West (1. 3219), or, more
specifically, the “‘vaus d’Avaron”’ (3123, 3221) — 1.e. the vale of
Avalon. But in the interpolated treatise of William of Malmesbury
(De Antiquitate) Glastonbury is called ‘insula Avallonia” (in
the British language it was called, it is said, Yniswitrin — i.e.


Baist called attention to a passage in Johannes Glastoniensis (fifteenth
century) which is supposed to prove the existence of early Arthurian
traditions at Glastonbury, but the passage is late and evidently com-
pounded from details in the chronicles and romances.

R. Thurneysen, Zs. f. rom. Ph., XX, 316ff. (1896), “Zu William
von Malmesbury”, pointed out some important Irish sources for certain
of the interpolations in the De Antiquitate, but they do not affect the
question with which this note is concerned.

"7 Cp. The Athenaeum, Feb. 21 and April 26, 1913.


Go ogle


The Theory of Christian Origin 267


“isle of glass’’). It has been, accordingly, suggested that Robert’s
“‘vaus d’Avaron’’ reflects the influence of the revised De Anti-
quitate and that the term is, therefore, intended to apply to Glas-
tonbury.*® But, apart from the uncertainty of the relative dates
of the two works — Robert’s was probably written in the eighties,
whereas the revised De Antiquitate in all likelihood dates after
1191 — the terms “vaus d’Avaron”’ and “insula Avallonia”’ do
not coincide. The one is a vale, the other is an isle. Very likely,
Robert merely used Avalon as an indefinite expression for the
West, — the Avalon of Celtic legend being indefinitely placed in
the Western Seas. If he refers to this Otherworld of Celtic belief
as a vale, instead of an isle, we may pardon this to a poet, whether
it is due to confusion or to intentional change. In any event, his
words do not offer the slightest justification for assuming that
he was here alluding to Glastonbury.*


5° Cp. Newell, op. cit., p. 510.

°° Inasmuch as the connection of Joseph of Arimathea with Glaston-
bury has been shown to be a late invention based on the romances,
there is no need of discussing Nutt’s hypothesis as to the origin of
Robert de Boron’s Joseph and the part that Bron plays in it, viz.,
that “Borron, or rather the sources he followed became acquainted
with a Bran conversion legend, and fused it with the better-known
Joseph one” (The Legends of the Holy Grail, p. 65, London, 1902).
He had already advocated this theory in his Studves, pp. 218ff., and
A. C. L. Brown seems still to accept it. Cp. the latter’s article “From
Cauldron of Plenty to Grail,” Modern Philology, XIV, 385ff. (1916),
Bran here, it should be explained, is the son of Llyr in the Welsh
tale, Branwen, Daughter of Llyr. There he is represented as possessing
a cauldron of healing and rejuvenation, which, Nutt thinks, may have
developed in tradition into a talisman of increase and plenty. Nutt’s
idea that this Bran was a hero of a legend concerning the conversion
of Britain, itself, rests on a slender foundation, viz., a Welsh triad
of: which there is no trace prior to the late thirteenth century. Accor-
ding to this triad he was “one of the three blissful Rulers of the
Island of Britain, who first brought the faith of Christ to the nation
of the Cymry from Rome, where he was seven years a hostage for
his son Caradawe.” For this triad see Loth’s Mobinogion®, II, 308f.
and for the character in Welsh literature, in general, ibid., I, 119,
note 2, — also Rhys: Studies in the Arthurian Legend, pp. 306¢f.
Moreover, Bran is called “the Blessed” in the Welsh tale cited above.


Go ogle


268 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


These materials, however, are too slight to show that there ever existed
an actual narrative about Bran as the original converter of Britain.
In any event, the implication of the triad has nothing in common
with the story of Robert’s Bron. Nutt regards the epithet “Blessed”
here as “originally pagan” and acknowledges that the triad may be
“fa reflex of thé Grail romances,” though he believes otherwise. Rhys,
loc. cit., advocates strongly Nutt’s theory, but unfortunately, since he
had no first-hand knowledge of the French romances, his opinions in
such a matter carry little weight. He confesses (p. 311) that the
extant Welsh texts do not support the theory. Before Nutt some
scholars had already derived the name of Bron in Robert's Joseph
from Celtic Bran, and identified the two characters. So, explicitly,
G. A. Heinrich, Le Parcival de Wolfram d’ Eschenbach et la Légende
du Saint Graal, p. 59 (Paris, 1855). Cp., too, E. Martin, Zur Gral-
sage, p. 37 (Strassburg, 1880). I have tried to show in Part IV
the true origin of Robert’s Bron.
Chapter II.
The Theory of Celtic Origin.


I have so far presented the theory which appears to me to
offer the most acceptable explanation of the origin of the Grail.
We have, however, the rival theory of Celtic origin to consider,
the most important advocates of which have been the late Alfred
Nutt,! and, among living scholars, A. C. L. Brown.? Nutt was
primarily a folk-lorist and he accordingly approaches the subject


* In his chief work, Studies on the Legend of the Holy Grail
(London, 1888) — also, in the Legends of the Holy Grail (No. 14
of Popular Studies in Mythology, Romance, and Folk-Lore, Lon-
don, 1902), and other minor publications.

* In various papers, to be named as occasion arises. — So, too
Rhys in Ch. 13, “Origins of the Holy Grail,” and Ch. 14, “Glaston-
bury and Gower,” of his work, cited in the next to the last note.
For the reasons there stated, however, despite his eminence as a
Welsh scholar, Rhys’s contributions to the present subject are not pro-
fitable reading. Indeed, they strike me as fantastic to the last degree.
Ch. 15, “Isles of the Dead,” on the other hand, has an independent
value for its discussion of such conceptions in the Celtic world.

In his review of Nutt’s Studies, Romama, XVI, 588 ff. (1889)
G. Paris thinks that Nutt has proved “l’origine celtique d’une grande
partie des élements qui figurent dans les romans du saint graal.’’ He
commends, especially, in this connection, the Gaelic tale of the Great
Fool, which the English scholar adduces as a parallel to the accounts
of Perceval’s youth in the Arthurian romances. On the other hand,
he speaks of Nutt’s parallels to the Grail itself as merely plausible
and of his hypothesis “sur l’origine britannique de la ‘préhistoire’ du
graal” as wanting in solidity. But after Zimmer, Gdttingische Ge-
lehrte Anzeigen, June 10, 1890, objected to the Great Fool parallel
as too modern, Nutt, Molk-Lore, Ill, 4011. withdrew that parallel,
“for the present, at least,’ and, as far as I am aware, never brought
it forward again in his discussions of the Grail.
270 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


from that point of view. He says’: ‘‘Leaving subsidiary details
out of account, we may bring all the instances in which the Grail
appears under two formulas: that of the kinsman avenging a blood
feud by the means of the three magic talismans, sword and lance
and vessel; and that of the visit to the Bespelled Castle, the in-
mates of which enjoy, thanks to the magic vessel, a supernaturally
prolonged life, from which they are released by the hero’s question
concerning that vessel. The one we may call the feud quest, the
other the unspelling quest.” “‘The castle to which the avenger
must penetrate to win the talismans [i.e. vessel, sword, etc. ] and
that to which the hero comes with the intent of freeing its lords
are both symbols of the otherworld” (p. 183). He finds the ori-
ginal of the Grail, then, in certain magic vessels that had the power
of supplying food to an unlimited extent. He cites the cauldron
of the Dagda (the good god) in the Irish legend of the Tuatha
de Danann (a race of fairies and wizards who possessed Ireland
before the Milesian invasion). There is considerable doubt, how-
ever, about the antiquity of this tradition. Less open to suspicion
on this score is the next saga of The Battle of Magh Rath, which
relates to events that took place in the seventh century and which
seems to have been written down in the latter half of the twelfth
century (p. 185). Here we are told how the sons of the King of
Alba sought to obtain from their father the “Caire Ainsicen’ —
so called, because it was the caire or cauldron which was used to
return his own proper share to each and no party ever went away
from it unsatisfied; for whatever quantity was put into it there
was never boiled of it but what was sufficient for the company
according to their grade or rank. “The [ Irish] writer then goes
on to instance similar cauldrons te be met with in the older history
of Ireland. These may nearly all be referred to the oldest Irish
heroic cycle, the Ultonian, of which Cuchullain is the most pro-
minent figure” (p. 185). Two of the instances in question are
cited from two of the most celebrated tales of this cycle — viz.
the Toghail Bruighne da Derga and the Tale of Mac Datho’s Pig.


* Studies, p. 181.


(50 ogle


The Theory of Celtic Origin 271


Nutt cited, also (p. 186), the cauldron of Bran in the Welsh
tale of Branwen, the daughter of Llyr, which dates from the
end of the twelfth century or beginning of the thirteenth.‘ Here,
however, the vessel is not food-producing,’ but it has (like Medea’s
cauldron) the power of bringing the dead to life again. As is
said in the tale: “The property of it is that if one of thy men bed
slain to-day and be cast therein, the morrow he will be as well
as ever he was at his best, except that he will not regain his speech.”
There is also a vessel of balsam in various Gaelic tales that has this
revivifying power.®

A. C. L. Brown has similarly identified the Bleeding Lance
of Chrétien with the Luin of Celtchar of Irish saga — a marvellous
spear.” In the Bruden Da Derga (= Destruction of Da Derga’s
Palace) it is said of this lance that “a cauldron full of poison is
needed to quench it when a deed of manslaying is expected. Un-
less this come to the lance, it flames on its haft and will go through
its bearer or the master of the palace wherein it is. If it is to
be a blow that is to given thereby, it will kill a man at every blow,
when it is at that feat from one hour to another, though it may
not reach him. And if it be a cast, it will kill nine men at every
cast, and one of the nine will be a king or crown prince or chieftain
of the reavers’’ (Brown, p. 18). In another Irish saga, the Mesca
Ulad (= Intoxicatson of the Ultonians), the cauldron which was


* Cp. Loth’s Mabinogion’*, I, 30.

° Rhys, Arthurian Legend, pp. 305ff., however, has cited food-
producing vessels from Welsh tradition. He thinks (p. 312) that the
Mwys (basket) of Gwyddno Garanhir, described in Kulhwch and Olwen
(Loth’s Mabinogion’®, I, 305) is more nearly “the pagan prototype of
the Grail of Christian romance” than anything else in Welsh. Although
the whole world, in groups of thrice nine men, should present themselves,
every man would find food to his taste in this basket.

° A. C. L. Brown argues, Kittredge Anniversary Papers, p. 244,
note 2, for a connection between the regenerating Celtic cauldron and
the cauldron of plenty. All that one can legitimately say on the sub-
ject, however, is that they are both fairy-tale fancies of a kindred
order. So, too, it seems to me, with the cauldron of inspiration in
the Welsh story of Gwion, cited by Nutt, pp. 210f.

* Cp. his article, “The Bleeding Lance”, PMLA, XXV, 1 ff. (1910).


C6 ogle


272 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


needed to quench the ardour of the wondrous spear is described as
‘a blood-black cauldron of horrid, noxious liquid . . . composed
through sorcery of the blood of dogs, cats and Druids” (p. 22).
Brown, himself, however, acknowledges (p. 23) that perpetual
bleeding is not mentioned in the Irish sagas as one of the mar
vellous properties of the Luin, and the same is true of all other
wonderful weapons in Irish and Welsh saga. A spear dipped into
a cauldron of blood to render it innocuous to its owner and those
nearby is, certainly, a very different affair from the lance of
Chretien’s procession. As Miss Peebles (p. 194) very sensibly
remarks: “With the Christian lance [1i.e. lance of Longinus ] so
obviously and suitably at hand, in literature, which, as writers
of romances, themselves, they must have known, in art produc-
tions which they must have seen, and in the drama with which
they must have been familiar, why should the Grail romancers
seek a bleeding lance in the Luin of Celtchar, which after all does
not bleed.’’®

Professor Brown cites (pp. 42ff.) also in this connection the
story of Balin and the Dolorous Stroke which is found in the Huth-
Merlin, I, 281ff.: In the palace of King Pellehan, pursued by
its lord, Balin comes to a room filled with the fragrance of spices
with a great silver bowl on a table in the centre and within this
basin stood a lance perpendicularly pointing downward, “and any
one looking at it would have marvelled because it was not insert-
ed nor supported, nor fastened anywhere.” Balin was on the point
of taking it and a voice said to him: ‘Do not take it, sinner.”


* Brugger, Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt., XXXVI*, 189f., in reviewing
Brown’s study, also, denies any connection of the spear of the Grail
procession with this Luin of Celtechar, although he, like Brown, be-
lieves in the Celtic origin of the Grail legend.

In his article, “An Old Irish Parallel to the Motive of the Bleeding
Lance,” Hriu, VI, 156f. (1912) Kuno Meyer has printed an Irish
poem which is supposed to offer a parallel to the lance of the Grail
story: A chieftain pollutes the hall of Tara by secretly and mischievously
bringing into it a bloody head ona pole or lance of the quicken-tree,
while the king was holding a feast. Meyer thinks that the text is
probably of the tenth century. Obviously, however, we have here
again merely a bloody, not a bleeding lance.


Go ogle


The Theory of Celtic Origin 273


But he did not refrain on this account from taking it with both
hands and he struck with it Pellehan who was coming against him
so vehemently that he thrust it through both of his thighs.” The
king fell to the earth and the knight returned the lance to the place
from which he had taken it, and when he had replaced it, it stood
as before. This was the Dolorous Stroke which Merlin had pro-
phesied (I, 231) would put the kingdom in distress for twenty-
two years and would wound the most holy man there was in the
world.”’ And so, as a matter of fact, desolation does overtake the
land. Later on Balin is slain in a duel with his brother — an
unnatural combat which has been made the subject of poems by
both Tennyson (Balin and Balan) and Swinburne (The Tale of
Balen).2 The Huth-Merlin, however, is a late prose-romance, and,
like all the prose-romances, it is not based directly on Celtic sources
— on the contrary, it is made up mainly by rehashing episodes
in previous romances, and this very story of Balin and the Dolor-
ous Stroke is plainly an invention that combines features of the
Grail Castle episodes of the earlier romances with other features
that are drawn from the prose Lancelot, the episode of Gawain
and the Perilous Bed. |

Altogether Professor Brown (p. 57) takes the Grail, Lance,
and Sword of Chrétien’s Grail Procession as going back to the
shining talismans of the Tuatha Da Danaan, viz. the Stone of
Destiny, the Cauldron of the Dagda,!! the Spear of Lug and the


” The development of the various versions from the Middle Ages
down has been discussed by E. Vettermann, Die Balendichtungen und
thre Quellen (Halle, 1918). The book has no original value, however,
for the affiliation of the mediaeval versions.

*° In the review of Brown’s paper on the Bleeding Lance, Brugger,
p. 190, expresses the same view that I have here expressed. He points
to the following romances as sources of the Balaain episodes in the
Huth-Merlin: Meriadeuc, Meraugis, the first continuation to Chrétien’s
Perceval (or its source), Grand Saint Graal. On this subject see also
Heinzel, p. 31, and Brugger, ibid., XXXI*, pp. 132 ff.

*" In his “From Cauldron of Plenty to Grail,’ Modern Philo-
logy, XIV, 385ff. (1916) Brown has collected from Irish literature —
more especially from the 7mrama — examples which are intended to
fllustrate the supposed derivation of the Grail from a Celtic cauldron

Rejperia, Ergdngungsrethe: 8. 18


Go ogle


274 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


Sword of Lug.!? But the sole authority on which this grouping of
talismans rests is the seventeenth century Irish historian, Keating.
He usually draws from old sources — but in this instance, no one
can say how old or how late. Moreover, Keating does not define the
nature of these talismans, or ‘‘treasures’’ merely, as he calls them.
He expressly identifies the Stone of Destiny with the stone brought
by Edward I from Scone in Scotland, which to-day rests in West-
minster Abbey and is occupied by the English kings on the oc-
casion of their coronation. Perhaps, the sword and spear of
the same list were as little marvellous as the stone. All this
is obviously too vague to form the basis for conclusions 6f any
value. And it is to be remembered still further that this late
list of objects which we know nothing about is Irish, and we
have not a scrap of evidence to prove that it was known to the
only Celtic peoples from whom a writer of Northern France would
with any probability have drawn his materials, viz. the Welsh
and the Bretons.

Finally, in regard to these supposed evidences of the Celtic
origin of the Grail, it has been argued?* that the position of the
fireplace in the hall of the Grail castle as described by Chrétien,


of plenty, just as his previous article was intended to illustrate the
derivation of the Grail spear from a marvellous Celtic spear. But to
me these illustrations are as little convincing as the others. The
passages quoted by Brown contain some instances of miraculous feeding
and some examples of the syncretism of Christian and pagan elements,
but there is really no distinctly marvellous vessel in them, and the
accompanying incidents are about as different from those which we
find in the Grail romances as one could imagine.

Already in “Notes on Celtic Cauldrons of Plenty and the Land-
Beneath-The-Waves”, Kittredge Anniversary Papers, pp. 235 ff. (Boston
and London, 1913), Brown had tried to prove that these cauldrons .
were connected with the Celtic under-sea Elysium and that the
Grail castle was also connected with the sea — hence that the Grail
was in origin such a Celtic cauldron, this feature, which the two have
in common, confirming the evidence of other features of similarity.

** Nutt, op. cit., p. 184, had already made this identification.

** By W. A. Nitze, in an important article, “The Castle of the
Grail — an Irish Analogue,” Studies in Honor of A. Marshall
Eliott, I, 19ff. (issued in 1911 at Baltimore, though undated).
The Theory of Celtte Origen | 275


11. 3055ff. betrays Celtic origin. It is said that the fire before
which the Grail-King sat was between four columns and that
four hundred men could conveniently sit about this fire. The
columns that held up the chimney were strong and made of brass.
Now, the chimneys of French mediaeval castles were the same
as at present, whereas the fire here is in the open hearth in the
centre of the hall, like the one in the palace at Tara, as described
in the Irish sagas. We are dealing, however, with a romance —
with a narrative of a fantastic kind like that of a folk-tale, and
it is questionable whether we should expect in such.a work literal
conformity with the actual customs of the time, even granting that
no such primitive hearth may have really existed by way of sur-
vival in some French castles of the twelfth century. Moving in
the atmosphere of a folktale, the poet may have purposely made
his description archaic. In any event, there is no sufficient cer-
tainty about the matter for this detail to turn definitely the scales
in favor of the Celtic theory.

In conclusion, it 1s obvious from this discussion, that the
theory that in Celtic folk-tales the Grail legend found its origin
is not satisfactory. No one has as yet brought forward a folk-tale,
Celtic or otherwise, corresponding in incident and setting to the
Grail story.14 Parallels (not very satisfactory in themselves) to
the individual features of it have to be collected from widely sep-
arated sources — sources, too, of uncertain date. This being the
case, there is no need of considering a still further objection:
namely, the improbability that a purely folk-lore, food-providing
vessel should be identified with the most sacred objects of the
Christian faith, the Blood of the Redeemer, the Chalice of the
Eucharist — and that not in stories of popular origin, but in
the long romances of educated men. As will have been seen above,
the food-producing quality of the Grail does not appear in the
earliest versions of the legend — Chrétien’s and Robert’s. It is
a later development, being found first in Pseudo-Wauchier (lL.
20114ff.), and the very fact that a poet did attach to the vessel


*“ So Miss J. L. Weston, Quest of the Holy Grail, p. 70.


15 Raised by Miss Weston, op. ctt., p. 68.
18*
276 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


this quality, although his predecessors had described it as holy,
tends to prove that the mediaeval romancers did not have the
scruples that some scholars have imputed to them. But the rea-
sons already advanced for rejecting the Celtic theory are, we
believe, sufficient.1¢


** Celtic traces in certain names which we find in the Grail
romances have no force in sustaining the theory of Celtic origins. For
example, in Romania, XXIV, 322, F. Lot calls attention to the place
name, “Chateau de Lis” in the first continuation to Chrétien’s Perceval.
Tis, as he points out, is Ulys, the Welsh word for “castle.” But the
writer is here probably adopting Lis as a place-name from Chrétien's
Perceval, where we have a character named “Meliant de Liz (or
Tis)” We have considered Chrétien’s relation to supposed Celtic
sources above. There is no doubt that in any event he would try
to give a Celtic coloring to whatever romance he might write.


C6 ogle


Chapter III.


The Ritual Theory.


The third theory of the origin of the Grail legend is one
which was suggested by Simrock as far back as 1842 in the notes
to his translation of Wolfram von Eschenbach! — namely, that
the conception of the Grail sprang from the ritual of some cult
of the Vegetation Spirit, or ‘‘the slain God”, as he is called very
often in the history of religion, as typified, for example, in Adonis
and Osiris.? This particular theory, however, has only assumed
importance in the last ten years or so through the publication
of W. A. Nitze’s “The Fisher ‘King in the Grail Romances’’,? and


* For a convenient summary of Simrock’s views, cp. Nutt’s Studies
on the Legend of the Holy Grail, pp. 100f.

* It lies, also, at the bottom of E. Martin’s identification of the
sick Grail King with the wounded Arthur, Zur Gralsage, pp. 31ff.
(Strassburg, 1880), and in his edition of Wolfram, pp. LVIIIff.; for he
interprets (p. 32) the wounded Arthur, who is borne to Avalon, but
is destined to return healed, as a representative of the Vegetation God.
The best refutation, I may add, of Martin’s identification is the fact
that we find Arthur in all the romances in which the Grail King
appears, except Robert’s Joseph, and yet the two are never identified.
In the Joseph, the action of which, besides, does not lie in Britain,
sickness or lameness is not an attribute of the Grail King. We have,
of course, stories (some of which are cited by Martin) in which Arthur
is pictured as living in fairy-land style (especially in mountains) and
as subsisting, presumably, in a miraculous manner, and in these respects
there are points of contact between his legend and that of the Grail
King, but these are, obviously, merely general folklore motifs. — For
a criticism of Martin’s theory, cp. Heinzel, pp. 67f. — Cp. with Mar-
tin’s theory the story about the imprisonment of Cronos on an isle
near Britain, which Rhys, pp. 367f, quotes from Plutarch.

* It was published in PMLA., XXIV, 365 ff. (1909).


Go ogle


278 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


Miss J. L. Weston’s Legend of Sir Perceval, Vol. 2 (1909).4
Although these two scholars worked out the theory independently
of each other, their results agree in the most essential respects.
It was obviously under the influence of Frazer's Golden Bough
that both were led to adopt this theory.


First, as regards Professor Nitze, he takes for comparison the
Eleusinian mysteries of Greece which was a Demeter cult — that is,
a cult of the Vegetation Spirit. The Grail procession is, then,
by origin, a vegetation ceremony, and “The Holy Grail, by the
mediaeval romancers often conceived in terms of a quest, is au fond
an initiation, the purpose of which 1s to ensure the life of the
vegetation spirit, always in danger of extinction and to admit the
‘qualified’ mortal into its mystery” (p. 394). Professor Nitze
thinks that, like the Eleusinian, the Grail rites may have been


“ Already in Vol. I (1906) of this work (pp. 329ff.) Miss Weston
had put forward her theory. She developed it more fully in a paper,
“The Grail and the Rites of Adonis,” which she read before the Folk-
Lore Society on December 19, 1906, and which was published in
Folk-Lore, XVII, 283 ff. (Sept. 1907). Vol. II of her Legend of
Sir Perceval, however, contains the completest exposition of her theory,
although the essentials are more clearly presented in her Folk-Lore
paper, just mentioned, and in a more recent book, The Quest of-the
Holy Grail, pp. T5ff. (London, 1913). In her latest Grail treatise,
From Ritual to Romance, (Cambridge, 1920), she tries, still further,
to bring together parallels to each feature of the Grail story from the
records of the pagan mystery cults and to show the intimate union
that once existed between the latter and Christianity. It is charac-
teristic of her method of work, when she declares (p. 5 of the last-
named treatise) that her aim is “to determine the origin, not to dis-
cuss the provenance and interrelation of the different versions.” I do
not believe this latter task can be satisfactorily achieved unless and
until we are of one accord as to the character of the subject matter.
When we have made up our minds as to what the Grail really was,
and what it stood for, we shall be able to analyze the romances; to
decide which of them contains more, which less of the original matter,
and to group them accordingly.” But to approach the texts with
preconceived notions, instead of making them, in due historical order,
as far as that can be ascertained, the primary basis of the whole in-
vestigation is, obviously, the reverse of all sound scientific method.


Go ogle


The Ritual Theory 279


both agrarian and mystic from the start. On this basis, then, he
interprets the three essential figures and the three essential sym-
bols of the Grail theme in the following manner.


I. The Fisher King. He is “an intermediary between the
two planes of exigsence, the present and the hereafter; himself the
symbol of thé creative, fructifying force in nature, specifically
associated with water or ‘moisture’. The representative of the
otherworld, he is also the guide to it, perhaps, as Nutt has sug-
gested, the Dis or Pluto of the Celtic Hades. Hence he is de-
scribed as fishing on the water, as directing the Arthurian knight
to the Grail castle, as officiating as Perceval’s host, as presiding
at the Grail repast, as the person of whom the question must be
asked, as being succeeded by the Grail knight. And his weakness
or infirmity agrees with Nature's declining strength; thus, his
land lies waste or is under the ban of enchantment.”’

II. “The Grail Knight... is the initiate. As such he must
qualify specially and is responsible for the success of the Grail
service, since, if he fails, the crops fail and the springs run dry.
Having succeeded, he is not only énémms in the sense that he
beholds the vision... but he shares in the secrets of the Grail and
becomes the Fisher King’s successor.”


III. The Fisher King’s father or “double’. This charac-
ter, which occurs only in Chrétien and in certain prose romances,
that all derive it directly or indirectly from him,® is, we may re-
mark, about as difficult to explain under one theory as another.
It may be due to some misunderstanding of his source, on Chré-
tien’s part. In any event, it is a “double” and is not fundamental
in the Grail legend, as its omission from so many versions proves.
In Nitze’s view, he stands for the life-god himself, like Adonis


* The Queste adopted it from Chrétien, and from the Queste (mainly)
it passed into the other prose romances. Cp. on the subject my ar-
ticles, “Pelles, Pellinor und Pellean,” MPh., XV, 113ff., 331 ff. (1918)
and “The Composition of the Old French Prose Lancelot,’ RR, IX,
360, including note 72 (1918). Miss Weston, From Ritual to Ro-
mance, pp. 115ff., regards this double as of purely literary . origin
and as having had no place in the original Grail ritual of her theory.
280 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


or Osiris. If we interpret the Grail as of Christian origin, he may
well represent the Holy Spirit.

IV. The Grail is paralleled in the [ Eleusinian ] Mysteries
by the “xiom™ or Holy Box’ [ a ritualistic vessel of which nothing
definite is known, but it seems to have contained bread as a sym-
bol of the life-giving god, p. 388] and “is the receptacle for the
divine food (wafer or blood) by partaking of which the mortal
establishes a blood-bond with the god. Thus the Grail comes
naturally to possess talismanic properties, primarily providing food,
but also preserving from disease and decay, distinguishing the
faithful from the sinners, and even ensuring victory in battle. This
leads by easy stages to its identification in the twelfth century,
through the medium of a holy blood legend, with the relic of Cal-
vary, and thence with the cup of the Last Supper.’’ The avenue
of transmission, Nitze thinks, was possibly Glastonbury (in Eng-
land) or Fécamp (in France). It seems, he observes, that, at
least, in the twelfth century the monks at Féecamp laid claim to
the possession of a Holy Blood relic. The same thing was true
of Glastonbury in the fifteenth century,* but the date is so late
that it affords no justification for Nitze’s assumption.

V. “The Lance... is a symbol like the Sword of Light of
Celtic fairy tales and probably identical in origin with it.” — I
may remark, incidentally, however, that in the tales of which this
sword is a feature the weapon is merely a marvellous one, but no
definite characteristics are given it.’

Nitze concludes, then, that the Grail theme is based on an
agrarian cult with its ritual. But he leaves it an open question
as to what part of the world we should localize this cult in. He
had endeavored to show that the Grail ceremonies have the same
lett-motiv (p. 411) as the ancient mysteries — for instance, the
Eleusinian — but he thinks it possible that the Grail romances
may have derived it from a similar cult among the Celts — con-
nected ultimately, it may be, with the Mediterranean cults. He
even attempts to supply Celtic parallels to some of the essential
characters and objects of the Grail theme — e.g. Manannan mac


" Cp. Heinzel, p. 42.
7 Cp. G. L. Kittredge, Arthur and Gorlagon, pp. 213ff.


C30 ogle


The Ritual Theory 281


Lir, the shape-shifting supernatural being of Irish romance
(p. 397), he compares with the Fisher King, the Lance with one
in the Welsh Mabinogi, Math, Son of Mathonwy, the Sword, as
we have seen, with the Sword of Light. But if our knowledge
of the ancient mysteries and their ritual was meagre, our know-
ledge of any Celtic agrarian cult is simply nil. So the way is
barred to any progress in that direction. |
The objections to Nitze’s theory are plain from what has
already been said. To start with, our information in regard to
the ancient mysteries is too fragmentary and vague to furnish a
basis for any trustworthy conclusion. Moreover, there is a gap
of more than a thousand years between such records as we have
of these mysteries and the appearance of the Grail theme in liter-
ature. Taken together with the indefinite character of such in-
formation as we do possess about them, we see that this leaves
the whole matter hanging in the air. As regards the supposed
origin from Celtic agrarian cults, here we have no basis whatever
for discussion, since data on the subject are completely wanting.®


* The best authority for what is known concerning the details
of the Eleusinian ritual is Paul Foucart’'s Les Mystéres d’Eleusis
(Paris, 1914). The author, however, sums up (pp. 368f.): “Nous
possédons donc peu de renseignements sur les rites et les cerémonies
qui s’accomplissaient dans le télestérion [i.e. place for initiation], et
encore, chacun d’eux, comme on le verra, a donné lieu aux interprétations
les plus diverses; si bien qu’en lisant tout ce qui a été écrit sur les
Mystéres, le lecteur se trouve plongé dans l’obscurité la plus complete.” |
He rejects, pp. 59ff., the interpretation of Greek agrarian cults put
forth by the school of Mannhardt and Frazer.

° In a later Grail article, entitled, “The Sister’s Son and the
Conte del Graal,’’ MPh., IX, 291.ff. (1912), Nitze takes the ground
that “the success of the grail ceremony and the welfare of its two
kings depend on Perceval’s conduct towards his parent” (p. 295), i. e.
his mother. “The fact that he deserted her sealed his lips in the
presence of the grail’ (p. 294). But there is no support for this view
in Chrétien’s text. There (ll. 3166ff.) it is stated explicitly that Per-
ceval did not ask the meaning of the first of the Grail objects —
the bleeding lance — because of Gornemant’s warning (ll. 1624ff.)
that he should not talk too much, and the same thing, of course,
applies to the other objects. If his mother later dies through his sin


(50 ogle


282 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


As has been already remarked, the theory of Miss Weston
is, in the most essential respects, identical with that of Nitze.
As I have intimated above, instead of seeking analogies to the
Grail legend in the Eleusinian mysteries, she seeks them in the
Adonis cult. This ancient cult she supposes to have persisted down
to the twelfth century through the agency of occult sects — such
as we have even at the present day — and thence to have passed
into the Grail romances. The Adonis cult, however, forms an
even less favorable starting-point than the Eleusinian mysteries
for an explanation of the Grail legend; for, if we know little of
the latter, we know even less of the former. The twelfth idyll
of Theocritus and other sources show us, of course, the slain god
stretched out on a bed with women wailing about him, but they
give us no detail of the ritual which should correspond to the
Grail procession. This slain god Miss Weston identifies with the
Maimed King of the Grail Castle. Both, in the euphemistic langu-
age of the respective accounts, have been wounded in the thigh —
i.e. both (according to Miss Weston) have been deprived of their
procreative organs or reproductive powers — and are waiting for
a resurrection. For evidence as to the perpetuation of the cult
of the Vegetation Spirit down even to the present time in the
form of various popular festivals Miss Weston refers the reader
to such works as Mannhardt’s Baum- und Feld-Kultus, and Fra-
zer’s Golden Bough.!© On this theory, the wasting of the land —
in neglecting to ask the question (ll. 3555ff.), this is simply one of
the many misfortunes which his failure to do so brought about. —
Nitze, ibid., thinks that the Grail story came to the French romancers
from the Celts and that the (supposed) mystic bond between Perceval
and his mother in respect to the Grail reflects the spirit of the ma-
triarchal system which he argues (pp. 304ff.) prevailed among the
primitive Celts.

Brugger, Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt. XXXVI*, 18 (1910), lays
stress on the fact that in all the versions of the Grail story, except
Robert’s Joseph (and the Didot-Perceval, dependent thereon), the
Grail-hero is related to the Grail-keeper on the mother’s side. This
fact, however, has no significance, for they are all merely following
Chrétien, directly or indirectly.

© See, especially, her From Ritual to Romance, ch. 5 (Cam-
bridge, 1920), for examples of such survivals drawn from these and
The Ritual Theory 283


which, I may remark, is first found in Pseudo-Wauchier, not in
Chrétien — is connected with the death or infirmity of the King,
because the King represents the Vegetation Spirit. Similarly, the
achievement of the quest, by restoring the King to health, restores
the waste lands to verdure (pp. 80f.). Miss Weston, however,
strains her point to an unreasonable degree, as when she explains
the situation of the Grail castle on the sea-coast or a river from
the fact that the figure representing the Spirit of Vegetation in
popular cults is often thrown into the sea. The Grail itself and
the Bleeding Lance she interprets as phallic symbols, representing
respectively the female and male organs or elements in the act of
generation. These being the most important objects in the Grail
rites, this interpretation constitutes the most important variation of
Miss Weston’s theory from that of Nitze.


The hypothetical ceremonies from which she derives the Grail
legend Miss Weston assumes to have had both a general and an
esoteric meaning. The main body of worshippers would “regard
the whole celebration simply as a means of securing fruitfulness”
(Quest, p. 85), but for the “elect who desired to penetrate beneath
the outer symbolism of the ritual to its inner and hidden meaning
the Grail, the Source and Food of Life’? assumed a different
form. “The aspirant would first be initiated into the mystery of
the origin of physical life” (p. 88). At this stage the Grail would
be merely a food-supplying dish. Then there would be two esoteric
stages of initiation to pass as a symbol of the female element in the
generation of life. Secondly (and lastly) he would be initiated
into “the higher Secret of the Mysteries, that of regeneration and
spiritual life’ (p. 90). The experience here must “pass on a
higher, a non-material plane and the source of spiritual life must
be other than a material food-supplying vessel” (p. 91). “The
Grail at this stage is wrought of no material substance.” “ The


similar authorities. Of particular interest are those (pp. 54 ff.) which
illustrate the superstition that the fertility of the land is connected
with the health of the king. We encounter this idea in the Odyssey,
XIX, 109 ff. and it still prevails among fhe African tribe, the Shilluk,
whose capital is Fashoda.


Go ogle


284 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


test here [= at this stage] demanded of the Quester is that he
shall ask concerning the nature and use of this mysterious vessel;
but ... he does not ask.” It would be wearisome to follow out
Miss Weston’s discussion in greater detail. Suffice it to say that
she concludes that “Regarded from the ritual point of view, it
seems clear that the Grail Quest should be viewed primarily as an
initiation story, as a search into the secret and mystery of life;
it is the record of an initiation manqué” (p. 95). Miss Weston
finds a proof of the correctness of her theory in the testimony of
occultists among her friends as to the similarity of the Grail rites
with rites of their sects.11 One may remark on this subject, how-
ever, that scientific accuracy is not likely to be a virtue of the
devotees of occultism, and, in any event, no mere hearsay testi-
mony can be accepted as proof. The way in which Miss Weston
herself misstated (unintentionally, of course) Ferdinand Lot’s opi-
nion concerning her theory that the Didot-Perceval was a prose-
rendering of a hypothetical lost poem by Robert de Boron shows
the danger of accepting such testimony.'?


* Chrétien gives no specific name to Perceval’s mother, and even
the name of Perceval, himself, is not disclosed until 1. 3535. Accor-
dingly, when the hero is first introduced to the reader, the poet merely
calls him (1. 74) “li filz a la veve dame” (“the son of the widow lady”).
Miss Weston, Legend of Sir Perceval, Il, 306f. sees in this simple
descriptive appellation — the simplest conceivable — a deep mystical
meaning. Having consulted an occultist friend, she writes: “Sons of
the Widow is a very wide-spread synonym for Initiates. The Grail
story was, a8 we have seen, an initiation story.” But if Chrétien (as
is not infrequently done in folk-tales and romances) chooses to hold
back for the present the hero’s name — doubtless, to pique the reader’s
curiosity — what other designation could he use?

** In From Ritual to Romance ch. 11, Miss Weston lays much
stress on a Naassene (Gnostic) document of the second century as
proving her theory concerning the ritual origin of the Grail legend.
We have here, it seems, an originally pagan ritual that has absorbed
Christian elements. But, in this case, again we are dealing with a
matter that antedates our earliest Grail text by a thousand years and
is consequently too remote for any direct bearing on the problem of
Grail origins. Besides, there is no similarity between the Naassenc
document and the descriptions of the Grail procession in our texts.


Go ogle


The Ritual Theory 285


Miss Weston is very positive that Gawain (and not Perceval)
was “the original progatonist of the Quest in its primitive, pre-
Christian form” (pp. 118f.). But she is alone in holding this
opinion and there is no evidence whatever to support it. She is
led to it by her assumption that the earliest form of the Grail
story, ‘‘so far as the subject-matter is concerned is... that em-
bodied by Wauchier de Denain in his continuation of [ Chrétien’s |
Perceval” (p. 31). Wauchier (quoted Legend of Sir Perceval,
I, 288), in an episode which has no connection with the Grail,
cites as his authority a certain Bleheris, a native of Wales, who
related the story to the Count of Poitiers.1* The appeal might


** Only one MS., Add. 36614 (British Museum) contains the name,
Bleheris. Miss Weston printed it first in her article, “Wauchier de
Denain and Bleheris (Bledhericus),”’ Romania, XXXIV (1905), 100ff,
giving, at the same time, the readings of the other MSS. in a note.
The passage runs thas:

Deviser vos voel sa faiture,

Si com le conte Bleheris

Qui fu nes e engenuis

En Gales dont je cont le conte,

Et qui si le contoit au conte

De Poitiers qui amoit l’estoire

Et le tenoit en grant memoire

Plus que nul autre ne faisoit.
The reading of Add. 36614, just reproduced, is clearer than the readings
of the other MSS., but it is possible that this may be the result of
an emendation on the part of a scribe who remembered the appeal
made in Pseudo-Wauchier, ]. 19434, to Bleheris (Bleobleheris). In
any event, that appeal is probably the source of the present one.
I shall have occasion to return to the subject in trying to establish
the separate existence of Pseudo-Wauchier in a note below.

Brugger, Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt., XXX1I* (1907), pp. 151,
XXXVI* (1910), 187, I believe, is the only scholar, besides Miss
Weston, who has accepted this Bleheris as a real person. On the
other hand, ibid., pp. 136ff., he rejects as a hoax the appeal to a
conte, written at Fécamp, which Miss Weston, I, 155, has also
unearthed in the MSS. of Wauchier. There is really, however,
nothing to choose between the two appeals. He identifies, (p. 158)
the Count of Poitiers here spoken of with the count who was after-
wards Henry II of England, and dates the composition of Bleheris’
supposed poem in the years 1151—1154. Miss Weston (pp. 291 ff.)
286 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


be a genuine one and still prove nothing in regard to the origin
of the Grail legend, for it occurs in an episode that is not connect-
ed with the Grail and relates to a minor character of the poem —
viz. the Little Knight who guards the magic shield won by Gawain.
As a matter of fact, it is, in all probability, merely one of the
customary fabrications of the mediaeval poets, and Wauchier was
here no doubt imitating the equally valueless appeal at the be-
ginning of Thomas’ Tristan to an authority whose name, Bréri,
is a variant of this name. So Wauchier’s appeal, even in regard
to this matter, is, in the opinion of most scholars (see Bédier, Lot,
Loth, Smirnov, etc.), a mere hoax, and he had no access to any
early independent source for the Grail theme. He was continuing
Chrétien’s unfinished work and his version of the story was, no
doubt, the product of his own invention. The term, “invention’’,
does not exclude, of course, the application to the Grail theme of
motiys drawn from folk-tales and romances which stood outside
of that cycle.


Miss Weston thinks that the first step towards the Christiani-
zation of the originally pagan theme was the identification of the


had identified him with a Bishop of Llandaff, who filled that office
983—1023. Assuming that Wauchier’s Bleheris was a real person,
Brugger’s dating would be preferable, but, for my own part, I regard
him as a myth. — Since the publication of Miss Weston’s and Brugger’s
discussions of the subject, Edward Owen has proposed still another
Bledri for identification with Wauchier’s Bleheris, viz. Bledri ap Cadivor,
a Welsh chieftain of the early twelfth century, who seems to have
been favorable to the Normans in Wales. Cp. “A note on the iden-
tification of Bleheris,” Revue Celtique, XXXII, 5ff. (1911). In her
brief comment at the end of her article, p. 16, Miss Weston says that
the arguments are not decisive. Jbid. XXXIII, 180ff. (1912), in his
“Bledhericus, Bleddri, Breri,’ W. J. Gruffyd upholds the same thesis
as Owen. — It is to be observed that the name bleri occurs also,
in Cornwall: J. Loth cites, Annales de Bretagne, XI, 480, from
Domesday Book a place named 7're-Blert.

Among scholars who have expressed disbelief in the reality of
Bleheris, cp. J. Bédier, edition of Tristan poems, II, 98, J. Loth,
Les Mabinogion’, I, 74f., F. Lot, Bibliothéque de Ecole des Chartes,
LXX, 572, A. Smirnov, Romania, XLII, 126.


(50 ogle


The Ritual Theory — 287


lance of the Grail ritual with the lance of Longinus, and that the
next was the connection of the Grail as a feeding-vessel with
Christian tradition through the personality of Joseph of Arimathea
(p. 117). She believes that this connection was effected at Glaston-
bury, where, according to her theory, Joseph was accepted in tra-
dition as Apostle of Britain and presumably a founder of Glaston-
bury. Here then the Grail was first definitely associated with
Joseph. But the effort to connect Joseph with a relic of the
Sacred Blood was inspired, she thinks, by the example of the abbey
of Fecamp in Northern France, where a similar relic was associated
with Nicodemus, whose apocryphal gospel was the principal source
for the legend of Joseph. We have in all this, however, a mere
deluge of hypotheses. As we have seen, there is no reason to be-
lieve that Joseph was ever connected with Glastonbury until after
1191. When the notion was first originated about the presence
of a Sacred Blood relic at Fecamp* is not known, and there is
no proof whatever that the French monastery had any influence
on the English one — and so with the rest of it.

* Brugger, Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt., XXXI*, 135 ff. (1907), rejects
Miss Weston’s theory of the connection of Fécamp with the develop-
ment of the Grail legend and commends Heinzel who mentioned the
Fécamp blood-relic in commenting on a passage in Wolfram which
Miss Weston (p. 162) misuses, (Uber Wolfram von Eschenbach’s
Parzival, p. 14, and Uber die franzésischen Gralromane, p. 40),
but did not draw the conclusion from its existence that Miss Weston
does. The mediaeval documents concerning the blood-relic at Fécamp
do not allude to such a connection, and the general resemblance between
the Grail (which by this time was conceived of as a blood-relic) and
this blood-relic at Fécamp was sufficient, Brugger thinks, to suggest
to Wauchier an appeal to an imaginary book at Fécamp as the source
of his Grail romance. This appeal, on which Miss Weston’s whole
theory is based, is found in two lines, which are not in the Mons
MS., and, consequently, not in Potvin’s edition of the Conte del Graal,
but which occur in four MSS. and with a manifest error (T'rescamp
for Fescamp) in a fifth. They are given as follows in Miss Weston’s
Legend of Sir Perceval, I, 155:

si com le conte nus affiche
qui a Fescans est tos escris.

The allusion here to Fécamp, though it does not appear in four of
the MSS., is probably genuine. In the two lines the author is appealing


Go ogle


288 Evoluteon of Arthurian Romance


Apart from the points specifically touched on already, one
may say in general that Miss Weston’s theory is open to the same
objections as Professor Nitze’s and to some additional ones, be-
sides. The gap in the historical tradition between the latest re-
cords of the Adonis rites and the first Grail romances is, of course,
virtually the same as the gap between the latest records of the
Kleusinian mysteries and these same romances. Moreover, stu-
dents of the Holy Grail do not know what are the rites of the occult
sects of our own day, much less those of the Middle Ages, if
such practices did, indeed, persist through that period, so that
it is impossible to control the theory. The interpretation of the
lance and Grail as phallic symbols seems especially fantastic. Al-


to the conte composed at Fécamp as his authority for thé story of
Perceval’s adventure at Mont Dolerous, ll. 33 900ff.

Miss Weston (p. 156) imagines that this conte was a real book
— “a fully developed Christian-Grail romance’. For my own part,
I have no doubt that Brugger is right in regarding the conte as
imaginary and on a par with the other mediaeval hoaxes of this kind
that he cites; but, even if it were genuine, the lines would not justify
Miss Weston’s large inference, for the Mont Dolerous adventure has
nothing to do with the Grail, except that the hero is Perceval, and
the appeal is made with reference merely to this adventure, not to
Wauchier’s poem, as a whole. It was suggested, doubtless, by the
fact that, through the confraternity of jongleurs there, Fécamp was
actually a centre for the production of contes. See Miss Weston,
p. 167, and especially, J. Bédier, Romanic Review, I, 122 ff. In this
article (pp. 113ff.), “Richard de Normandie dans les Chansons de
Geste’’, Bédier has shown how the jongleurs at Fécamp were respon-
sible for the part played by Richard in the Old French epic.

In connecting the Fécamp blood-relic with the Grail, Miss Weston
had been anticipated by Le Roux de Lincy, Essai sur l’abbaye de
Fécamp, 137. (Rouen, 1840) and, secondarily, by G. A. Heinrich, Le
Parceval de W. d’Eschenbach et la Legende du Saint Graal, 77ff.
(Paris, 1855). Blood-relics (vials that are supposed to contain the
blood of Christ) are very numerous in Europe. Cp. Hertz: Parzival,
p. 454, and Wechssler, Sage vom Gral, pp.115f. Heinzel, p. 48,
names a number of books on the subject of such relics.

For an argument against Miss Weston’s Fécamp theory, cp. also
F. Lot, Bibliotheque de Ecole des Chartes, LXX, 572f. (including
note 1 on p. 573).


Go ogle


The Ritual Theory 289


together, of the two kindred theories, Nitze’s appears the more
acceptable, although in the opinion of the present writer, even
this does not get beyond the realm of ingenious conjecture.

Such similarities as may exist between the Grail rites and
those of the agrarian cults of the ancients do not conflict, after
all, with the theory that the former were made up of Christian
elements — for the rites of the Christian church itself, as is
well-known, developed under the influence of the old pagan mys-
teries,!5 just as the leading Christian festivals are definitely trace-
able to festivals of the old pagan religions. This is true, for in-
stance, of Christmas, Easter and the Feast of the Assumption of
the Virgin. Accordingly features of the Grail theme which offer
analogies to these agrarian cults are found also in Christian legend,
which derived them no doubt from those cults. For instance, just
as vegetation dies with Adonis, so in some Christian legends it
is said to have died as the result of the death of our Lord. Simil-
arly the lance of Longinus in Christian legend is not only a
symbol of peace, but, like the lance of the Grail romances, a symbol
of destruction.1¢ Altogether, however, where we have such features
common to Christian legend and the ancient cults, it is much more
likely that the Grail romances derived them from the former than
from any supposed underground perpetuation of the latter. Cer-
tainly, as regards theGrai] procession, the procession of talismans,
we can find parallels to all of these in Christian ritual,!’ whereas -
we really know nothing definite about the objects that figured
in the rites of the agrarian divinities of antiquity. So Christian
ritual is far more likely to have been the immediate source.


** Miss Peebles, pp. 200f. rightly stresses this fact. Nitze,
PMLA, XXIV, 372, note 1, and Brugger, Zs. f. fre. Spr. u. Litt.,
XXXVI", 69, recognize it, but do not give it, I believe, its due weight
in its bearing on the eucharistic origin of the Grail legend.

*® Cp. Miss Peebles, p. 192 and note.

“" Cp. Heinzel, pp. 7ff. |


Hefperia, Ergdngungsreihe: 8. 19


GO ogle


Chapter IV.
Continuations of Chrétien.


Chrétien’s unfimished Perceval was carried on by later
poets, and these continuations! combined are about five times as
long as the original poem. The poets who are responsible for
the continuations are as follows. 1. An anonymous writer,
usually called in discussions of these matters Pseudo-Gautier or
Pseudo-Wauchier. His work which relates Gawain’s adventures ex-
tends through |. 21916. 2. Wauchier de Denain? (to employ


* For a study of the MSS. of the continuations see Hugo Waitz,
Die Fortsetzungen von Chrétien’s Perceval le Gallois nach den
Pariser Handschriften (Strabburg, 1890), and J. L. Weston, Legend
of Sir Perceval, Il. 27ff. et passim, (London, 1906). The MSS.
vary considerably. For differences of view between Waitz and Miss
Weston as to the priority of the redactions see the latter, pp. 47f.

* His work was formerly cited generally under the name of
Gaucher de Dourdan or Gautier de Doulens, but P. Meyer, Romania,
. XXXII, 583 ff. (1903), has established Wauchier de Denain as the
correct form. For MS. variants of the name see Potvin’s Perceval
le Gallois, V, 109, note 2, Birch-Hirschfeld, pp. 88f., and P. Meyer,
loc. cit., p. 585. For Wauchier’s literary activities see P. Meyer,
Histoire Littéraire de la France, XXXII, 258ff. (1906).

Birch - Hirschfeld, pp. 89ff., and Miss Weston, Legend of Sir
Perceval, II, 235 et passim, regard the first continuation of Chrétien,
which I have ascribed above to Pseudo-Wauchier, as really by Wauchier.
Miss Weston excepts apparently (cp. p. 214, note) ll. 10602—11596
(Chastel Merveilleus episode), as the work of “the copyists’. It seems
to me more likely, however, that Wauchier’s work only begins with
the narrative of Perceval’s adventures — that is to say, with 1]. 21917.
This view has been held by G. Paris, Histoire Littéraire de la France,
XXX, 27, and Manuel, p. 98, Nutt, pp. 70ff., Schorbach, edition of
Wisse-Colin’s Low German fourteenth century version of the Perceval.
(Strassburg, 1888), pp. XXXV, XXXVIIIf., W. Golther, Zs. f. ver-


GO ogle


Contenuations of Chrétien 291


the form of the name which is now common), who continues it
through |. 34934. He appears to have been at one time in the


gleichende Lntteraturgeschichte, Neue Folge, Il, 419 (1890), R.
Heinzel, Uber die franzdsischen Gralromane, p. 58 (good summary
of the argument therefor) and A. Jeanroy, Revue des Langues Romanes,
L, 542, note (1907). It is borne out by the Berne MS., which, after
an introduction of 13 lines, begins at this point. See A. Rochat:
Uber einen bisher unbekannten Percheval li Galois (Zirich, 1855).
Interpolations, too, are much more frequent in Pseudo-Wauchier. Besides
those printed as such by Potvin in appendices, II, 369ff. and IV,
343ff., the description of the tournament, ll. 13481—14943 (not in
the Mons MS.), which is one of the feeblest things in Arthurian
romance, certainly belongs in this category. It is to be observed,
moreover, that Wauchier and Pseudo-Wauchier conflict in their con-
ceptions of the Grail castle, and scarcely harmonize in their use of
the Bel Inconnu tale. Cp. particularly 20380ff. and 38 401 ff., respective-
ly, where Wauchier takes no account of what Pseudo-Wauchier had
said of this son of Gawain. G. Paris, Manuel, p. 105, believed, indeed,
that Wauchier was unacquainted with Pseudo-Wauchier’s work. But
this is refuted by the undeniable dependence of the account, ll. 33440ff.
which Gawain gives to his son, Guinglain, of his visit to the Grail
Castle (including the circumstances that led up to it) on the account
(ll. 19664 ff.) of the same episode in Pseudo-Wauchier. Cp. Heinzel,
pp. 52f.

The only reasons which Miss Weston gives, I, 235, for discarding
Pseudo-Wauchier are: 1. that the Gawain adventures in the two parts
are of the same kind; 2. both refer to the same authority (Bleheris).
The first statement, however, is not quite exact, for in Wauchier we
have no adventure imputed to Gawain like the visit of this character
to the Grail castle in Pseudo-Wauchier, ll. 19991 ff., and, in general,
the adventures in the Arthurian romances are so much alike in kind
that obviously the similarity would afford no criterion of authorship.
The second point has been found convincing by Brugger, Zs. f. frz.
Spr. u. Litt., XXXI*, 141. But granting that the citation of “Bleheris”
as an authority (instead of the corresponding “li escris’” of the Mons
MS., printed by Potvin, 1. 31675), which occurs only in the British
Museum Add. 36, 614 (for the readings of this and the other MSS.
cp. Miss Weston in Romania, XXXIV, 100f.), is really due to Wauchier,
and is not simply a scribe’s emendation of a passage that had become
corrupt in the MS. tradition, it may have been very well suggested
to him by Pseudo-Wauchier’s citation of this same authority in |. 19434,
where the Mons MS. (printed by Potvin, III, 344) has “Brandelis”’,


19*


C30 ogle


292 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


service of the Countess Jeanne of Flanders, who ruled from 1206
to 1244, but the composition of his part of the Conte del Graal
probably falls in the twelfth century. Wauchier’s work was itself
continued by two different writers, who each take up the narra-
tive at the point where he left off. These writers are named respec-
tively Manessier (Manecier) and Gerbert. 3. Manessier, who wrote
at the command of the Countess Jeanne of Flanders, mentioned
above, carries it on to l. 45379. 4. Gerbert, who seems identical
with Gerbert de Montreuil, author of the Roman de la Violette,’
inserts 15,000 ‘lines between Wauchier and Manessier. To this
day, Gerbert’s intercalation has been printed only in part, viz.
Potvin, VI, 161ff. and Romania, XXXV, 501ff. (the episode
which Bédier calls Tristan Ménestrel).

As regards the dates of these continuators, we have no precise
evidence on the subject. We know that Wauchier was writing


but the other MSS. have “Bleheris” or “Bleobleheris”, as Miss Weston
(I, 241, including note) has pointed out. From what has just been
observed in the preceding paragraph, it is established beyond question
that Wauchier was acquainted with Pseudo-Wauchier’s work.

* The identity, first suggested by Francisque Michel, in his edition
of the Tristan poems, I, p. civ, note 75, has been generally accepted
since. Cp. Birch-Hirschfeld, Die Sage vom Graal, pp. 110ff., G. Paris,
Manuel, p. 106, Kraus, Uber Girbert de Montreuil und seine Werke
(Wiirzburg diss., Erlangen, 1897), Maurice Wilmotte, in the proceedings
of the Académie Royale de Belgique for 1900: Bulletin de la Classe
des Lettres, etc., pp. 166—189. The last-named is much the most
important discussion of the subject. Wilmotte lays particular stress
on the abundance of leonine rhymes which distinguish the two among
the poems of the time, and decides that there are “de sérieuses pro-
babilités’’ in favor of the identity.

The Roman de la Violette is based on the same motif as
Shakespeare’s Cymbeline — the foolish wager about a woman's chastity
that has such serious consequences.


“The most careful examination of the question is by E. Brugger,
Zs. f. fre. Spr. u. Litt., XXXVI", 45ff. (1910). Brugger, however,
takes no account of Wilmotte’s paper on Gerbert which I have cited
in the previous note. In this paper the author has pointed out that
in the “lutte de Tristan’’ episode (Tristan prevails in succession over
Gifflet, Lancelot, Yvain and Gawain), which occupies about 1500


Go ogle


Continuations of Chrétien 293


at some time between 1190 and 1212 (limits of the rule of Phi-
lip, Marquis of Namur, for whom he executed a translation of the.
Vitae Patrum), how much earlier or how much later there is no
means of determining. It is most probable, however, that his ad-
dition to Chretien’s Perceval belongs to the latter years of the


lines in Gerbert’s continuation, though it hardly figures at all in Pot-
vin’s analysis, Gerbert had in mind the prose Tristan. There is no
reason to believe that that work was in existence before 1220, at the
earliest, so that this would give us a new terminus a quo for Ger-
bert’s addition to Chrétien’s poem. |

In Romania, XXXV, 497ff. (1906) Bédier has edited this “lutte
de Tristan” episode and Miss Weston has added notes. She regards
it as an interpolation embodying lost materials: 1. a Perceval poem,
2. a short episodic Tristan poem. The names, however, in the episode
betray the lateness of its composition: “Meraugis” from Meraugis de
Portlesguez, “Roi des C. Chevaliers” and “Claudas de la Deserte”
from the prose Lancelot. So too probably “Bruns sans Pitie” is taken
from the prose Lancelot.” Besides, Tristan, as a conventional knight,
derives plainly from the prose 7'ristan (cp. Liseth, pp. 256f.). not
from any old tradition. — Golther, Tristan und Isolde, p. 226ff. is
inclined to accept the existence of no. 2.

Gerbert states, Potvin, VI, 212f. that he has taken up the work
(i. e. of continuing Chrétien’s Perceval), “Quant chascuns trovere le
laisse.” Brugger, loc. cit., p. 52, interprets this as implying that he
did not know of Manessier’s continuation, and, consequently, that he
wrote contemporaneously with the latter or immediately thereafter.
This interpretation, to be sure, is not necessary, and the fact over-
looked by Brugger that Gerbert wrote after the prose Zristan tells
against his conclusion. G. Paris, Histoire Littéraire de la France,
XXX, 42, believes that Gerbert is unacquainted with Manessier. Heinzel,
on the other hand, pp. 75f., has argued that Gerbert knew all the
continuations of Chrétien’s Perceval. All the points of distinctive
agreement between Gerbert and Manessier which he cites (p. 76) are
unsatisfactory. The first of the three, indeed, is cited by Heinzel
through an error, for the passage (ll. 29682 ff.) really occurs in Wauchier,
not Manessier. It concerns the adventure of a knight inatomb. The
second (the breaking of Perceval’s sword) is too commonplace to
possess any weight, and the third (temptation of Perceval by a devil
in woman’s shape) may very well have been borrowed by Gerbert
from the Grand S. Graal. On the whole, there is no proof that
Gerbert knew Manessier.


GO ogle


294 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


twelfth century. The limits of Manessier’s date are 1211—1244,
with the probabilities in favor of the first half of this period. Ger-
bert’s work should, doubtless, be, also, assigned to this period.

In discussions of the origins of the Grail legend, the greatest
mischief, in the judgment of the present writer, has resulted from
the use of these continuations, as if they were original authorities
that drew directly from Chretien’s source, independently of him,
or perhaps from sources that he did not know. This has been the
fault even of some advocates of the theory of Christian origins
(e.g. Heinzel), but still more of the opponents of that theory. Miss
Weston, indeed, takes Wauchier as the best authority on the sub-
ject of the Grail. She believes that he, too, had access to the lévre
that Count Philip gave to Chrétien, only she thinks that Wauchier
preserves better the character of the book in question than Chrétien
did.6 But we have seen that she also believes in Breri, who is,
in all probability, merely one of the innumerable hoaxes of the
writers of the Middle Ages, when a bold citation of authority
was sufficient to quell all doubters, save perhaps a few invincible
skeptics. As a matter of fact, one may safely affirm that Wauchier
knew nothing of the Grail, except what he found in Chrétien’s
fragmentary poem, and Manessier and Gerbert were in the same
case* — only they had Wauchier’s and Pseudo-Wauchier’s con-
tinuations, besides, to furnish suggestions to their imaginations.

As regards the contents of these continuations, Wauchier’s
work, like Chrétien’s, offers us in alternation adventures of Perceval
and adventures of Gawain. But the adventures of the latter here,
besides being of the most commonplace character, make up not
quite a fourth of the whole, and they are subordinated to the ad-
ventures of the former, as they are not in Chrétien’s Perceval,
for in Wauchier they are all incidents in a quest of Gawain for
Perceval. On the other hand, the continuation of Pseudo-Wauchier

° Cp. her Legend of Sir Perceval, 1, 323ff.

* This accords, of course, with Golther’s opinion. Cp. especially,
p. 420 of his article, “Beziehungen zwischen franzésischer und keltischer
Litteratur im Mittelalter”, Zs. f. vergleichende Litteraturgeschichte.


Neue Folge, III, 409ff. (1890). Similarly, Foerster, Chrétien Wérter-
buch, p. 185* (1914).
Continuations of Chrétien 295


relates wholly to adventures of Gawain, including one at the Grail
castle. The poet, however, makes it plain that Gawain is not the
destined Grail Winner, for he cannot put together the pieces of
the broken sword, and, besides omitting to ask about the Grail, he
falls asleep before he has received an explanation of any of the
other objects, save the lance.

In order to introduce the Grail episode into his narrative, the
author has used an incident in Chrétien’s Perceval (ll. 4380£f. )
which in that poem had had no connection with it — viz. the
one in which Gawain by his courtesy brings Perceval to Arthur,
after the latter (Perceval) had unhorsed Kay for rudely inter-
rupting him in his revery about his lady-love. In Pseudo-Wauchier
the unnamed knight who is brought back to Guinevere turns out
to be mortally wounded with a dart and dies as he reaches the
queen’s tent. Equipped in the dead man’s armor, Gawain goes
forth to avenge him on the unknown slayer and in the course
of his wanderings stumbles by chance on the Grail castle’ to
which the slain knight, it. seems, belonged. Despite some clumsiness
and inconsistency in detail, the air of mystery and the suggestion
of the supernatural are well maintained throughout the whole epi-
sode, — as, for example, in the incident of the forest chapel upon
which Gawain comes in the depths of the night and whose brilliant
lights he sees extinguished by a bodiless black hand and in that
of the elusive light which finally guides his horse through the
darkness to the Grail castle. So, too, with the scenes in the hall
of the Grail castle — the people’s mistaking Gawain for the slain
knight whose return they are expecting and whose armor Gawain
has on, the procession of the canons and their service over the
mysterious dead man, whose bier lies in the hall, with the cross


* The castle is out in the sea and is reached by a long causeway,
which it took Gawain from nightfall to midnight to traverse. Conse-
quently Brown observes, Kittredge Anniversary Papers, p. 247, that
“the castle of the Grail was, in a more original form of the story, an
under - wave-abode”. But this is, surely, a far-fetched inference.
Mediaeval castles were often thus situated, for better protection, and,
as far as the length of the causeway is concerned, the whole conception
of the Grail castle belongs, of course, to fairy-land.
296 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


and the fragment of a sword on the body, the moments that
follow, when Gawain, with his face in his hands, sits alone in the
hall, with the corpse — then, the return of the throng, with the
Grail King, who wears a crown of gold and who, unlike Chrétien’s
Grail King, is able to walk. The poet has undoubtedly caught
here the spirit of a folk-tale more distinctively than Chrétien in
his corresponding description, only in the legitimate endeavor to
gain the effect of mystery he commits some blumders and leaves
the narrative in certain particulars unnecessarily obscure. But
these obscurities are, no doubt, due mainly to the fact that, like
Chrétien and Wauchier, Pseudo-Wauchier did not finish his tale.
Just as in the episode which follows upon this one and which
is strikingly similar to it in the central motif — the unknown
dead man who lies on a bier in the hall with a broken weapon (the
truncheon of the spear still in his body) and whose death calls
for vengeance — he wraps the initial scene in the utmost mystery.
He does, however, complete this later episode, and so what at
first seemed to be an impenetrable mystery is in the end satisfactor-
ily cleared up. We should, doubtless, have had the same result.
in the case of the earlier episode, if the author had not left it un-
finished. Perhaps the most fateful mnovation which marks this
description of the Grail castle in Pseudo-Wauchier is the con-
ception of the broken sword. In Chrétien (ll. 3092ff.), when
Perceval visited the Grail castle, the Grail King (Fisher King)
presented him with the espee as estranges renges (1. 4674) which
had been given him by his niece, la sore pucele (1. 3107). It was
there said that this sword would break in only one peril, and
nobody knew what that was, save the person who forged the weap-
on. Later (ll. 3622ff.) Perceval’s cousin warns him that the
sword will fly in pieces when Perceval enters a combat, but that
the smith who forged it (Trebuchet) can mend it again. Manifestly


* For the MS. readings of the passages in question cp. Miss
Weston, Legend of Sir Perceval, I, 133ff. The interpolations, found
in certain MSS., which she discusses, pp. 137ff., have no importance.
They originated, obviously, in efforts on the part of the scribes to
harmonize Chrétien and Pseudo-Wauchier.


Go ogle


Continuations of Chrétien 297


Chrétien was preparing the way here for an intended episode in his
Perceval which he never reached. Pseudo-Wauchier, however,
adopted the hint and exploited this sword of the Grail castle for
his own narrative.? Half of it lay on the corpse in the hall, the
other half of it had been in the possession of the knight who was
killed so mysteriously near the queen’s tent and whose death Ga-
wain had set forth to avenge. Gawain had carried it to the Grail
castle, it would seem, as a part of the dead knight’s equipment,
which he was wearing, and when he laid aside this equipment
on his arrival there, the lord of the Grail castle took the sword
and brought it in for the test of Gawain’s fitness to undo the spell
which rested on the land of the Grail. This conception of the broken
sword, as thus developed by Pseudo-Wauchier, had a great success,
and with various modifications of setting, etc. turns up im all
subsequent romances of the Grail cycle, and in the other con-
tinuations of Chrétien eclipses the question concerning the Grail
in importance.

Not so successful, however, were certain other innovations of
this writer — for example, his discardal of the Grail procession and
of the epithets of the lord of the Grail castle, ‘Fisher King”’ and
‘Rich Fisher’. The imposing procession and these romantic titles
of the Grail lord proved, naturally, too attractive to later roman-
cers. In Pseudo+Wauchier we have Chreétien’s feast in the hall
of the Grail castle (ll. 3237ff.), but without his procession. On
the other hand, the author has the unlucky idea of making the
Grail supply the food and wine at this banquet.!° So the table


* There is no need of resorting to the constantly recurring theory
of lost sources here. The mediaeval romancers did not feel the awe
of the Grail that some modern scholars seem to feel. The author of
Sone de Nausay (late thirteenth century) added (ll. 17065ff.) to the
Grail relics a piece of the true cross and a candlestick which had
done duty at the birth of Christ. What this writer did, a writer of
a somewhat earlier time surely would not have shrunk from doing.

*° The idea that the Grail possessed the magical quality of
supplying unending sustenance is met with first in Pseudo-Wauchier.
In Robert's Joseph the conception is somewhat different. There Joseph
of Arimathea lives for years in prison without food or drink, and, at
298 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


is set in regular fashion, and yet the Grail, in some unexplained
manner, furnishes the courses. Nothing could be more awkward.
The author wanted to vary the scene in the Grail castle, but he
fails to give the marvellous vessel any organic connection with
the incidents that surround it. The way in which he disposes of


the same time, he has the Grail with him, but Robert does not ascribe
his hero’s preservation to any sustenance furnished by this sacred vessel.
It is merely said that that was due to the help of God (ll. 731 ff.)
or Jesus (ll. 2620ff.). Furthermore, in the passage about the Grail
table, it is really the fish, caught by Bron (cp. ll. 2495ff.), which
(as in the Bible account of Christ’ smiracle of the loaves and fishes)
supplies miraculous subsistence to the people. The Grail is present,
so to speak, merely as the representative of Christ, through whom the
miracle is wrought.

The conception of a magical object (table, vessel, or what not)
with food-producing powers is common in folk-lore. For innumerable
examples from every part of the world see Anmerkungen zu den
Kinder- und Hausmdrchen der Briider Grimm, neu bearbeitet von
Johannes Bolte und Georg Polwka, I, 346ff. (Leipzig, 1912).

Pseudo-Wauchier, who was continuing Chrétien’s work, like
Chrétien, of course, identified the Grail with the vessel that contained
the bread of the sacrament, and it is easy to imagine that the sacra-
ment which afforded sustenance to the spirit could also afford miraculous
sustenance to the body. Miss L. A. Fisher has cited an actual example
of this from Caesarius of Heisterbach’s Dialogus Miraculorum,
Distinctio TX, exemplum XLVII (not XLVI, as she gives it), in her
The Mystic Vision in the Grail Legend and the Divine Comedy,
p. 81 (New York, 1917), and investigation would, doubtless, reveal
still other instances. In any event, as Miss Fisher, loc. cit., observes,
the constant connection in Christian literature (beginning with St. John,
VI, 49f.) of the eucharist with the Old Testament manna miracle, and,
still further, with the miracle of the loaves and fishes and with that
of Cana in the New Testament makes this conception of the life-
sustaining power of the sacrament the most natural thing in the world.

Chrétien (ll. 3187ff.) had already attached a fairytale motif to
the Grail — viz. its marvellous luminosity. This is one of the com-
monest qualities of marvellous objects in folk-tales. To be sure, this
quality was sometimes ascribed to the eucharist in mediaeval writers.
Cp. Miss Fisher, pp. 77f. It is ascribed to the Grail, also, by Robert
de Boron, Joseph, ll. 719, 2031f.; but, as stated above, this was
probably suggested by the Gesta Pilati.


Go ogle


Continuations of Chrétien 299


the lance is equally unhappy. Having abandoned the idea of the
procession, he represents the lance as resting in a lance-holder in
the hall and the blood as running down the shaft from the steel
head and through a golden tube, fixed to the handle, into a silver
vessel, whence it flowed still further through a tube of silver -—
into what is not stated. This lance, as the Grail King tells Ga-
wain expressly (ll. 20259ff.), is the one with which the side
of the Son of God was pierced (on the cross). So to the writer
it was a Christian relic, as was, doubtless, the Grail, though in
the author’s fragmentary narrative the latter is left undefined.

New, too, in Pseudo-Wauchier is the conception of the blight-
ed land. In Chrétien there is nothing of this kind. There, to be
sure, Perceval’s failure to ask the question which would have healed
the wound of the lame Grail King will have, also, the effect of
bringing unmeasured calamities upon the realm of the Grail castle
(Il. 4637ff.), but, apart from the fact that these calamities lie
in the future, there is nothing supernatural about them. Here,
however, the land goes to waste under an evil spell, which is
partly undone by Gawain’s question concerning the lance, the sword
and the bier. Accordingly, the following day the waters ran
again, the forests regained their verdure and the people blessed
him, as he passed, for having brought them such relief. At the
same time, they blamed him for not asking concerning the Grail,
which would have completed the restoration of the “roiaume
destruit”’. This conception of the land that becomes a desert under
a spell which a certain question will undo is, of course, derived
from folklore, but it does not appear in Chrétien, and there is no
reason to doubt that, like the revenge motif, it was an original
contribution of Pseudo-Wauchier’s to the development of the Grail
legend.1!


** Nutt regards the revenge motif as already connected in popular
tradition with a Grail-quest. Indeed, in his view (pp. 181ff.), all
stories about the Grail quest fall into two classes, whose essential
motifs are respectively: 1. the avenging of a kinsman in a blood feud
by means of sword, lance and vessel, 2. the bespelled castle mottf.
But two of the Grail stories of the first category, Manessier’s and
Peredur, derive from Pseudo-Wauchier. The third, Sir Percyvelle,


(50 ogle


300 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


There are still other striking episodes in this first continuation
to Chrétien’s Perceval — for example, the one which I have already
mentioned above and which shows contamination with the tale
of the Swan Knight, viz. that of the dead man who was brought
over the sea to Camelot in a ship, drawn by a swan. It is a night
of heat and storm, and Arthur, who is seated by a window, seeing
the strange vessel, goes down and, on entering it, finds there the
dead body of a handsome knight, richly dressed and embalmed,
with a spear still fixed in it. A letter in the dead man’s hand
contains the request that Arthur should permit the body to rest
in his hall and refuse to let any body remove the spear from the
wound for a year, if necessary, unless some one should appear to
avenge the slain man on certain fantastic conditions, that seem
impossible of fulfilment. Kahares (Guerehes), a brother of Ga-
wain, however, achieves the adventure.

Among the most interesting stories in this continuation are those
that are attached to the name of the Celtic hero, Caradoc, and
which constitute the so-called Livre de Caradoc in this division
of the Conte del Graal. There can be little doubt, however, that
this group of stories is interpolated and that it is not by the same
hand as the bulk of the first continuation. The Livre de Caradoc
contains three well known motifs:

1. The arrival of a mysterious stranger with a head-cutting
challenge (as in the Middle English romance Sir Gawain and the
Green ‘Knight) — he will submit to decapitation now, if the
knight who accepts the challenge will submit to the same process
a year hence.

2. A variant of The Faithless Mother folk-tale, involving an
account of how Caradoc was relieved through the devotion of his


probably adopted it from the Bliocadrans-prologue; but this romance
does not connect it with the Grail, for it omits the Grail altogether.
I have discussed the sources of these romances in the appropriate places.
It is misleading when Heinzel, pp. 52, 75, says that Gautier and
Gerbert show this revenge motif. We have such a motif in their
works, but it has no immediate connection with the achievement of
the Grail adventure.


Go ogle


Continuations of Chrétien 301


wife, Guimier, from the affliction of a serpent that had fastened
itself on his arm.!?

3. The chastity test by means of the drinking-horn, which
proves that only Caradoc, of all the knights at Arthur’s court,
could boast of a chaste wife.

These famous mottfs were all ultimately derived from folk-
tales, as, indeed, the folk-tale stamp of its incidents is the dis-
tinguishing characteristic of the Livre de Caradoc.

The continuation of Pseudo-Wauchier cannot claim, of course,
to be a very highly developed work of art, but, if we exclude. ob-
vious interpolations, such as the description of the tourney, Il.
13481ff., what remains is, in my opinion, the most readable of
the French metrical romances of the Arthurian cycle, with the
exception of Chrétien’s works and the Tristan fragments. It 1s
hard to parallel in these romances such a range of power as is
exhibited here, on the one hand, in the vigorous duel of Gawain
and Brandelis!® (ll. 17729ff.), which the sister of the latter ends
by bringing in the child of herself and Gawain and appealing on its
behalf to the compassion of the combatants, on the other, in the
charmmg scene (ll. 19595ff.) where the ladies,!* preparing to
meet Gawain’s ‘‘amie’’, who has just arrived at court, pass judg-
ment on each other’s appearance, before going into her presence.

19 Soe. pp. 89ff., above.

** Brugger, Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt., XXXI*, 144, well charac-
terizes. this as one of the grandest passages in Old French literature.

Adont les veissies pinier

Par cest castel et aplanier

Ces dames et ces damoiseles,

La roinne et les puceles.

L’une faisoit son cief trecier,

Et l'autre son coste lacier;

La tierce dist: “Sour, suis-je bien?”’
‘A vous, fait-ele, ne faut rien;

Et a moi, coment en est pris?”
“Vos iestes bien, ce m’est avis.”
Li quarte si dist d’autre part:
“Damoisele, se Diex vous gart,
Sui-jou ore bien coulouree?’’

“Oil, plus que riens qui soit nee.”


Go ogle


302 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


Wauchier is as thoroughly mundane as Chretien or Pseudo-
Wauchier. He has the same joie de vivre, and his hero’s amours!®
and the occasional ironical comments in his work on sexual mat-
ters!6 are even more licentious in tendency than anything in
Chrétien. Here, as in Pseudo-Wauchier, the Grail occupies really
a very small part in the narrative, but, after a fashion, it gives
unity to the whole, for at the conclusion the hero has at last
reached the Grail castle. Unfortunately, Wauchier’s continuation
breaks off in the middle of this crowning scene. Unlike modern
scholars, however, our poet did not take the Grail quest very
seriously, for he makes his hero turn aside from it on any provo-
cation. Look, for instance, at the absurd complex of adventures,
concerning the magic chessboard, the stag-head and tomb-knight
(il. 22898ff.).17 The girl who owns the magic chessboard will


** Cp. ll. 25017 ff, 30449ff., ete.

** Cp. ll. 28763 ft., 34011 ft., ete.

17 The magic chessboard (self-playing Geamen motif had a great
success and from Wauchier (apparently) it passed into the Didot-Per-
ceval (J. L. Weston’s Legend of Sir Perceval, ll, 31ff.), the Welsh
Peredur (Loth’s Mabinogion’*, II, 114 ff.), the prose Lancelot (Sommer’s
Vulgate Version, etc., V, 151ff. ), the Perlesvaus (Potvin ed. p. 89) and
Dutch Lancelot (ll. 1839 ff). Cp. J. D. Bruce, Romanic Review,
IX, 375f. (1918), where the earlier literature on the subject of the
relations of the different versions is: given.

The second tomb-knight episode in Wauchier (ll. 29680ff.) is
probably nearer to the (as yet, unidentified) folk-tale of which both
episodes are variants. In this second episode Perceval comes upon a
marble tomb under a tree and a knight confined in it. In compliance
with the knight’s petition, Perceval cuts off a limb of the tree and
prizes open the tomb, thereby freeing the knight. No sooner is the
imprisoned man out than he knocks his liberator over into the tomb
and shuts down the lid. He seizes still further Perceval’s mule, but
the animal, being enchanted, will not move, so that the ungrateful
knight finally has to return, liberate Perceval, and resume his old place
in the tomb, the lid of which now falls with such force that it shakes
the earth.

In her Studies in the Fairy Mythology of Arthurian Romance,
p. 223, note 5 (Boston, 1903) Miss Paton includes in a list of supposed
parallels to this story an episode in the Welsh tale, Pwyll, Prince
of Dyved (Loth’s Mabinogion*, I, 99ff.), where Pwyll, following the


(26 ogle


Contenuations of Chrétien 303


not grant Perceval her love, umless he will bring her the head
of the white stag in the park nearby. He takes her hound along
with him, kills the stag, and is cutting it up, when the ill-con-
ditioned owner of the stag, a girl, seizes the hound and will not
give it up, unless Perceval will challenge a knight who lives in
a tomb. The pursuit of the hound leads thus to a variety of ex-
travagant adventures, which end in Perceval’s enjoying the promis-
ed favors of its mistress. It has an almost comic effect that the
hero should be deflected from the quest of the Holy Grail by
such a series of achievements, the object of which, after all, is
the gratification of a merely sensual passion. This hero, in fact,
had made the pursuit of the hound the excuse for what in actual life
would be regarded as an act of much greater moral obliquity —
namely, the abandonment of Blanchefleur, whom, after lying with
her, he had promieed to marry. But Wauchier was no ascetic, and
he was exploiting the story of the Grail by new inventions simply
for the entertainment of his high-born patrons, and, except in
so far as it contributed to that purpose, it had no more interest
for him than the materials of chivalrous and amorous adventure
which make up the greater part of his poem. Although inferior
to the work of his anonymous predecessor, Wauchier’s continuation
contains some happily told episodes — for instance, the story of
Perceval’s return to his old home and the scene of recognition there
with his sister’* — also, his subsequent visit to his hermit uncle.


advicc of the fay, Rhiannon, manages to entrap Gwawl in a sack. The
differences, however, are too great, and I agree with Josef Baudis,
Folk-Lore, XXVIU, 44f. (1916), that there is no connection between
the two stories. He compares with the Wauchier episode a trick in
the Irish Naked Hangman (Eriu, VII, 201) and the tale of The
Three Gifts, in which the hero, imprisoned in the magical bag, is a
devil or Death. “He gets a sound hammering” in the bag. It seems
to me, however, that the true original of Wauchier’s tomb-knight in-
cidents must be some ghost story concerning a haunted tomb, such
as abound in all parts of the world.

® This character, who figures also in the Queste del Saint Graal,
is, no doubt, the invention of Wauchier. Cp. Brugger, Zs. f. frz.
Spi. u. Litt., XXX1*, 126.


Go ogle


304 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


Coming next to Manessier, we have here an even more ram-
bling romance of adventure than in the case of Wauchier’s con-
tinuation, and in a much duller style. Episodes concerning Gawain
and Sagremor, for example, that have nothing to do with the main
action are introduced. Manessier’s work is mainly a compilation
of the mustiest commonplaces of Arthurian romance — knights
vanquishing their adversaries and sending them to Arthur’s court,
etc. The only episodes of any interest are the variant of the Black
Hand episode (ll. 39790ff.) and Perceval’s visits to the Grail
castle (ll. 44591ff.), the first really invented by Pseudo-Wauchier,
as we have seen above, the latter modelled on Wauchier and Chré-
tien. Besides Chrétien, Wauchier and Pseudo-Wauchier, Manes-
sier makes use of the prose romances of the so-called Walter Map
cycle.19

Let us look, however, more closely at the Grail incidents in
Manessier.

In Manessier we have two visits to the Grail castle. The first
is merely a completion of the visit which Wauchier had begun to
describe. Manessier here simply takes up the narrative where Wau-
chier left off. On this visit Perceval asks all the questions which
he had failed to ask on his original visit — with such disastrous
consequences to the land. The Fisher King gives him the most
ample information on each of the points concerned, so that the
real Grail problem would seem to be solved. But it turns out now
that, according to a conception which the writer borrowed from
the prose Grail romances, the Fisher King had received his wound
from the fragments of a sword with which his brother, Goon
Desert, had been slain, and it will never heal until an unknown
knight has slain the murderer (Partinal). So this gives the author
the excuse for several thousand lines of disconnected adventures,
with the usual complement of damsels, hermits, etc. At last, Per-
ceval kills Partinal and returns to the Grail castle with the head
hanging at his saddle-bow. As soon as the king learns of this,
he leaps to his feet and is straightway made whole. There is
a repetition that night of the Grail procession at supper, and after-


*® Cp. Heinzel, p. 73.


Go ogle


Contenuations of Chrétien 305


wards, on Perceval’s disclosing his name to the king, it is dis-
covered that the young knight is his own sister’s son. The king
wishes to hand over his crown at once to his nephew, but the latter
refuses to take it, so long as his uncle is living. Perceval returns
now to Arthur’s court — has, of course, new adventures on the
way — and when he arrives there, Arthur has a record of his
achievements written down and kept in a box at Salisbury. We
have here an imitation of the conclusion of the prose Queste del
Saint Graal, where the story of the deeds of the Quest-knights
is said to have been preserved in the same manner. The Grail
damsel now appears and tells Perceval that his uncle is dead. Perce-
val goes to the Grail castle, accompanied by all the court, who
assist at his crowning and remain with him a month, during
which time the Grail feeds all with the costliest foods. He marries
his cousins, the two Grail-bearers, to two valiant kings and reigns
in peace for seven years, after which time he follows a hermit
into the wilderness, accompanied by Grail, lance, and ‘holy dish.
He serves the Lord for ten years, and, when he dies, Grail, lance
and dish were, doubtless, carried up to heaven, for since that day
no man has seen them.

There is no need of pointing out the numerous differences of
conception in matters of detail which Manessier exhibits as com-
pared with his predecessors;?° for these differences simply mean
that he has chosen to modify or add to the narrative according
to his own pleasure. There is no ground for assuming that he
had access to any sources for the legend of the Grail other than the
romances in verse and prose on this theme that we still possess.?!

The same thing (pace Brugger and Miss Weston) applies to
the last writer of the series, viz. Gerbert.2? He is acquainted with


*° Heinzel, pp. 59ff., has done this for Manessier and, 74ff., for
Gerbert.

*' Nutt, p. 182, is so possessed with the prejudices of a folk-
lorist that he not only believes that Manessier drew from oral Grail
traditions, but thinks that he represents them more closely than Chrétien.

** Miss Weston in her Legend of Sir Perceval, I, 140ff. takes
Gerbert’s account of Perceval’s experience with the sword which he
received at the Grail castle, as evidence that he was using not merely


Hefperia, Erqtingungsrethe: 8. 20
306 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


all the writers who have thus far been discussed and with the
Grail prose-romances as well.?5


Chrétien, but “the source of Chrétien’s sword story, and that source
was an elaborate and well-thought-on poem” (p. 145). But she, herself,
says (p. 144) that this account is “thoroughly consistent with the
indications given by Chrétien’, and her only reason for refusing to
accept it as Gerbert’s own invention is that he does not develop the
episodé of Perceval’s marriage with the same consistency. I need not
point out how purely subjective this reasoning is. Besides, I may
remark that the defects of the marriage episode are due to Gerbert’s
introduction of a didactic, moral, aim into the narrative. That has
often brought better poets than Gerbert to grief. The conception of
the sword, which we have already in Chrétien, may be ultimately
derived from the Wieland saga, as Miss Weston, pp. 149ff., contends,
but that circumstance would have no bearing on the present question.

Brugger, Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt., XXXI*, 130 (1907), says:
“Ich bin auch der Meinung, dass Gerbert ausser Chrétien’s Perceval
mit Fortsetzung noch einen Perceval-Roman gekannt hat. Die Con-
nection Percevals mit dem Schwanritter bei Gerbert und Wolfram be-
weist, dass jener Roman entweder Kiot’s Perceval oder die gemeinsame
Quelle von Chrétien und Kiot (das Buch des Grafen Philipp?) war.”
Later (p. 131) he thinks this romance, used by Gerbert, was probably
Kiot’s (Guiot’s). Somewhat similarly before him, E. Martin in his
edition of Wolfram, Strassburg, 1900—1903, I, Einleitung, p. XLI,
says that Wolfram and Gerbert, who, independently. of each other,
show the combination of the Swan-knight and Grail stories, may have
both drawn on “altere franzdsische Uberlieferang’”. This hypothesis,
however, is not necessary. At the time that Wolfram and Gerbert
wrote, both stories were, so to speak, household words in Western
Europe, and in Gerbert’s case, especially, the suggestion to combine
the two lay very near, for Pseudo-Wauchier, whose work he had be-
fore him, had already exploited the Swan-knight story in the incident
of the swan-drawn boat, ll. 20857ff. It is indifferent for the present
inquiry whether we believe that the Swan-knight legend had a separate
existence, before it became attached to the house of Bouillon or not.
W. Golther, Romanische Forschungen, II, 103 ff. (1889), and G. Paris,
Romania, XXVI, 580ff. (1897), for example, affirm that it had, but
J.F.D. Blite Zs. f. roman. Ph., XXI, 176ff. (1897), XXV, 1ff.
(1901), XXVI, 1ff. (1903), denies this. The former are, doubtless, right.

*® Cp. Heinzel, 75f. He shares with Chrétien’s other continuators,
as distinguished from Chrétien, himself, the revenge motive, and, like
them, he discards the father of the Fisher King. His knowledge of


(0 ogle


Continuations of Chrétien B07


He connects his continuation™ with Perceval’s visit to the Grail
castle at the end of Wauchier’s division of the Conte del Graal
(1. 34934). Wauchier, doubtless, intended that Perceval should
finally achieve the Grail adventure at this point, and that would
have ended the story; but Gerbert, who wished to make his own
contribution to the Grail theme, does not complete in that sense
the episode which Wauchier left unfinished. In the new poet’s
conception Perceval is still unable to join together the pieces of
the broken sword, owing to his sin, in being indirectly the cause
of his mother’s death (VI, 163), when he insisted on leaving home
against her will. Having thus made his own work possible, Ger-
bert launches out into a narrative of fantastic and chivalrous ad-
ventures of the ordinary kind, the best of which, perhaps, relate
to the mysterious sword of the Grail castle. His hero has to
expiate still further, however, his sin in respect to Blanchefleur,
whom he had promised to marry. In this connection we have a
precious bit of mediaevalism in the description (VI, 199ff.) of
how the lovers pass the night before their wedding in bed together,
yet abstain from carnal intercourse and mutually laud the virtues
of chastity. Indeed, they practise this doctrine of continence until
Perceval has achieved the Grail adventure, and would have done
so to the end, had not a celestial voice on their wedding night


Pseudo-Wauchier is plain from his adoption (Potvin, IV, 166ff.) of the
motif that, immediately after Perceval asks about the Grail, the blight
which rested on the land was lifted, and of the further motif, VI,
249, of the swan-drawn boat. From Wauchier, too, he borrows, among
other things, the character of Perceval’s sister, invented by that writer,
and he follows both Wauchier and Pseudo-Wauchier in conceiving of
the Grail King as not disabled.


** Potvin, VI, 259, speaks of Gerbert’s portion of the Conte del
Graal, as an interpolation, but, as I have stated above, there is no
convincing evidence that he knew Manessier’s continuation, so that it
is better to regard it with Nutt, p. 22, note, as an “independent finish”
to the poem.

R. H. Griffith, “The Magic Balm of Gerbert and Fierabras and
a Query’, MLN, XXV, 102f. (1910), ‘suggests that in the passage
concerning the magic balm, Potvin, VI, 183ff., Gerbert is imitating
Fierabras. The resemblance, however, may be accidental.


20*
308 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


(VI, 209), instructed Perceval that the “delit carnel’’ was per-
missible in marriage, for the begetting of issue and avoidance
of sin, and predicted that among his posterity would be the Swan-
Knight and the three conquerors of Jerusalem. This allusion to
Godefroi de Bouillon, the hero of the first Crusade, and his
brothers, Eustace and Baldwin, as connected with the Swan-Knight,
is imitated from the metrical romance, Le Chevalier au Cygne,
which derives the house of Bouillon from that character. In the
end (VI, 256ff.) Perceval again reaches the Grail castle, is wel-
comed by the Fisher King, witnesses the Grail procession, unites
the broken sword — in short, brings to a conclusion the adventures
of the Holy Grail.

None of these continuators of Chrétien, however, except
Pseudo-Wauchier, rose above mediocrity, and, inasmuch as they
are entirely secondary, being, in the present writer’s opinion, with-
out access to any independent sources for the conception of the
Grail, it is needless to dwell longer upon their additions.®


*° The Berne MS. of Wauchier, which is summarized by A. Rochat,
Uber einen bisher unbekannten Percheval li Galois (Ziirich, 1855),
adds (pp. 90ff.) a brief conclusion of 56 lines to Wauchier’s unfinished
work. Perceval here ends the Grail quest by asking the necessary
question. He is said to be the son of Alains li Gros and Enigeus.
As Nutt remarks, p. 19, this shows use of Robert’s Joseph. Heinzel,
p. 59, objects that in Robert’s poem Alain is not called “li Gros”.
See, however, the prose version, p. 127.
Chapter V.
Sir Perceval of Galles.


Besides the great Conte del Graal of Chrétien and his suc-
cessors, there are three other important works that deal with the
story of Perceval or the Grail, viz. the Middle English metrical
romance, Sir Perceval of Galles (composed about 1370), the Par-
ztval of Wolfram von Eschenbach, composed early in the thirteenth
century, and the Welsh tale, Peredur, which was probably written
somewhere about the year 1800. The fiercest controversies have
raged in regard to these works, but, in the present writer’s opinion,
this is due to the baleful assumption that has come down from
the Romantic Era to the effect that mediaeval poets were in-
capable of inventing anything themselves — they were always
merely transcribing hypothetical sources. But nobody has ever ex-
plained why, if the authors of hypothetical sources were so gifted
with invention, the authors of the works actually preserved should
be so destitute of this faculty.

Let us take first the Sir Perceval of Galles. The peculiarity
of this romance is that it contains nothing about the Grail, though
it strongly resembles Chrétien’s Perceval in other respects. The
authority of Gaston Paris! gave currency to the view that this
poem stood closest of all extant works to the primitive form of
the story of Perceval, which, he supposed, belonged to Welsh oral


* Histoire Littéraire de la France, XXX, 259ff. G. Paris here
expresses strong approval of W. Hertz’s discussion of the subject, which
antedated his own. The essay on the Grail by the latter is now
easily accessible in his Parziwal von Wolfram von Eschenbach, neu
bearbeitet, pp. 413 ff. For the English poem, see pp. 435ff.


(50 ogle


310 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


tradition, so that it represents best the versions of that story
which was used both by Chrétien and by the author of the Welsh
Peredur. Miss Weston? and others have laid stress on some points
of supposed agreement even between the English poem and
Wolfram’s Parzival, which, they argue, go back to a common
source. The whole subject has been most fully discussed by R. H.
Griffith in his treatise, Sir Perceval of Galles (Chicago, 1919),°
and by A. C. L. Brown in his study, “The Grail and the English
Sir Perceval.” * Griffith endeavors to adduce parallels to the Middle
English romance from various Celtic folk-tales, and his conclusion
is that the English poem is not only wholly independent of Chre-
tien, but is merely “‘an English singer’s versification of a folk-
tale that was known in his district of Northwest England.”> His
parallels, however, are forced, in the extreme, and, in most cases,
bear no essential resemblance to the Middle English poem. This


* Legend of Sir Perceval, I, 319, Cp. too, A. C. L. Brown,
“The Grail and the English Sir Perceval” MPh., XVI, 553ff. (1919).

* Cp. end of next chapter (note).

“ MPh. XVI, 553ff. (1919), XVII, 361ff. (1919), XVII, 661 ff.
(1921). For comment on Brown’s attempt in the first two sections
of his study to connect the English poem with Wolfram aud the Lan-
zelet cp. note just cited. The third section consists of a collection of sup-
posed Irish parallels — to me, unconvincing — to incidents in Sir Per-
ceval, cited to prove that the English romance has an Irish source.
As I have stated in the text above, however, I see no necessity of
looking further than Chrétien for a source.

* This conclusion is manifestly untenable. Cp. my review of
Griffith's book in RR., IV, 125ff. (1913). So, too, Brugger, Zs. /f.
fre. Spr. u. Litt.. XLIV*, 170ff. (1917); in other respects, he finds
much to commend in Griffith’s book. The complete agreement in the
order of incidents between Chrétien and the English romance and the
French nomenclature of the latter prove conclusively that Sir Per-
ceval 6f Galles is based on a French original. Acheflour, the name
of the heroine in Sir Perceval, is, I may remark, in passing, merely
a MS corruption of Blancheflor (Blanchefleur), the name of Chrétien's
heroine. Nothing is commoner in mediaeval MSS. than the dropping
of initial letters in proper names and the loss of ” in the same. The
latter error is, of course, due to neglect of the stroke (over the pre-
ceding vowel), which is so often used in these MSS. to denote n.


(0 ogle


Sir Perceval of Galles 311


poem, however, seems to me plainly a mere adaptation of Chré-
tien’s Perceval with the Grail left out. Moreover, the author had
before him not only Chrétien’s genuine work, but a spurious pro-
logue, known as the Bliocadrans-prologue, which is found in two
MSS. This spurious composition contains an account of the manner
in which Perceval’s father died and also of his youth. Accor-
dingly, we have in the English Sir Perceval the story of Perceval’s
childhood given as well as the incidents of his career after he seta
out for Arthur’s court.é There is in the English poem an episode,
not represented in Chrétien, in which the hero rescues a besieged
lady and marries her. There are somewhat similar stories in the
Latin prose romance of the thirteenth century, De Ortu Waluuanii
and in Yder, a French romance in verse of the same century —
and, no doubt, the English poet drew on some source of this kind for
the particular episode.? As he approaches the episode of the Grail
castle in Chrétien, he abandons his source, describes how, on hear-
ing news of his mother, the hero sought her, found her demented,
and going with her to the dwelling of a giant whom he had slain,
cured her of insanity by a magic drink. With his mother he
returns to his queen and his realm. Afterward he went to the Holy
Land and there he was killed.

The motive that actuated the English poet in omitting the
Grail incidents from his poem is probably the fact that they
differed altogether from the usual material of the romances. The
mystery of it all may well have puzzled him. The writer is by


* Hertz, Parzival, p. 438, cites as evidence that the English
Sir Perceval drew from a more primitive source than Chrétien’s poem,
an approximate agreement between the former and the Italian poem
Carduino (second half of the fourteenth century) a romance of the
Bel Inconnu type, in a certain detail: In both the hero is a rustic
simpleton, brought up in the forest, and in both he begins his martial
experience with javelins (in Carduino he has two, in Sir Perceval
one). The last detail is not very important, but, most likely, Carduino
derived it from a version of the Perceval tale. This is, probably,
true, likewise, of the simpleton motif.

" Cp. my Historia Meriadoci and De Ortu Waluuanii, p. LIX,
Baltimore, 1913.
312 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


no means devoid of constructive skill, but there is no ground for
believing that he, any more than the authors of the other Middle
English romances, was very highly educated or that he had a
brain for subtleties. These works deal, as a rule, with stock themes
— fighting, especially with pagans and giants, witches, etc. —
and it is quite likely that the author of the present poem balked
at so unfamiliar a theme as the Grail. This would be particularly
true, if he merely had before him Chrétien’s poem with the spurir
ous Bhocadrans-prologue, but none of the continuations. In view
of the length of Chrétien’s Perceval plus these continuations, and
the consequent paucity of copies in circulation, all the probabili-
ties are that such was the case. But Chrétien’s work, being un-
finished, leaves the Grail unexplained, and one can easily com-
prehend, then, why the English author should have shirked so
difficult a subject. Moreover, it is to be remembered that the
English romance was already fairly long (according to English
standards), before it reached the Grail episode in Chretien, and
the writer may have concluded, very naturally, that his work was
long enough. Surely, in view of all these reasonable considerations
we have no cause to be surprised, if we find the Grail theme
omitted in this poem alone of all the romances of which Perceval
is the hero.®


* Cp. my review of Griffith's book in RR., IV, 125 ff. (Jan.-
March, 1913).

It is worth noting that in a romance which was, in reality, a
sort of continuation of Chrétien’s Perceval and in which the hero was
a son of Perceval, the Grail was omitted. I refer to the Morien,
which only survives in the Dutch version, Moriaen. Cp. p. 331, note 33,
below. G. Paris, Hist. Litt. de la France, XXX, 252f., observed
these peculiarities of the Morien.


Go ogle


Chapter VI.
Wolfram’s Parzival.,


No problem of the Grail literature has excited more active dis-
cussion than that of the sources of Wolfram von Eschenbach’s
Parzival.1 Chrétien’s poem is represented in its entirety in Wolf-
ram, but the German poet has prefixed to the main narrative an


7 As is customary, my Parzival references will be to Lach-
mann’s divisions of the text, each containing 30 lines. These divisions
are indicated in all editions of the poem.

Wolfram was a Bavarian knight (cp. the Parzival, 115, ll and
121, 7) and the Parzival was composed in the first decade of
the thirteenth century. At 379,19 there is a reference to an event
that took place in 1203—1204, viz. the siege of Erfurt by Wolfram’s
patron, the Landgrave, Hermann von Thiringen. From the nature
of the allusion it appears that that event was comparatively recent.
On the other hand, Hermann von Thiiringen, who died April 25, 1217,
was still alive when Wolfram, at 297, 16ff., addressed him, personally.
So this part of the Parzival was certainly composed before the date
just given. For other indications respecting the date of the Parziwal,
ep. R. Liick, Uber die Abfassungszeit des Parzival (Halle diss. 1878).

It is nowadays generally agreed that Wolfram’s 7iturel, which
deals with an episode of Chrétien’s Perceval, ll, 3390ff. — namely
the one in which Perceval, after leaving the Grail castle, comes upon
his cousin (called Sigune by the German poet), supporting the dead
body of her slain lover in her lap — was written after the Parzival
not improbably, even after the Willehalm. Cp., especially, A. Leitz-
mann, “Untersuchungen iiber Wolfram’s Titurel,’’ PBB, XXVI, 93 ff.
(1901) — particularly, pp. 145ff. The poem was left a fragment —
doubtless, on account of the author’s death.

As regards the Willehalm (also incomplete), which is based on
Aliscans, an Old French chanson de geste of the Guillaume d’Orange
cycle, Book IX, at least, must have been composed after April 25,
1217, the date of the death of Hermann von Thiiringen, as stated
above, for in that book (417,12) Wolfram alludes to Hermann as dead.


Go ogle


314 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


account (Books I—II) of the life of Perceval’s father and he has
completed (Books XIV—XVI) the account of the quest of the
Grail which Chrétien left unfinished. Moreover, in these ad-
ditions, both at the beginning and at the end, we are made ac-
quainted with an elder half-brother of Percival’s, named Feirefiz,?
who does not appear in Chrétien. There would be nothing strange
in it, if Wolfram had supplied these additions from his own ima-
gination. His continuation of Chrétien’s poem is wholly indepen-
dent of the continuation by the French poets discussed above, but
the tantalizing condition in which Chrétien left the Grail-quest,
even the nature of the sacred vessel being unexplained, would
naturally stimulate him, as it did the first (anonymous) continuator
of his Perceval, Wauchier, and the rest, to develop the story to a


* I. ©. Old French “vairs fiz’ = “party-colored son”, his father
being white and his mother black. With respect to the variegated
coloring of his skin and hair, Wolfram (57,27) compares him to a
magpie. Cp., too, 758, 17ff. The poet, doubtless, hit upon this bizarre
name, vairs fiz, because in Chrétien’s Perceval (ll. 336, 537, et
passim) Perceval, the character’s half-brother, is often addressed as
“biax fi(l)jz” == “beautiful son.” Surely, no French-speaking person
would have invented such a name as “vairs fiz.” In Wolfram the
father of Parzival and Feirefiz is named Gahmuret. Rochat, Ger-
mania, Il, 114 (1858), identified this name rightly with Gomeret,
name of a kingdom in Chrétien’s Hrec, 1. 1775, and in other romances,
which is, also, occasionally a personal name in these romances. Cp.
W. Hertz, Parzival, p. 469, (Stuttgart, 1898). Brugger’s identification,
however, of Gomeret with Sagremor, Mort-Festschrift, pp. 55ff., is
forced, in the extreme. On his attempt to connect the story of Gahmuret
with a passage in the Livre d’Artus of MS. 337 ep. p. 331, note 33,
below. Perceval’s mother is named Herzeloyde in Wolfram, i. e. Old
French, Herselot.

In his important study, Wolfram’s Stil und der Stoff des Parzival,
pp. 63f. (Wien, 1918, in the Sitzwngsberichte of the Vienna Academy
of Sciences, Band 180, Abhandlung 4) — which, in the rest of this
chapter, I shall refer to merely as “Singer” — S. Singer denies the
identity of Gahmuret (Gamuret) and the Gomeret of the romances.
But the names in the Parzival — as far as they are comprehensible
— are all either drawn from the romances or fabricated on the model
of the names in these works, so that there is no good reason for
questioning the identity.
Wolfram’s Parzival 315


conclusion. Similarly, the addition of the preliminary narrative,
which tells of the hero’s parentage, the adventures and marriages
of his father, was quite natural, in view of the models with which
Thomas’s Tristan and Chretien’s Cliges supplied him. We have
seen that a French poet was also inspired — no doubt, by these
same models (especially, Thomas’s Tristan) — to prefix an early
history of the hero’s parents to the Perceval. But a difficulty
is created by Wolfram’s appeal to an unknown Kyot (Kiot) as the
source of his poem. This Kyot is first mentioned, l. 12469 (416,
20, of Lachmann’s text), that 1s to say, near the middle of the
Parzival, and in a quite informal fashion. Contrary to the custom
of the romance-writers, the German poet cites no authority here
at the beginning of his poem, where the citation of a genuine
authority would naturally belong, but at the point just noted
he observes off-hand, at the end of a speech (416, 17) that a king’s
follower, named Liddamus, came forward. Kyot, he says, calls
him thus. He also says here that Kyot is a Provengal, but curi-
ously adds that, using a source in a heathen language,‘ he (Kyot)
wrote his work in French. He refers to this same Kyot in other
places, only two of which, however, possess any importance. In


* Cp. the story of Tristan’s parents in Thomas’s Tristan, of
Cliges’s parents in Chrétien’s Cliges, To be sure, there is no evidence
that Wolfram knew Thomas’s poem. In Eilhart’s 7ristan, which he
knew well (cp. Lichtenstein’s edition of Eilhart, pp. CXCIIIff.), the
love-affairs of Tristan’s parents are treated very succinctly. But he
was certainly familiar with the Cliges. See his references thereto,
334,11, 586,27, 712,8. The last two are to the love-story of
Cliges’ parents.

“The lines (416, 25ff.) run:

Kiot ist ein Provenzal,

der dise aventiur von Parzival

heidensch geschriben sach.

Swaz er en franzoys da von gesprach,

bin ich niht der witze laz,

das sage ich tiuschen fiirbaz.
So the story of Perceval was originally a heathen tale! The same
statement is made, with different wording, 453, 11 ff.

* The passages are: 431, 2 (ich sage iu als Kiot las), 453, 5ff.
— 455, 22, 776,10 (ob Kyot die warheit sprach), 805,10 (op der
316 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


one of these (453, 11ff.) the poet is describing what purports
to be Kyot’s source, — namely, the pretended work of a half-Jew,
Flegetanis, on the history of the Grail, which Kyot found, cast
aside in the city of Toledo (in Spain). This Flegetanis, whose
father was a pagan and who must, therefore, have owed his de-
scent from Solomon to his mother, is here said to have been @
great astronomer and he had read the name of the Grail in the
stars and had declared that a host of angels had brought the
sacred object down to earth, where only the chaste and the good
of the Christian faith might guard it. Through application, com-
bined with knowledge of necromancy, Kyot was able to decipher
the strange characters in which this heathen (Arabic) book was
written and the virtues of Christian baptism enabled him, still
further, to understand its contents, which, as a matter of fact,
however, Flegetanis, who penned it, seems to have understood very
well. He (Kyot) now began to seek the story of the Grail in Latin
books, in order to discover where there was a people suitable to
cherish the Grail. He read chronicles of the various countries,
Britain, France, Ireland, and elsewhere, and he found at last (455,
12) in a chronicle of “Anschow”’* — doubtless, Anjou (in France)
— the story which he sought. In this story he read concerning
Mazadan’? and how the Grail descended in succession to Titurel,®


Provenzal die wéarheit las), 827, 1ff. (at the end of the poem). It
will be observed that the first, third and fourth passages have no
value — are, indeed, merely phrases to make out the rhyme.

There is another Kyot in Wolfram’s poem — viz. Sigune’s father.
He is a minor character in the narrative, and, of course, is fiot to
be confounded with the Kyot (Kiot) to whom Wolfram appeals as his
source. For this other Kyot, who is a duke and the paternal uncle
of Condwiramurs (Parzival’s wife), cp. 190, 6, 477, 4, 797, 4 ete.

* The coupling of Anschowe in the poem with Wales (103, 7)
and with Great Britain, Ireland and France, (455, 10ff.) leaves no
room for doubt that Wolfram’s Anschowe is primarily Anjou. On the
Austrian Ansowe (Antschau) see p. 321, note 16, below.

" The interpretation of Mazadan as derived from an Irish Mac
Adam — “sons of Adam” (cp. Martin’s edition Il, 64) is, I believe,
purely fanciful. So, too, with Singer’s interpretation (p. 49) of the
name as equivalent to “Macedonian” — i. e. Alexander the Great —
Wolfram’s Parzival : 317


to his son Frimutel, and to Frimutel’s son, Anfortas (Amfor
tas),9 who was Perceval’s maternal uncle and keeper of the Grail
at the time that Perceval visited the Grail castle. Thus the Grail
Kings, like their kinsman, Perceval’s father, are Angevins. —
Again, in the concluding paragraph of his poem (827, lff.),
Wolfram says that if Chrétien de Troyes has not told the story
of the Grail correctly, that may well arouse the anger of Kyot,


on the basis of later mediaeval conceptions of that hero’s union with
a fay. Wolfram had already (56, 17ff.) mentioned Mazadan as an
ancestor of Gahmuret (as well as Uther Pendragon) by a fay, named
Terdelaschoye (Tere de la joie), who had carried him off to Feimurgan
(Fee Morgan). Through a blunder he has here — as elsewhere
(400, 8, 496, 8, 585,14f.) — given the name of the fay to the
land and vice versa. I cannot agree, however, with Singer’s estimate,
p. 49, of the decisive value of this blunder in proving the existence
of Kyot. It sprang, no doubt, from the poet’s misunderstanding of
some French text, but his French reading was not confined to poems
on Perceval. It is one of the proper names in Wolfram which still
await a satisfactory explanation.

° In Wolfram’s poem, 240, 24, Parzival, on his first visit to the
Grail castle, saw this beautiful old man lying on a bed in a chamber
apart. Afterwards, Trevrizent, 501, 22, explains that this was Titurel,
the first person to whom the Grail was committed (first Grail King).
The name, which Wolfram, doubtless, took from Hartmann von Aue’s
Erec, (1. 1650), is, probably, derived from French T'ydorel, the name
of the hero af a Breton Jaz. The stories of the two characters,
however, are not connected. ;

Titurel corresponds to the Grail King’s (Fisher King’s) father,
who is described in Chrétien’s Perceval, ll. 68378—6393, as being
sustained solely by a sacred wafer, which was brought to him in the
Grail, and as not having left his room for fifteen years. It will be
noted, however, that Titurel is grandfather, not father, of the actual
Grail King, as in Chrétien. The French poet, indeed, does not mention
the Grail King’s grandfather, nor does he give definite names either
to the Grail King or his father. The conferring of definite names on
persons who are left unnamed in Chrétien is found all through the
Parziwal. This tendency is not confined to Wolfram. We find it
throughout Arthurian romance. The later a romance is, the more
liberal it is with names.

° OFr. Enfertez (Enfermetez) = “Infirmity’. In such Old French
words an-, am-, instead of en-, was a common variant in the spelling.


Go ogle


318 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


who has given us the correct version. In this passage he speaks
of Kyot again as a Provencal. The name is, doubtless, identical
with French Guiot and we know of two writers of that name in
mediaeval French literature. One of these was Guiot de Provins
(a contemporary of Wolfram’s), who composed some lyrics in the
style of the amour courtois, but is best known as author of the
so-called Bible,!° which is a satirical work on contemporary so-
ciety. Some critics have been inclined to accept this writer as
Wolfram’s Kyot and to explain the German poet’s designation
of him as a Provengal as due to a misunderstanding of the French
place-name, Provins, for the name of the famous country, Pro-
vence.41_ But Guiot’s extant works are of a totally different cha-


*° The works of Guiot de Provins have been recently (1915)
reedited by John Orr in the Manchester University Studies.


** The most recent argument for the identification is E. Brugger’s,
Archiv fiir das Studium der neueren Sprachen, CXVIII, 233f.
(1907). Brugger, of course, assumes a French original (by Guiot de
Provins) as Chrétien’s source, and ascribes Wolfram’s Provenzal to
an error on the part of the German poet. — For earlier arguments
in favor of the identification (which K. Wackernagel, Altfranzdésische
Lieder und Leiche, p. 191, Basel, 1846, was the first to suggest)
see, especially, San Marte (A. Schulz), “Wolfram von Eschenbach und
Guiot von Provins”’, Germania, Ill, 445ff. (1858) and Parzival-
studien, I, (Halle, 1861).

In his “Wolfram und Kiot”, Zs. f. deutsche Philologie, XXXVIIItt.
198ff. (1906), Paul Hagen argues that Wolfram follows his (hypo-
thetical lost) original in the closest manner. But this view of the
German poet’s relation to his source adds new difficulties to the
acceptance of the work of a Provengal lyric poet as that source; for,
according to the Parzival, 158, 13ff., this source states (“Als uns
diu aventiure giht’”’) that no painter from Kéln or Maastricht (well-
known art-centers in those days) could have designed a more perfect
figure than Parzival’s was, as he appeared on horseback, when he met
Iwanet. A Provencal surely, would never have hit upon such an
image. Hagen, consequently, ascribes Wolfram’s citation of Kyot to
an error and proposes as the real author of the sources of the Parzival
Philip of Poitiers, later Bishop of Durham, who accompanied Richard
Coeur de Lion to Steiermark, on the latter’s return from Palestine
in 1192. His main reasons for doing so are that Trevrezent’s expe-
dition, 496, 1ff., follows nearly the same course as Richard’s journey,


Go ogle


Wolfram’s Parzival 319


racter from Wolfram’s poem and there is no reason to believe that
he ever wrote a romance.!? There was, apparently, another Guiot
of the same period who is only known from an allusion in a poem
of the thirteenth century as the author of a (lost) tale of incest.1


that Philip was deeply attached to the House of Anjou (which the
Parzival was supposed to glorify and to which Richard I belonged),
and that he knew the cities above-mentioned, for he attended the
election of Otto IV, Emperor of Germany, at Kéln (Cologne) in 1198.

This wild theory, as far as I know, has not gained a single
adherent. — Hagen is so loath to grant Wolfram any imaginative
capacity whatever that he even regards the Zitwrel as adopted from
another work by the same person who wrote the (supposed) source of
the Parzival. In respect to this theory, too, I believe, he stands
alone.

** The fact that the extant works of Guiot de Provins are so
different from Wolfram’s Parzival should be given greater weight than
Brugger is willing to admit. None of them, it will be noted, are
narrative poems, and there is no evidence at all that he ever wrote
a narrative poem. Moreover, what ground do his extant works afford
us for expecting from the author’s pen a narrative of the most bizarre
quality, like the Gahmuret and Feirefiz episodes in the Parzwal?
The distinctive quality of the best of these works — the Bible —
is its shrewd common sense, enlivened by a racy vein of satirical humor.
But whatever may be his merits, the author’s muse is pedestrian,
indeed, as compared with Wolfram’s. Moreover, Singer, p. 43, aptly
points out that there is not a trace of Wolfram’s obscurity in Guiot
de Provins and that the latter, instead of idealizing the Knights Templars,
speaks disparagingly of them. Against such considerations, the few
details of parallelism between Guiot’s genuine writings and the Parzival
have no weight. The point has sometimes been made, that in his
Willehalm Wolfram renders the French place-name Provins correctly
by Provis (which would be its regular equivalent in Middle High
German) and hence that he would not have confounded Provins and
Provence in his Parzival. Willehalm, however, is later than Parzival,
and, hence, as Brugger op. cit. p. 233, note 1, observes, Wolfram
might have become better informed in the interval as to the differences
between the two.

*® @. Grober, who first printed the extract that concerns us, in
his Grundriss, I, 430, note 2, speaks of the poem as a miracle of
the thirteenth century from a MS. of the Arsenal library, but gives
it no nearer dating. The passage is reproduced somewhat more fully
in W. Foerster’s large edition (1890) of Chrétien's Cliges, p. XII.
320 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


But in this same passage — a list of authors of the twelfth cen-
tury — Chrétien is spoken of as author of the Perceval, and if
the Guiot in question had written a poem on the Grail, no doubt,
the fact would have been mentioned.!4

Nevertheless, it is argued that Kyot must have been a real per-
son, for only a Frenchman — indeed, only an Angevin or one


The writer is contrasting the low estate of poetry in his own day with
the different conditions that prevailed in the former age. In this
connection he gives a list of the poetical celebrities of this former age
(the twelfth century), which comprises the names of Gautier d’Arras,
Chrétien and our Guiot, among others. He says of Guiot:

“Et Guios qui maint bel miracle

Traita de cele damoisele

Qui sen pere enfante pucele,”


and eleven lines further down:


“Mais d’aus tous me tieg a Wiot,
Por ce c’ainc ne vol rimer mot
Por qu'il i eust faussete, etc.”


Brugger, loc. cit. p. 233 (including notes 2 and 3) endeavors to
prove that this Guiot, too, is identical with Guiot de Provins and
Wolfram’s Kyot, but the thread of his argument is tenuous to the last
degree, especially as regards Kyot. Even if the miracle referred to
in the above-quoted extract did not belong to the literary genre of
that name, it must have been a religious poem of a quite limited
scope — which would certainly not bring the author, whether he was
Guiot de Provins or not, very close to a poem like Wolfram’s Parzival.
Brugger observes that composers of lyrics (Cp. Wolfram’s la schantiure,
416, 21) like Chrétien, also, often wrote romances. On the other hand,
however, this was, of course, frequently not the case.

‘* This point is made by W. Foerster, p. 201 of the Introduction
to his Chrétien Worterbuch (Halle, 1914). The section of this Intro-
duction (pp. 187ff.) entitled Wolfram und sein Kyot and W. Golther’s
address, Parzival und der Gral in deutscher Sage des Mittelalters
und der Neuzeit (Rostock, 1910), along with Lichtenstein’s article,
give the strongest presentation of the case against the reality of
Wolfram’s Kyot. Golther’s address is easily accessible in his Zur
deutschen Sage und Dichtung, pp. 154 ff. (Leipzig, 1911).

The couplet in the anonymous miracle about Chrétien runs as
follows:

“Et Crestiens qui mout bel dist
Quant Cleget et Percheval fist.
Wolfram’s Parzival 321


whose patron was of the house of Anjou — would have been inter-
ested in magnifying the Angevin dynasty by connecting the herc
of the poem and the Grail Kings generally with that house.5 But
there is more than one possible explanation of this. First, it is
to be observed that there is no personal allusion or note in these
passages about Anjou. It is said (6, 26), that ‘‘Anschowe’’
(presumably, Anjou) is Gahmuret’s country and that Kyot found
the story of the Grail in a chronicle of that land, but we hear
nothing more about it. In Wolfram’s time the rulers of Anjou,
being also kings of England, were — or had been a short timé
before — the most powerful reigning house in Europe. Moreover,
they were closely connected with the great family of Guelphs in
North Germany, whose influence extended to the court of Wolf-
ram’s patron, Hermann of Thiiringen. If Wolfram, then, wished
to exalt his hero, by connecting him with some actual dynasty
of the time, none would more naturally suggest itself to him than
the dynasty of Anjou. It is even more likely, however, that the
poet’s relations with the Austrian noble family of “Anschowe’’ are
responsible for his fancy of making his hero belong to the world-
famous house of the same name.'¢


** In his edition of the Parzival, pp. XLff., Martin even goes
so far as to identify the hero of Wolfram’s poem with a definite Count
of Anjou, viz. Fulco (Fouques), paternal grandfather of Henry II of
England. He was a Templar and King of Jerusalem, 1131—1143.
The parallel which Martin draws is throughout extremely forced. For
similar speculations before Martin, cp. Wechssler, Sage vom heiligen
Gral, pp. 174£, and J. F. D. Bléte’s criticism of the same, Anzeiger
f. d. Altertum, XLIII, 350ff. According to Wechssler, Wolfram was
inspired to connect the house of Anjou with Perceval by the fact that
the house of Bouillon had been connected with the Swan-Knight.

In connection with these matters, it has been observed that no
Frenchman would have made Anjou a kingdom, as Wolfram (5,25) does.
The heraldic figure in the escutcheon of England, in the early thirteenth
century, which Martin mentions, viz. a black leopard, does not accord
very exactly, after all, with the panther, Perceval’s crest.

7° “Ansowe”, “Antschau”’, was in the Austrian province of Steier-
mark, with which, according to many indications, Wolfram had some
intimate connection. Note the following details bearing on the subject:
Gandin’s crest is a panther, (101, 7). This figure was, also, the crest

Hefperia, Ergdnzungsreihe; 8. 21


Go ogle


322 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


It is most probable, then, that in these appeals to Kyot Wolfram
was merely indulging in the common mediaeval trick of bolster-
ing up his own inventions with an imaginary authority.1?7 Nobody
disputes that, for the part of his poem which corresponds to Chré-
tien, he stands close to the latter — I would, myself, say, follows
him closely, for at times they agree word for word.1® On the other


on the escutcheon of Steiermark. Now, from early in the thirteenth
century, the burgraves of Steyer were united by marriage with a noble
family that took its name from Antschau. Moreover, in 1216, we
find a nobleman of this neighborhood, Ulrich von Stubenberg, on an
expedition tho the Holy Land, using precisely the same heraldic device
as Gahmuret (Parzival, 14, 27ff.), viz. a silver anchor with a gold
rope wrapped around it. Furthermore, Gandin, Gahmuret’s father, as
we are told by Trevrezent in the Parzival (498, 25), was named
after Gandine (Gandein) in Steiermark. — On all these matters see
more fully A. von Siegenfeld, Das Landeswappen Sterermarks, pp. 296 ft.
(Graz, 1901), and A. Schénbach, Anzeiger fiir deutsches Altertum,
XXVIII, 149ff. (1903).

‘7 This practice of mediaeval writers is well-known. For a valuable
article on the subject, with special reference to the Kyot problem
(and denying Kyot’s existence), see F. Wilhelm, “Uber fabulistische
Quellenangaben”’, PBB, XXXIII, 286ff. (1908). Such fictions did not
carry with them the stigma then that they now do. It has been
urged, however, that Wolfram’s whole poem shows that he was parti-
cularly honest and that he must have been, consequently, incapable
of such fraudulent statements. But, after all, every man is the creature
of his age, and a “Schalk”, like Wolfram, would be under peculiar
temptation to avail himself of the general license in this regard.
Besides, as we shall see below, we know that he did falsely attribute
the original of his Willehalm to Chrétien de Troyes.

*® For more or less systematic comparisons of Wolfram’s text
with Chrétien’s cp. Alfred Rochat, ‘Wolfram von Eschenbach und
Chrétien’s de Troyes”, Germania, III, 81ff. (1858), Otto Kiipp, “Die
unmittelbaren Quellen des Parzival von Wolfram von Eschenbach”’,
Zs. f. deutsche Philologie, XV, 1ff. (1885), and, especially, J. Lichten-
stein, “Zur Parzivalfrage’, PBB, XXII, 1ff. (1897). The last-named
article deals with the Parzival from almost every point of view, and,
in my opinion, nothing better has been written about the poem. See,
too, A. Birch-Hirschfeld, Die Sage vom Gral, pp. 243ff. (Leipzig,
1877) for a very important comparison of the portions of the two poems
that relate to Grail matters.

In Wolfram there are many misunderstandings of Chrétien’s text


Wolfram's Parzival 7 323


hand, that the additions are Wolfram’s own is shown by their
character. There is nothing similar to them in the literature of
the French romances.19 We have in the Parzival a pure Arthurian
romance introduced by what appears almost as a travesty on the
stock situations in the French Arthurian romances. Just as the
heroes of the latter, attracted by Arthur’s fame, usually go to
his court, enroll themselves among his knights, and from this
court as a centre set forth on adventures, here we find the hero
of the preliminary episodes, Gahmuret, drawn by the same mo-
tives to the court of the Caliph of Bagdad, who, as Wolfram is
careful to explain, corresponds in the heathen world to the Chris-
tian Pope at Rome. Then comes this same hero’s championship
and rescue of the black pagan heroine, Belacane, queen of Za-
zamanc in Africa, when she is besieged by a Christian (Scottish)
army, and their subsequent marriage. This situation has, of course,
numerous parallels in the French Arthurian romances — only
the heroine in such cases is always white and a Christian. Per-
haps, a remembrance of the loves of Guillaume d’Orange and
Orable — who, to be sure, receives baptism — or of some other
Christian knight and fair Saracen princess has influenced this
latter episode. Especially bizarre is the impression which is pro-
duced by the piebald Feirefiz — as variegated in his color as a
magpie, says Wolfram — the offspring of the union of the white
hero and the black heroine.

As regards, still further, the books (XIV—XVI) at the end
of the Parzival, which carry the narrative beyond the limits of
Chrétien’s Perceval, it 1s to be observed that Book XVI, in which
the hero finally achieves the quest of the Grail, is indissolubly


which show that he used Chrétien directly. Cp. Lichtenstein, op. cit.,
p. 57, notes 1 and 2. If Kyot really existed, his text in these places
must have been identical with Chrétien’s.

*® This remains true of the coloring which is given to such additions
and of the general conceptions by which they are inspired, even if
one accepts at the same value as Singer the interesting list of parallels
between Wolfram, on the one hand, and French and Provencal writers,
on the other, in respect to phrase and imagery, which he has collected,


pp. 15ff.
21*
324 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


connected with the characteristic conceptions of the Grail which
had already been developed in the earlier books of the poem —
especially the Fifth and Ninth. Now, since even the adherents
of Kyot generally acknowledge that these conceptions originated
with Wolfram and constitute his chief glory, as far as the Parzival
is concerned, there is no valid ground for denying to him the sole
responsibility for this part of his poem. And, after all, why should
we refuse to concede to Wolfram any power of invention? In
respect to originality of style,2° of moral conceptions, and of ideas,


*° Singer, pp. 5ff., it is true, contends that this style (really
Kyot’s according to his theory) — tortuous, barock, but never failing
in strength — was formed on the trobar clus (style purposely obscure)
of certain Provencal lyrical poets, and, in proof thereof, assembles the
parallels referred to in the last note. Many of these phrases and
images, however, are such as might suggest themselves independently
to contemporary authors in different lands. On the other hand, a
considerable proportion of them did, no doubt, come to Wolfram, directly
or indirectly, from the French. But, to say nothing of those elements
which may have reached him from that quarter through German
channels, he was, of course, acquainted with other French books, besides
the source of the Parzival. He translated a chanson de geste, and
it is purely gratuitous to set down to Kyot’s account, and not to his,
the knowledge of the two romances of antiquity, the Roman de Troie
and the Roman de Thebes, which his work evinces (cp. Singer,
pp. 22f., 104f.).

The style of the Parzival — one of the most individual in
mediaeval literature — is substantially the same as that of the Wille-
halm and Titurel. Surely, the natural inference from this state of
things is that the style in question was the expression of the author’s
own personality, not (as Singer, p. 126, supposes) that he acquired it
from Kyot and that it stuck to him later in his Willehalm (to say
nothing of the Ziturel), although there was no suggestion of it in
the French source of this poem.

In a far-fetched manner, Singer, p. 10, seeks still further support
for his theory as to the existence of a French poem, in the obscure
style, on Perceval from a supposed allusion to such a poem in the
late metrical romance, Escanor, ll. 325ff. (latter part of the thirteenth
century). Kay is here charging Perceval unjustitiably with obscurity
of speech; but this is, plainly, merely a sarcastic thrust at Perceval
as a Welshman, for the stupidity of the Welsh was proverbial in the
romances.
Wolfram’s Parzwwal 325


in general, he is recognized as superior to all of his predecessors
in mediaeval poetry and unequalled among romance-writers even
to the end of the period. He impresses his personality on almost
every line of his poem and gives a subjective coloring to every
part of his work. Why, then, should we deny him every spark
of narrative originality? After all, the mere incidents in these
additions require no great creative gift, e. g. a young knight’s
service at the court of a famous monarch, his rescue of a besieged
lady,#! a fight between friends or relatives that do not recognize
each other. These are all commonplaces of the romances. It is
the new setting, however, which is given these incidents, the ori-
ginality of conception with which such incidents are invested and
the grotesque and vivid detail with which they are set forth that
count. Now, these latter features are certainly Wolfram’s own,
so that there is no ground for depriving him of the very moderate
credit which is his due for the former. The creative act here is
insignificant as compared with that which is involved in the sub-
lime invention of the world-wide Grail community, which is in-
disputably his.

Moreover, we have the splendid Titurel fragments before us —
the finest of all of Wolfram’s compositions — to emphasize the
falsity of the view that, where narrative elements are concerned,
he was unable to rise above the level of a slavish reproduction of
his originals. Aside from the superb lyrical passion of these frag-
ments, they offer a train of incidents which none but the most
extravagant adherents of Kyot®? have denied to Wolfram’s in-
vention. They are not provided with the novel setting of the
books of the Parzival in which Gahmuret is the principal figure,
but otherwise they show an equal capacity for new combinations
of old motefs.


* G. A. Heinrich, Le Parcival de Wolfram d’Eschenbach et
la légende du Saint-Graal, p. 192 (Paris, 1855) has plausibly sug-
gested that the siege of Patelamunt and the deliverance of Belacane
were imitated from the similar siege of Pelrapeire and deliverance of
Condwiramurs.

** For example, P. Hagen, “Wolfram und Kiot”, Zs. f. d. Ph.,
XXXVI, 1ff. (1906).
326 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


In view of the considerations which I have just presented,
it seems most likely that Wolfram had no other story concerning
Perceval and the Grail than Chrétien’s before him and that he
deliberately tried to conceal his obligations to Chrétien by the
invention of an imaginary authority whom he arrays against the
French poet.?8 It has been suggested that he put forward this hoax,


°* All the scholars cited p. 322 note 18, above, except Ktipp, con-
clude that Wolfram’s Kyot was a fiction. The same opinion has been
held, also, by the following, among others: K. Simrock (in the later
editions of his translations of Wolfram’s Parzival and Titurel, of
which the fifth appeared at Stuttgart in 1876), F. Zarncke (see pp. 317 fff.
of his “Zur Geschichte der Gralsage’, PBB., Ill, 304ff. 1876), G.
Paris, (Société Historique et Cercle Saint-Simon, Bulletin 2, p. 100,
Paris 1883, and Romania, XXII, 166), 0. Behaghel, Literaturblatt
for 1898, Cols. 115, 263, W. Golther in the address cited above (as
against his earlier belief in Kyot’s existence, Romanische Forschungen,
V. 115 ff.), W. Foerster, pp. 187ff. of the Introduction to his Chrétien
Worterbuch (Halle, 1914).

Besides Kitipp, the following are some of the scholars who have
expressed a belief in the reality of Kyot: San Marte, Germama, III,
445ff., (1858) and elsewhere, K. Bartsch, in his successive editions of
the Parzival and Titurel, T. Urbach, Uber den Stand der Frage
nach den Quellen des Parzival, Programm, Zwickau, 1872, R. Heinzel,
“Uber Wolframs von Eschenbach Parzival,” Sitezwngsberichte der
Kawserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften in Wien: philosophisch-
historische Classe, Band 130, Wien, 1894, W. Hertz, in the successive
editions of his translation of the Parzival, E. Wechssler, Die Sage
vom heiligen Gral, pp. 164ff., Halle, 1898, where there is the best
summary of arguments on the subject, Paul Hagen, Der Gral, Strass-
burg, 1900, and in various articles. Add to the above Miss J. L.
Weston, Legend of Sir Perceval, 1, 72, 93, et passim, London, 1906,
KE. Brugger in the article quoted above and elsewhere, and S. Singer,
“Uber die Quelle von Wolframs Parzival,” Zs. f. d. A., XLIV, 321 ff.
(1900) and in his Wolframs Stil und der Stoff des Parzival. Singer
concludes that there were three important French Grail romances,
now lost: 1. The oldest of all, in which the hero was Gawain, not
Perceval. 2. The common source of Chrétien and Kyot. 38. Kyot.
Wolfram’s immediate source, according to this scholar, was Kyot, who,
in turn, derived his obscure style from the Provencal poets. For a
good refutation of this artificial system of Singer’s cp. W. Golther,
Iiteraturblatt, March-April, 1918, cols. 86 ff.

According to W. Golther, Zur deutschen Sage und Dichtung,
Wolfram’s Parzival 327


so as not to seem on a level with the rival poet, Hartmann von
Aue, who had also translated a romance of Chrétien’s.** Besides,
Wolfram had a strong sense of humor, and in an age when no moral
discredit attached to the citation of fictitious authorities, he might
well take pleasure in laughing at his readers in his sleeve, in pal-
ming off his own inventions on the public as drawn from a poem
that no one had ever heard of.25 In any event, a Provengal poet
who wrote in French and not in his native tongue was in the Middle
Ages a most improbable person, and the improbability is increased
when Wolfram calls him (416, 21) la schantiure (= chanteur,
incorrectly feminine), for this term would apply to a writer of
songs, not of romances.** Note, too, that through some blunder
Wolfram (469, 2ff.) conceives of the Grail as a stone.?? But no
Provencal would have made this mistake; for the word for the
Grail, Provengal grazal, was especially well-known in Provence


p- 167, Wolfram, on purpose, wrongly ascribed Chrétien’s poem to Guiot
de Provins. This particular poet, he thinks, was suggested to him,
very likely, because the MS. of Chrétien’s Perceval which he used
was written by a scribe, Guiot, whose name was recorded at the end
of the copy. This is the name of the copyist of the Yvain in MS.
794 (Bibl. Nat.). — Golther’s conjecture is plausible, but some other
chance circumstance might have led equally well to Wolfram’s adopting
just this name.

** Cp. Foerster, Chrétien Wérterbuch, p. 198*.

°° This is F. Zarncke’s view, who speaks of Wolfram as a ‘“Schalk“.
Cp. PBB., Ul, 324.

*° For the arguments of the Kyot advocates in regard to these
matters, especially Brugger, see above, pp. 318ff. notes. Singer,
p. 43, adopts the view that the MS. lascantiure should be devided
Vascantiure and that this means /’enchanteur. There is no reason,
however, as far as one can see, why Kyot should be called an “en-
chanter’’, and the older interpretation is, doubtless, correct.

77 The stone is called, he says (469, 7), lapsit exillis — which
is probably a corruption of lapis de celts. For a discussion of the
various interpretations of the term cp. J. F. D. Blite, Zs. f. d. A.,
XLVII, 101 ff. (1903). Some scholars (cp. Wechssler, p. 167) contend
that, after all, Wolfram meant by stein a vessel, but there is no
evidence of this in the text. He was probably puzzled by the word,
Graal, like the authors of the Norwegian saga and the Peredur,
respectively, and ended by interpreting it as a stone, since in the


Go ogle


828 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


(its meaning being ‘‘dish”) and it is in use there to this day.
Take, too, the word tatlleor (= carving dish or board) which
Wolfram mis-translates messer (= knife). If he really had a
completed French story of the Grail before him, he would not
have fallen into this error.?8 Equally conclusive as to the hoax,
it would seem, is the fact®® that in the first passage (416, 19ff.)
where Wolfram cites Kyot as his authority he is really following
Heinrich von Veldeke (Eneide, ll. 8633 ff. ).3

There is other evidence that Wolfram did not shrink from
false statements where they served his purpose. So, in his Wille-


Middle Ages (as even now) marvellous properties were so often imputed |
to precious stones.

Singer, pp. 83ff., still maintains that the Grail was originally
conceived of as a stone and that Kyot preserved this conception, from
whom it passed to Wolfram. The most elaborate defence of this point
of view is Paul Hagen’s Der Gral (Strassburg, 1900). Cp. p. 335,
below.

*° For these arguments see Foerster, Chrétien Worterbuch, p. 201.
As an explanation of the misunderstanding by which Wolfram
cenceived of the Grail as a precious stone, Foerster here suggests
that he erroneously connected it with French grais (gres) =
sandstone. — Tailleor is found in Chrétien’s description of the
Grail procession in his Perceral twice, viz., ll. 3193, 3249. In the
first line it is applied to the tatlleor (the meaning of which is much
debated), borne in the procession by one of the Grail maidens; in the
second line it is used of a dish on which an attendant does carving at
the table of the Grail King. There is a difference of opinion as to
whether the fazlleors of these two lines are the same. Wolfram regarded
them as different — hence his two Messer (234,18, 490, 21f.).

Miss Weston, Sir Perceval, I, 162, and Singer, pp. 88f., stand
alone, I believe, in denying any connection between Wolfram’s Messer
and Chrétien’s tazlleor. Adopting, it would seem, a suggestion of
Heinzel’s (in his Grail treatise, p. 40), Miss Weston tries to bring the
former into relations with the Fécamp blood-relic which plays so im-
portant a part in her theory of Grail origins. But we know of no
knives being among the relics at Fécamp. For a refutation of this
point (about the Messer) of Miss Weston’s cp. J. F. D. Bléte, Anzeiger
fiir deutsches Altertum, XXXII, 24 ff. (1908).

*° Cp. Behaghel, Literaturblatt for 1898, cols. 115, 263.


*° Literaturblatt for 1898, cols. 115, 2638.
Wolfram’s Parziwal 329


halm (125, 20), which, as stated above, is based on the Old French
chanson de geste, Aliscans, he pretends that his authority was
Chrétien de Troyes. So, too, with his assertion (Parzival, 115, 25)
that he did not know how to read or write. This assertion, which
occurs in a passage that is wholly humorous in its character, was
widely accepted at its face value, as long as the old romantic
notions about the origins of epic poetry were held, and some scho-
lars still take it lterally, but it seems obvious that we are con-
fronted here with a falsehood. The writer knew French and para-
phrased a French poem (Chrétien’s) of more than 10,000 lines.
Add to this that his work, which runs to nearly 25,000 lines, is
singularly free from contradictions and inequalities. There is not
an authenticated case in history of an uneducated man’s composing
a work of anything approaching the Parzival in extent, to say
nothing of its quality, whether with or without the aid of aman-
uenses, and this fact, of itself, justifies an attitude of skepticism,
The knowledge of French which he possessed, the varied learning
which he displays,*! the closeness, with which he follows Chretien


°1 Cp. his liberal use of Solinus as pointed out by E. Martin,
Zur Gralsage, pp. 5ff. — also, ibid. pp. 9ff., the great quantity of
names, drawn from different sources. Martin accepts Wolfram’s state-
ment concerning Kyot, but believes that he introduced these names,
himself, into his poem from a great variety of other sources. P. Hagen
in his Der Gral (Strassburg, 1900) and “Untersuchungen iiber Kiot”,
Zs. f. d. A., XLV, 187ff. has, also, shown the use which is made in
the Parzival of the Bible, (ultimately) Oriental sources, the so-called
Letter of Prester John, etc. He imagines, it is true, that Kyot, not
Wolfram, is responsible for all this; but, unless we accept the German
poet’s assertion as to his illiteracy, there is no ground for that assumptior.


It is to be observed that the strange nomenclature (drawn from
Solinus, etc.) of Wolfram’s poem which I have noted above is found
mainly in those parts that have nothing corresponding in Chrétien’s
Perceval. These names have been the subject of much special study.
Besides Martin, cp. San Marte, “Uber die Eigennamen im Parzival
des Wolfram von Eschenbach”, Germamia, II, 385 ff. (1857), K. Bartsch,
“Die Eigennamen in Wolframs Parzival und Titurel,” Germanistische
Studien II, 114ff. (Wien, 1875), G. Paris, Romania, IV, 148ff.
(1875), the notes to Hertz’s translation of the Parzival. The Arabic
names of the planets (782) and the lines about precious stones (791)


y Google


330 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


and the power of his style, which German critics declare to be the
finest of the Middle Ages in their language, — these things all
prove that Wolfram was far removed from illiteracy. His state-
ment on the subject was, most likely, merely a humorous mysti-
fication, with a covert hit at the pretensions to learning of some
contemporary poets — perhaps, above all, as we have seen, Hart-
mann von Aue.??


Let us review somewhat more systematically, though briefly,
the contents of Wolfram’s Parzival, parts of which I have had
occasion to refer to in the discussion above.

In the portion which he has prefixed to Chrétien’s narrative,
the poet represents that Perceval’s father was a prince of Anjou,
named Gahmuret. In a manner which, as we have seen, has no
parallel in the French romances he makes this Christian knight
enter the service of the Caliph of Bagdad (the Baruc, as he is


and the men who were learned in regard to the same (773, 22ff.)
came, of course, from learned sources, the latter from Arnoldus Saxo.

For Wolfram’s reading in French literature and, probably, Pro-
vengal, also, see, still further, Singer’s above-cited treatise. He inter-
prets, it is true, such evidences of wide reading in the Parzival as
proofs of Kyot’s existence. Among other things, he points out interesting
borrowings from the Roman de Thebes (cp. Antigone and Antikonie)
in the German poem.


** Even Bartsch (see note to 115, 27 in his edition of the Parzi-
val), although accepting Wolfram’s statement concerning his illiteracy
at its face value, sees in this statement a hit at Hartmann. Wolf-
ram’s position is somewhat like that of Burns, as expressed in the
“Epistle to John Lapraik”: he upholds nature and depreciates learning.
Wolfram, on the other hand, owes much, of course, to Hartmann in
respect to narrative method. He has, besides, in the opinion of most
scholars, borrowed from him a large number of names. To be sure,
this is denied by Singer, pp. 56ff., who acknowledges that Wolfram
was well acquainted with Hartmann’s Hrec, but argues that, in such
cases, it was Kyot who drew these names direct from the French
and that the list in Hartmann, indeed, contains spurious late additions
derived from the Parzival. Granting, however, that Singer’s views as
to the sources of these names in the Parzival and Hartmann are
correct there is no reason why Wolfram, himself, should not have
drawn, them from Chrétien.
Wolfram’s Parzival 331


called). He becomes famous among the Saracens and weds a
Moorish queen, Belacane, whose noble character in her lover's eyes
more than offsets her heathen faith.5* Later, however, as he longs


** Brugger, Heinrich Morf Festschrift, 59ff., has argued that
Wolfram used for this prologue the same source that the author of
the Livre d’Artus of MS. 337 used in his Baruch-Sagrethor-Sebile
episode (Sommer’s Vulgate Version of the Arthurian Romances, VU,
280ff.). This common source he supposes to be a lost romance. But
the episode in the Livre d’Artus is a mere variation of the Clamedex-
Perceval-Blanchefleur episode in Chrétien’s Perceval, ll. 1921ff., the
author substituting for Blanchefleur the heathen widow, Sebile, of, the
Chanson de Saisnes. This accounts for the chanson de geste features
of the episode, which Brugger remarks on. In the Saisnes, too, in
the approved style, Sebile is baptized before being married to her
Christian lover, Baudouin. Sarmenie, in the Livre d’Artus, is pro-
bably a corrupt or wilful variant of Parmenie of the Tristan poems.
As far as Baruch in this romance is concerned, Brugger speaks of
him as a Christian, but this is not certain. Indeed, inasmuch as he
is called Li Noirs Cheualiers, he is very likely a dark-skinned pagan,
like Sebile, whom he persecutes. The author gave him accordingly
a pagan (Oriental) name. Baruch is still a common name among the
Jews. Sommer lists it in the Index of his Vulgate Version as the
name of a person in the Estoire del Saint Gral, I, 193, viz., as
the name of one of Mordred’s sons. This, however, is a mistake. It
is the name of a castle that belongs to one of these sons.

The differences between Wolfram and the Livre d’ Artus episode
are, after all, very marked.

Brugger, ibid., 65ff., like Martin, Zur Gralsage, p. 18, and Singer,
Zs. f. d. A., XLIV, 323ff., before him, and Miss Weston, Morien,
p. 15 (New York, 1901), since, has inferred from certain resemblances
between the tale of Feirefiz and the Dutch poem Moriaen, that the
two drew on a common source — a lost French poem. The latter
is embedded in the vast Dutch (metrical) Lancelot, which was edited
by W. J, Jonckbloet (The Hague, 1846—1849). It has since been
edited separately by Jan Te Winkel, Roman van Moriaen (Bibliotheek
van Middelnederlandsche Letterkunde, XX, Groningen, 1878). Despite
the contrary opinion of the editors, Gaston Paris is, doubtless, right
in regarding this poem not as an original Dutch composition, but as
a translation of a French poem. Cp. Histoire Littéraire de la France,
XXX, 254. According to the story, Agloval, Perceval’s brother, being
in the land of the Moors, had an amour with a princess there, but
abandoned her, whilst she was enceinte, on the pretext that he had


Go ogle


332 Evolution of Arthurian Romance.


for a more active life, he makes this difference of religion a pretext
for leaving her, declaring at the same time that he will come back
to her, if she will turn Christian. After his departure Belacane
gives birth to a son, named Feirefiz. Gahmuret returns to Europe
by way of Spain and in a tourney in Wales wins Herzeloyde, queen
of Wales and Anjou and Norgales (i. e. really, North Wales).
He marries her, despite some compunctions which the memory of
Balacane causes him. In the course of time he hears that the
Baruc, his former lord in the East, is pressed by enemies.
So, under the influence of loyalty, he goes to this monarch’s as-
sistance, but not long after his arrival falls a victim to treachery
— a heathen broke his helmet of adamant by throwing goat’s blood
on it — hence he was exposed to the fatal wound (105, 17ff.).
Herzeloyde gives birth to Perceval fourteen days after his father’s
death. On hearing the ill news, she retires to the forest with


to go in search of Lancelot. The child of this intrigue, Moriaen, when
he is a lad, goes forth to find his father and compel him to right this
wrong to his mother, by marrying her. He comes to Arthur’s kingdom,
makes the acquaintance of Gawain and others, and, in the end, achieves
his object. There is satisfactory internal evidence that Perceval, and
not Agloval, was the father of the hero in the French original. Apart
from the fact that Perceval in this hypothetical French romance was,
as stated, father, and not brother, of the character concerned (as in
Wolfram), G. Paris (p. 253) points out that this motif of a son seeking
out a faithless father and compelling him to marry his mother occurs
in other romances of the period and is here linked with one of the
commonplaces of mediaeval romance — the love of a Saracen princess
for a Christian knight. He, therefore, — rightly, in my opinion, —
denies any connection between Moriaen and Parzival. Paris, however,
should, not have included “le roman latin de Meriadoc’” among the
works that exhibit the motif just mentioned. In that romance (Historia
Meriadoci) the hero’s parents die at the beginning of the story. Cp.
my edition, Historia Meriadoci and de Ortu Waluuanit, pp. 4¢f.

In Romania, XXIV, 336f. (1895), Lot ascribes a Celtic origin
to Morien — identifies him with Mor of the Black Book of Caermarthen
and Book of Taliessin. But “Mor” sounded like Maure (= Moor) —
hence, says Lot, the Dutch or French author conceived of the character
as black. “Moryen’, he observes, also, means “sea-born’’ in Welsh.
Lot’s derivation of Morten from Mor, who is a mere name in the
Welsh texts, is to me unconvincing.


Wolfram’s Parzival 333


her infant son, as intimated at the beginning of Chrétien’s pcem.*!
Even this brief summary brings out one fine feature of Wolfram’s
poem — namely, that he exhibits a universal tolerance. Pagan
and Christian with him stand on the same plane of nobility. The
fact, indeed, that he gives his Christian hero a pagan brother
(Feirefiz), is symbolical of this broad humanity.

For the next 16000 lines, approximately, the poet, in general,
follows Chrétien pretty exactly. He often amplifies his original
in detail, it is true, developing sometimes descriptions of the ex-
ternal splendors of feudal life or giving a more individual stamp
to the characters.» By slight additions, tco, he endeavors to render
more plausible incidents and actions and to weld into closer unity
all parts of the narrative.°¢ It is in the portion of his poem, how-


** Among the knights whom Gahmuret vanquished in the tourney,
at the time that he won Herzeloyde, was Orilus’s brother, Lihelin
(i. e. Llewellyn). He conceived a great hatred of Gahmuret (79, 12ff.)
and after Gahmuret’s death robbed his widow (128, 4ff., 141, 7ff.) of
two of her dominions, Wales and Norgales. He appears also in one
or two later passages of the poem. Some scholars (cp. Wechssler,
p. 170) have seen a great significance in the brevity of the passages
about this character in the Parzival: Wolfram must have been drawing
on a longer narrative about him. But it is not necessary to assume
this. He was first introduced to render more dramatic the scene of
the tourney and, later, the isolation of the widow, but he was not
needed in the part of the narrative where Wolfram no longer had to
rely on his own invention, and the poet, merely in that part, refers
to him occasionally, in order to keep up the connection between Book
I—II and the rest. But even granting that what is said about Lahelin
in the Parzival came from a longer poem, Wolfram could have drawn
on such a poem just as well as Kyot.

*> There are also some transpositions, the most important of which
is the story of Sigune. Here an episode in Chrétien (ll. 3390ff.) is
divided into two parts (138, 9ff., 249, 11 ff.) and the first part is
put much earlier in the narrative — just after the conclusion of the
episode of the tent-lady (called Jeschute by Wolfram) in Chrétien
(1. 811). As Lichtenstein, p. 15, suggests, Wolfram’s reason for the
earlier introduction of this episode is, that he did not want his hero to re-
main unnamed any longer, yet, according to Chrétien (Il. 3535 ff.), it was
in the dialogue with his cousin (Sigune) that Perceval first learns his name.

°° This aim probably accounts, in a large measure, for the fact
that all the characters of any importance in the Parzival are related
334 Evolution of .Arthurian Romance


ever, in which the author expounds his conception of the Grail
(Books V and [X_) that the expansion becomes really considerable—
especially, in the Ninth Book, where Perceval visits his hermit
uncle, Trevrezent, confesses to him his religious doubts and other
sins, and is absolved by this lay confessor, after having been first
enlightened by him with respect to the relations of God to man
and the true nature of sin as well (462, 11) as with respect to the
history and qualities of the Grail and its attendants.37 Here some-
thing less than two hundred lines of Chrétien have been expanded
into upwards of fifteen hundred by Wolfram. More important
however, than the mere fact of amplification is the difference of
spirit which distinguishes the German poet’s treatment of his
theme; for, whereas Chrétien moves in the ordinary grooves of the
conventional and orthodox theology and ecclesiastical practice of
his age, Wolfram, who had already revealed a saner morality than
the French poet in his exaltation of constancy of character and
rational chastity and in his putting the relations of his heroes
and heroines (Parzival and Condwiramurs, Orilus and Jeschute,
etc.) on the basis of marriage, deepens immeasurably in this
remarkable episode the moral import of the Grail conception, by
treating it in a profoundly mystical spirit.%8


and so constitute one great family. There was a beginning of this
in Chrétien’s Perceval, but Wolfram, so to speak, makes it thoroughgoing.
The spirit of universal brotherhood which inspired the German poet's
conception of the Elect of the Grail was, also, probably a factor.
German critics have sometimes taken the matter we are commenting on
as especially characteristic of the Germans. Cp. for example, Lichten-
stein, PBB, XXII, 69.

*7 See for a comparison of Book IX with Chrétien, A. Nolte “Die
Composition der Trevrezentscenen”, Zs. f. d. A., XLIV, 241 ff. (1900).
The additions, he concludes, are wholly Wolfram’s, not Kyot’s. In
his “The Ninth Book of Wolfram’s Parzival’, MPh., I, 275ff. (1903),
A. B. Faust has defended this book from the charges of incoherence,
etc. which had been brought against it, especially by G. Bétticher,
Das Hohelied vom Rittertum, eine Beleuchtung des Parzival nach
Wolframs eigenen Andeutungen (Berlin, 1886).

*° In some points, it is true, Wolfram’s changes involve a loss
as well as a gain. For example, the wound of the Grail King of
Chrétien’s poem (ll. 3470 ff.) is no longer impressive, when we learn
Wolfram’s Parzival 335


As we have seen, through some misunderstanding of his
French original, our author conceives of the Grail as a precious
stone somewhat like the Kaaba at Mecca. It would seem that it
had fallen from the heavens like the Kaaba. In one place (471, 15)
he says that the noble and worthy among the angels who remained
neutral at the time of the first great conflict between the Trinity
(God) and Lucifer were its guardians.3® Afterwards, its defence
was committed to the Templeise*® — that is to say, a company
of knights whose name and function recall the actual Knights
Templars of the time. In fact, it was obviously the order of
Knights Templars that suggested to Wolfram the brotherhood of
the Grail, just as it suggested to his contemporary,‘! the author
of the famous French prose romance, the Queste del Saint Graal,
the character of Galahad. The crusades, both in practical life and
in literature, had brought about the union of the two great ideals
that distinguish the Middle Ages — the ideal of chivalry and the
ideal of the Christian Church — but in the French romance the
ideal of chivalry, in a spirit of the narrowest asceticism, is com-
pletely subordinated to that of the Church, whilst in the German
poem, with a sane recognition of their respective values, the two
are combined in perfect harmony.
from Wolfram (479, 2ff.) that it was received in the pursuit of the
usual adventures of a knight-errant, who was endeavoring to win the
favor of his lady by prowess. To be sure, Wolfram explains the mis-
fortune as a punishment for Amfortas’s pride and unchastity, as dis-
played in this pursuit. Similarly, according to Wolfram (501, 25),
the mysterious illness of the Grail King’s grandfather (cp. Chrétien,
Nl. 6391ff.) is the gout.

°° Later (798, 11ff.) he retracts this.

*° From Latin Templenses. Singer objects, pp. 93ff., that a
German would have used a German term (templaere or another), in-
stead of this French form, for the Knights Templars. But it did not
require any great knowledge of French to invent the word, templeis,
even if our author did not actually pick it up from some French
source. He might prefer it to the ordinary German terms, because
he did not want to identify too absolutely his ideal order with the
contemporary order that suggested it.

*" The Queste, too, was, apparently, written in the first decade
of the thirteenth century.
336 Evolution of Arthurian Romance —


The Grail, then, which is entrusted to the keeping of this
new order of spiritual knighthood is a symbol of redemption and
of eternal life. It renders immortal and ever-youthful those that
dwell near it and look upon it. The place where it 1s preserved
is called Munsalvaesche (doubtless, Mont Salvage) *? and its guar-
dians prevent any one from approaching the mystic castle, save
those that are called to its service. These chosen servants, who
are of both sexes, are summoned in their youth from all lands and
from the ranks of the poor and the rich alike. They must renounce
profane love (minne), yet marriage is not forbidden them, since
their children are to be dedicated to the same holy service as
themselves. Among the men, however, this privilege is restricted
to the Grail King and to those who (like Lohengrin) are sent forth


“7 It is to be noted that the name which Wolfram gives to the
Grail castle is simply the French equivalent of the name of his own
home, Wildenberc (Cp. Parzival, 230, 12f.). This can hardly be
an accident. In PBB, XXIV, 409 (1899), A. Gebhardt regards Wil-
denberc as a jesting translation of Munsalvaesche; but this is ex-
tremely improbable. The passage concerning Wildenberc occurs before
Munsalvaesche has been named (251, 2), and the joke would, accor-
dingly, have been lost on the reader. On the other hand, I believe
with Golther, Zur deutschen Sage und Dichtung, p. 161, that Wolf-
ram humorously named his Grail castle after his own home. In that
event, there would be no need of considering — with Foerster, Chrétien
Weorterbuch, p. 201*, — the possible influence of Montserrat on the
name of Wolfram’s Grail castle.


It has been also suggested that Munsalvaesche is derived from
Montem Salvationis, but this derivation is not phonologically unob-
jectionable, like the derivation which I have given above and which
is now generally accepted — except by Singer, p. 90, who believes
that Wolfram’s French source had here Mont Salvation.


Wildenberc, Wolfram’s home, is usually identified with modern
Wehlenberg (formerly named Wildenbergen) near Ansbach. In his
review of Panzer’s Wolfram bibliography, Anzeiger fiir deutsches Alter-
tum, XXIV, 316ff., E. Schréder, however, has proposed, instead of.
Wehlenberg, Wildenberg on the eastern edge of the Odenwald. The
older identification, nevertheless, is probably correct. Cp., especially,
Johann Baptist Kurz, Heimat und Geschlecht Wolframs von Eschen-
bach (Ansbach, 1916).
Wolfram’s Parzwal 337


to take charge of lands without a lord.‘* The Grail community,
furthermore, has no concern in regard to subsistence, for on Good
Friday a dove descends from the heavens and lays a sacred wafer
on the stone, which is thereby endowed with the power to supply
its votaries with food and drink.

Thus the Grail King, it will be seen, is the sovereign of
a spiritual realm which is coextensive with mankind. His office,
indeed, 1s more exalted even than that of the Pope, for its authority,
resting wholly on a basis of spiritual and moral aspiration, is
untrammelled by dogma and unsullied by worldly interests. If
this was to be the ultimate development of the Grail legend, no
wonder that the mediaeval Church was chary of lending it coun-
tenance!

It is to this unparalleled dignity that Perceval is appointed,
after expiating his sins through humility and human sympathy.
As has been remarked by more than one scholar, the depth of
Wolfram’s conception in all this comes out plainly, if we contrast
him with his contemporary, Hartmann von Aue. For the latter
(compare his Gregorius) the only unpardonable sin is religious
doubt. For Wolfram it is inconstancy of character, the want of
a fixed purpose. To obtain salvation, then, one must be constant
and loyal. Wolfram’s hero shows these qualities in his relations
to his wife and in his relations to the Grail.44 We have in the
poem the story of his sin and of his purification.“ The poet’s
treatment of Perceval’s failure to ask the fateful question at the
Grail castle is particularly noteworthy. In Chretien this failure
has no moral significance — the whole incident is simply one of
a fairy-tale spell which the question will undo. But with Wolfram
it is otherwise. It betrays a want of sympathy with his fellow-


*® Moreover, the marriage of the men had to be secret, whilst
that of the women was public (494, 13ff.).

** It is significant that Wolfram always makes his hero speak
of them (wife and Grail) together, as determining the aims of his life.

*> Noteworthy is Wolfram’s independence of contemporary ideas
as to how one should attain grace — that is to say, through penance,
intercession of the Virgin Mary or the saints etc. There is not a
trace of Mariolatry in his work.

Hefperia, Ergdnjungsrethe : 8. 29
338 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


man (255, 17; 484, 24), when Perceval omits to ask the question,
and therein he has sinned. It is true that he is restrained by the
injunctions of Gornemanz, but those injunctions were merely the
formulas of a conventional etiquette, and etiquette has in the crisis
proved stronger with the hero than compassion. He only frees
himself from sin later on, when by asking the neglected question,
he exhibits the sympathy which he had failed in before.

So, too, with the contrast of Perceval and Gawain as types,
respectively, of the knight who pursues the ideal and the knight
who is merely the perfect embodiment of conventional courtesy
and wordly accomplishments. The antithesis is already found in
Chrétien, but the French poet is purely a courtier and a man of
the world, with a gift for depicting the externals of hfe — light,
graceful, and endlessly fluent — whereas Wolfram has profound
emotion and an original ideal which he wishes to express through
his work.

So far for the portion of his narrative which Wolfram borrow-
ed from Chrétien. It only remains to outline briefly the con-
clusion which he added to Chrétien’s unfinished poem: The French
poem had ended at the point where Arthur’s mother and the other
queens appear imprisoned in a magic castle.** The lord of this
castle is called Clinschor by Wolfram, and he is said to be the
nephew of Virgil, who, as is well-known, was regarded in the
Middle Ages as an incomparable magician. Gawain overcomes
the magician and releases the captives — later he has a fight
with Perceval, neither being aware of the other’s identity. After
many minor adventures Perceval meets his half-brother, the heathen
Feirefiz, and sustains with him the hardest of all his fights.
They recognize each other, however, embrace, and repair to Ar-
thur’s court. Cundrie, a Grail damsel, learned in starlore, comes
and tells Perceval that his wife and twin sons, Lohengrin and
Kardeiz, have been summoned to the Grail castle and that the
question will now free Amfortas and his land. With Cundrie
and Feirefiz Perceval rides to the Grail castle, meets his wife,


** Owing to the fact that Chrétien had left this episode un-
finished, Wolfram has remodeled it with great freedom.
Wolfram’s Parzival 339


and together they all behold the talismans, save Feirefiz, to whom
as a heathen the sight of the Grail is denied. But soon, under
the influence of the charms of the Grail damsel — as Wolfram
intimates, with some happy strokes of humor — rather than from
religious conviction, Feirefiz becomes a convert to Christianity,
is, baptized, and weds the damsel (Repanse de Schoie); the two
then go to India, and from them is born Prester John. On the
other hand, Perceval rules henceforth over his Grail kingdom.
Lastly, it is told of his (Perceval’s) son, Lohengrin,*” how he was
led to the aid of the Duchess of Brabant by a swan, how he marries
her on condition that she shall not inquire as to his origin and how
on her breaking his command the swan carries him away from
her. — This introduction of the Swan-Knight into the Grail story
_ was, of course, an innovation of Wolfram’s, for the two legends
had so far developed separately. So, too, with the idea that the
lord of the magic castle where the queens were held in duress was
a nephew of Virgil. Virgil — and the same thing is true of
Prester John — had been well-known figures in mediaeval legend,
before Wolfram composed his poem, but they had had no con-
nection with the Holy Grail.

The conclusion just outlined calls for no particular remark.
Like the corresponding prologue, it is, in the judgment of the
present writer, plainly the invention of Wolfram.‘

‘? Probably = Loherenc Garin, that is, Garin of Lorraine, with
reference to Garin, a well-known character in the Old French chan-
sons de geste. The Swan-Knight story had already been connected
with the House of Lorraine. For its influence on an episode in Pseudo-
Wauchier, cp. p. 300, above. That episode, however, is not directly
connected with the Grail, so that the assertion which I make in the
next sentence above is valid.

‘S In his “Parzivalstudien’, Germania, XXXVII, 74 ff. (1892),
P. Hagen studies the relations of Chrétien, Wolfram, and Peredur,
and finds in certain supposed agreements between the last two, as
against the first, proof that they are independent of Chrétien. Peredur,
however, is certainly derived directly from Chrétien. On this subject
scholars of virtually every school are nowadays agreed. Cp. p. 344
note 3, below.

R. H. Griffith has made the same sort of comparison as Hagen,
but on a more elaborate scale, in his Sir Perceval of Galles (Chicago,
340 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


1911), laying especial stress on agreements with the English Sir Per-
ceval. But on the subject of such supposed agreements cp. my review
of Griffith’s book in the Romanic Remew, IV, 125ff. (1913). What
I have said there applies, in general, also, to similar comparisons in
Carsten Struck’s Miinster dissertation, Der yunge Parzival in Wolf-
rams von Eschenbach Parzival, etc. (Boma-Leipzig, 1910) and
A. C. L. Brown’s “The Grail and the English Six Perceval“, MPh.,
XVI, 553 ff. (1919). Brown stresses, as the most important, five
points of agreement (so he considers them) between Wolfram and the
English poem, as against Chrétien, viz.: In both 1. Perceval meets
three knights in the forest in the opening episode of the story, not
five, as in Chrétien 2. had a bad mount 3. lives near “a natural
source of water’, — i.e., according to the English poem “He dranke
water of the welle’; according to Wolfram, bathed every morning
in a river nearby, 4. is connected with a vengeance motif, 5. his
father in his marriage tournament “made an enemy”, who is later to
do battle against the son.

Now as regards these five points: No. 1 is not accurately stated,
for in Wolfram there are really four knights. First three knights
appear, and then, immediately afterwards, a fourth knight, who is lord
of the rest. Besides, only the last of these in Wolfram has a name,
viz. Karnahkarnanz, whereas in the English poem the three knights
are Yvain, Gawain and Kay. — No. 2. The idea that the young rustic’s
mount should be more or less ridiculous springs naturally out of the
situation. Otherwise, there is no similarity between the two poems.
In Wolfram Perceval’s mother, when he first leaves home, purposely
gives him a poor horse, to protect his life, since, if so mounted, the
knights would not take him seriously. Nothing is said of this in the
English poem in the only passage where the matter is mentioned (one
much later in the narrative, viz. at the point where Perceval has just
slain the Red Knight). There (ll. 718ff.) it is stated, merely in
passing, that Perceval was riding a mare that was with foal. —-
No. 3. Here, on the face of it, there is obviously no real resemblance
between the two. Besides, “He dranke water of the welle And yitt
was he wyghte,” (11. 6f.) is introduced to emphasize the hero's sober
bringing up, with which, of course, Wolfram’s river has nothing to do.
— No. 4. In the English poem the revenge motif (taken, doubtless,
from the spurious Bliocadrans prologue to Chrétien) is one of the most
important motifs of the romance and justifies Perceval’s enmity to
the Red Knight. In so far as there is any revenge motif at all in
Wolfram, the object of it is Lahelin, who does not correspond to the
Red Knight, in any way. Moreover, in Wolfram the matter has no
Wolfram’s Parzwwal ' 341


importante. I called attention to these differences in Romanic Review,
IV, 127, note 6 (1913). — No. 5. In Wolfram (unlike Sir Perceval)
the knight overthrown (not killed) in the later encounter (Orilus) is
not identical with the knight who was overthrown in the first encounter
(Lihelin). One would have to read, however, the long and altogether
different narrative in Wolfram to see how ill-supported this last point is.
Chapter VII.
Peredur, Diu Crone, and Sone de Nausay.


Different views have been expressed in regard to the relations
of the French Conte del Graal (Chrétien’s Perceval plus its con-
tinuations) and the Welsh tale, called Peredur, which is contained
in the collection of Welsh tales, known generally as the Mabino-
gion.1 This tale has been frequently taken by advocates of Celtic


* The best discussions of this question are by 1. W. Golther,
“Chrestiens Conte del Graal in seinem Verhdltniss zum wédlschen
Peredur und zum englischen Sir Perceval,” Sitzungsberichte der phi-
losophisch-philologischen und historischen Classe der K. b. Akademie
der Wissenschaften zu Miinchen, 1890, Band I, Heft I, pp. 174 ff.,
and, 2. R. Thurneysen, in his review of Miss Williams’s Peredur essay
in the Zeitschrift fiir Celtische Philologie, VIII, 185ff. (1912).
Thurneysen’s discussion of the evolution of the Welsh tale is con-
vincing. As he points out, Miss Williams, like previous scholars, fails
to observe that the Red Book of Hergest indicates that the Peredur
really consists of three separate stories, each beginning on a new page
and with large initial letters. To be sure, on other grounds, Miss
Williams recognized the third of these stories as a later addition to
the original text, but, according to Thurneysen, so is the second (II).
Still further, the first of the stories, which ends at the point where
Peredur is reconciled to Angharat Law Eurawe, is itself composite,
and consists of two parts designated by Thurneysen, Ia (ending at the
point where, after the incident of the drops of the blood in the snow,
Peredur is found by Arthur’s knights) and Ib. This Ia is a free para-
phrase of the corresponding portion of Chrétien, with little admixture
of native Welsh materials. On the other hand, Ib and II are free
inventions of Welsh story-tellers, independent of each other, but both
writing under the influence of Ia, which first introduced Peredur as
a knight errant into Welsh literature. The author of Part III follows
Chrétien, as far as his fragmentary narrative permitted, but adds to
it from some other non-Welsh source, terminating the whole with his
Peredur, Diu Créne, and Sone de Nausay 343


origins for the French romances as evidence of the existence in
Wales of a Perceval legend embodying incidents that gave rise
to the legend of the Holy Grail. Few, however, latterly have denied
that it had some sort of connection with the French romances.

Nutt? speaks of it as “‘exhibiting ... what is, on the whole, the
oldest form of a sequence of incidents found in the most diverse
shapes in the French Grail romances. It is practically a Grail
Quest before the introduction of Christian symbolism has trans-
formed both the Grail itself and the Quest for it.” In his Studies
on the Holy Gratl (p. 145) he thinks that the extant Peredur
must be an amplification of an earlier Welsh tale, and that the
author of the story in-its revised form was strongly influenced
by Chrétien and drew upon him also for materials. In a special
thesis on the subject, Kssat sur la composition du roman gallois de
Peredur (Paris, 1909), Miss Mary R. Williams maintains that
only the final section (third, according to her division) is copied
from the French (mot Chrétien) — the section which begins with
Peredur’s return to Caerleon after his visit to the Grail castle
(pp. 13f.), — although there was also a French poem correspond-
ing to Section I. J. Loth, Les Mabinogion, I, 538 (Paris, 1913),
accepts Peredur, like The Lady of the Fountatm and Geraint the


own inventions, but on the basis of suggestions, which he found in Ia.
This Part III, as said above, begins with Peredur’s return to Caerleon
after his visit to the Grail castle.

* The Mabinogion, p. 354 (New York, 1902).

In his Studies in the Arthurian Legend, Ch. 4—6, J. Rhys
discusses Peredur in Welsh literature, and tries to connect him with
the stories of Yvain and Lancelot, but, as far as I am aware, has
convinced no one. — To prove that Peredur was “early known” as
a Grail hero in Wales, Evans cites the Black Book of Caermarthen,
65, 7—9 (of the twelfth century, it seems), where we have Peredur
called penwelic. He interprets this as pen-vedig = chtef physician
i. e. who healed the Grail king, and remarks: “Thus an independent
source of genuine antiquity reveals Percdur to us as the Welsh hero
of the Grail quest.” Cp. The White Book Mabinogion, Welsh Tales
Romances reproduced from the Peniarth Manuscripts, edited by
J. Gwenogoryn Evans, p. 14 (Pwllheli, 1907 — really issued, how-
ever, in 1909, it appears, since the Preface is dated in the latter year).
344 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


Son of Erbin, as derived from the French — strange to say, how-
ever, not from Chrétien, but from hypothetical Anglo-Norman poems
(now lost) which dealt with subjects of Welsh origin. In this he is fol-
lowing Gaston Paris. E. Windisch alone, Das Keltische Britannien bis
zu Kaiser Arthur, p.221 (Leipzig, 1912), appears to deny altogether
any connection with the French. — But one is tempted to say, how-
ever, that only the obsession of Celtic origins could lead one to
deny the derivation of Peredur from Chrétien.? The oldest MS.
of the Welsh tale (fragmentary) dates from the thirteenth cen-
tury (cp. Loth? I, 18) and the tale itself certainly dates from
a period when the French romances had already developed —
that is, not earlier than the latter half of the twelfth century, or,
more probably, the beginning of the thirteenth. Welsh scholars
have cited no evidence that would place them so early. The
author shows no knowledge of anything concerning the Perceval
legend which is not in Chrétien. His account of Perceval ends
where Chrétien ends.

‘The construction of the tale bears testimony to its French
origin. As compared with the Welsh tales of the native tradition,
such as Kulhwch and Olwen, Peredur and its companions, Owein
(The Lady of the Fountain) and Geraint, Son of Erbin‘ ex-


° Although an advocate of the Celtic origin of the Grail legend
Brugger regards the Peredur as a mere derivative of Chrétien and
his continuators. Cp. his review of Miss Williams’s thesis, Herrig’s
Archiv, CXXV, 450ff. (1910). So, too, W. A. Nitze, Modern Lan-
guage Notes, XXV, 246ff. (1910) and W. Golther, Literaturblatt fir
germamische und romanische Philologie, XXXI, 286f. (1910) in their
reviews of the same thesis. G. Paris, on the other hand, had ad-
vocated the certainly erroneous view that a lost Anglo-Norman poem
was the common source of Peredur and Chrétien’s Perceval. Cp.
p.. 99 of his Perceval et la légende du Saint Gral: Société Historique
et Cercle Saint-Simon, Bulletin no. 2 (Paris, 1883). He says, ibid.
p- 98, that the Perceval story is Welsh in origin, and regards the
Middle English Sir Perceval as preserving it in its most authentic form.

* J. Gwenogvryn Evans remarks that Peredur is more Welsh
than the last two and “less influenced by the prevailing tone of the
Romances of chivalry.” See his The White Book Mabinogion, etc.


Go ogle


Peredur, Diu Créne, and Sone de Nausay 345


hibit, as has already been said, a different art. We have here,
it 1s true, as in the mediaeval romances, generally, not a logi-
cally developed plot, but a series of episodes with hardly any
thread of connection, save that the same character is the hero of
each of the episodes. Nevertheless, the individual episodes are in
themselves coherent, whereas in the native Welsh tales there is no
coherence, and the fantastic narrative (with a multitude of beau-
tiful details, to be sure), like a wild vine, strikes out in any
direction it pleases. The structure of Peredur is, then, essentially
the structure of Perceval. Indeed, the actual order of the in-
cidents through the two works is the same — only that the hero’s
visit to Blanchefleur, owing, perhaps, to some disarrangement of
leaves in the French MS. which the Welshman had before him,
has been put later, and hence has produced an obvious confusion
in the Welsh narrative. In parts there is, indeed, for a long stretch
of narrative a verbal correspondence between the Welsh and the
French, as in the passage which follows on the incident of Perce-
val’s unhorsing Kay (Chrétien, ll. 5698 ff.). Elsewhere there are
manifest errors, which are due to the fact that the Welshman
has misunderstood his original. For example, Perceval’s excla-
mation on first seeing knights: ‘They are angels,’ is transferred
to his mother, in whose mouth they have no sense. Two nuns
appear strangely as waitresses in Blanchefleur’s castle, probably
because, on approaching this castle, Perceval is said by Chretien
to have seen “II Abéiee’’.5 — On the other hand, the Welsh
has some merits of style which are wanting in the French. As
Nutt has remarked,® the narrative in the former is “direct and
vivid, bathed in colour, bringing into high relief with an artistic
instinct almost uncanny in its rightness those traits and features,
which produce a picturesque, a romantic effect.”


pp. XIII, XXIV. This is true, but is explained by the composite
character of the work. Cp. p. 342, note 1, above. Evans believes
that Peredur had undergone repeated redaction before the days of
Chrétien” and that it is older than Owein and Gereint.

* Cp. Nutt, Studies, p. 135.


* Mabinogion, p. 352.
346 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


Apart from the confusions, just noted, the main differences
which distinguish Peredur are as follows: 1. Gawain’s adventures
are greatly abbreviated; 2. Descriptions pertaining to the life of
chivalry are largely left out; 3. The Grail, as such, does not appear
in the Welsh tale. Instead of the sacred vessel, we have simply
a dish with a bleeding head on it. This is a talisman intended .to
incite the hero to avenge the death of the cousin, whose head is
on the dish, and the harming of am uncle. The cause of this
difference is that the Welsh author could make nothing out of
the mysterious Grail in Chrétien’s unfinished poem, so that he
substituted the motif of vengeance which he found in Manessier’s
continuation and which was familiar to him already. Even the
idea of curing the Fisher King by the execution of vengeance,
employed by Manessier, would be well-known to him, for this is
found among the Celts, and in Old Irish the same word meant
to ‘‘pay”’ and to “cure’’.?7 All that the Welsh author did then
was to put on the dish, instead of the wafer, the head of Manessier’s
Goon Desert, which here serves as a warning, not a token of
victory. As an illustration of how impossible it was for foreign
translators of Chrétien to fathom’ the meaning of the Grail,
Golther® has cited the Norwegian translator, who betrays his des-
pair by offering the reader a choice of translations of the word
Grail, all equally nonsensical. This translator queries whether the
term means web or progressive alleviation or assistance! The
Welshman did better, inasmuch as he adopted from Manessier
something that he could understand. 4. The Welsh author has
introduced into the story some motifs drawn from native Welsh
folk-tales. The principal instances are in the Witches of Glou-
cester episode. Peredur subdues one of these witches, who had
been troubling a noble lady, and afterwards at the court of the
witches he learns the arts of chivalry. By the aid of a precious
stone that renders the bearer invisible the hero slays a great serpent
that dwells in a lake and ravages the surrounding country. 5. He
has substituted for the French name, Perceval, the familiar Welsh


7 Cp. J. Loth, Mabinogion*, I, 63, note.
* Cp. op. cit., p. 194.
Peredur, Diu Créne, and Sone de Nausay 347


name, Peredur. The Welsh tale, then, is substantially merely an
adaptation of Chrétien with some use of Wauchier and Manessier
and probably the Bliocadrans-prologue.® Like the mediaeval trans-
lators, generally, the author does not usually follow his original
verbatim, but paraphrases and shortens at will, and, most im-
portant of all, gives the style the colouring of the native tales.
As we have seen, he has also made some additions, but these are
not numerous. There is no need, then, of assuming the very im-
probable sequence: 1. a Welsh tale about Perceval. 2. a French
version of this tale. 3. Chréetien’s Perceval, based on the French
version. 4. the extant Welsh Peredur, which is a modification
of (1) under the influence of (2) or (8). Instead of this com-
plicated scheme, we simply have 1. Chrétien + his continuators.
2. the extant Peredur based on the same.


Besides the three works which I have just considered and which
have loomed so large in Grail discussions, there are two others which
are of less importance, but which should not be passed over entirely
in silence in a survey of the development of the legend of the
Holy Grail. They are as follows:

1. Diu Crone (Krone).° Gawain is the hero of this German
poem of 30,041 lines, which was written about 1220 by Heinrich
von dem Tiirlin, probably of Steiermark. In the genre to which
it belongs it has few rivals in respect to the number and extra-
vagance of the adventures that it offers. We find here specimens
of almost every fantastic object that went to make up the trea-
sure of mediaeval romance — drinking cups that test the chastity
of knights and ladies, magic girdles that render the wearer in-
visible, images, the sight of which induce an irresistible sleep,
etc. — and, of course, the incidents that are necessary to demon-
strate the power of these objects. The final adventure of the


° Cp. Golther, pp. 197f.

© Edited by G. H. F. Scholl as vol. 27 in the Bibliothek des
Litterarischen Vereins in Stuttgart (Stuttgart, 1852). Miss Weston
has translated the Grail episode in her Sir Gawain at the Grail
Castle, 33ff. (London, 1903). Gawain reaches the Grail castle at
]. 29153 of the original poem.
328 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


romance is Gawain’s visit to the Grail castle, on which occasion
he is accompanied by Lancelot and Calogreant. When the knights
arrive, they find in the hall of the Grail castle simply a cheerful,
pleasant scene, such as might have been witnessed almost daily
in a castle of the time — two youths of noble birth playing
chess and jesting, as they play, whilst the Grail lord, who, as in
the continuators of Chrétien (except Manessier), is not lame, looks
on at the game. So, too, with the feast in the evening, in des-
cribing which the author emphasizes the splendor of the service,
and the courtesy of the host, and the minstrels’ music. Before
the Grail procession enters, a fair youth brings in a sword which
we recognize as the sword that was destined for the Grail knight
in previous Grail romances. As in the corresponding scene in
Chrétien, however, here it is not broken. Heeding the admonition
which he had received from a goddess beforehand, Gawain refrains
from drinking at the feast, but his companions succumb to thirst,
fall into a deep slumber,!! and so do not share in Gawain’s sight
of the Grail procession. The most distinctive feature of the Grail
procession in Diu Crone is that the Grail is brought in by a
crowned damsel (the fairest that God had ever created), on a
cloth of samite and resting on a jewel as its base, being, itself,
like a reliquary on an altar, and that the spear dripped three
drops of blood into a salver which the host at once took.!2 Gawain


‘* This inopportune slumber was doubtless suggested by Pseudo-
Wauchier, ll. 20299ff., where Gawain is the victim. From the same
passage, probably; are derived (1) the conception of the Grail lord
as not lame, (2) the rather artless idea that Gawain is warned be-
forehand that he must ask the question.


1? The Christian symbolism of this is obvious, and shows that
the author recognizes the whole Grail conception as Christian. The
King says that only he is nourished by the blood. This, however,
is the German poet’s own innovation.

Miss Weston, op. cit., p. 82, speaks of the réle of the weeping
maidens in the Grail procession as being “never clear.” In her theory
of Grail origins she derives this feature of the Grail procession (which
is not universal in the Grail romances) from the Weeping Women of
the ancient Adonis festival. But in a scene of mysterious sorrow, why
should one seek outside of the situation itself the suggestion of women
Peredur, Diu Créne, and Sone de Nausay 349


recognizes at once in the Grail-bearer the goddess whom he had
met on his way to the Grail castle and who had warned him as
to what he should do there (ll. 28345ff.). He now recalls an-
other of her admonitions — namely, that when he saw her again
with five maidens in her company, he should not fail to ask what
they were doing. Gawain, accordingly, asks the unspelling ques-
tion, and the Grail people rejoice at the freedom which, through
this act of Gawain’s, they have regained. Strangest of all, how-
ever, the old lord of the Grail castle now tells Gawain that he
and his company are, in reality, dead. They had been doomed
to this life-in-death as a penance for sin which they had com-
mitted in the form of strife among kinsmen, and nothing but the
unspelling question could deliver them. Only the maidens of the
Grail procession were not spirits. After this pronouncement he
and his company vanish. Thus Gawain, as nowhere else in the
Grail romances, is permitted to achieve the quest of the sacred)
vessel.

It has been generally assumed, and rightly, no doubt, that
Heinrich von dem Tiirlin derived much of his material from French
romances that are no longer extant, but there is no compelling
reason for adopting this hypothesis in regard to the episode of the
Grail castle. As was inevitable, every romancer that dealt with
this theme introduced some variations into his description of the
scene, and the variations which we find in the present instance,
including the striking folk-tale conception of the phantom king
and courtiers, are such as a German poet could have imagined
just as well as a French one.!8 We need not suppose, either, with


uttering laments? Of course, after one writer had started this inno-
vation, other writers would imitate him. If one is to seek for an
original of this feature in some external source, the Gospels, of course,
furnish the example which is nearest to hand, in the women who
lament at the grave of Our Lord. And it is to be remembered that
in every extant version of the Grail theme, the Grail is regarded as
Christian. .

** The idea that the Grail maiden was a goddess is, of course,
not French. It is more natural, however, in a German poet who was
doubtless as interested in Frau Saelde, Frau Venus, etc., as other
countrymen of his in that age were.
390 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


Gaston Paris,* that Heinrich made Gawain the hero of the Grail
adventure, because he misunderstood the intentions of Chrétien
in his Perceval. If the author of the Queste, a few years before,
supplanted Perceval as the Grail Winner by Galahad, an entirely
new creation, it would be, to say the least of it, just as easy for
the German poet to divert this honor to the credit of Gawain, who
was already the most famous figure among the knights of Ar-
thur’s court.

2. Sone de Nausay.° This is a French romance of the latter
part of the thirteenth century, a tedious poem of 21,321 lines,
which in its incidents is often similar to the Arthurian romances,
but is not really connected with Arthur and his knights — not
even in its Grail episodes, which alone concern us here.

_ After various adventures in England, Scotland, and Ireland,
Sone, the hero of the romance, goes to Norway with Alain, king
of that country. He is taken (ll. 4339ff.) from the mainland
to the Grail castle, which is a monastery situated on an isle, not
far from the shore. One is surprised at the flora and fauna which
Sone finds in Norway — almond and olive trees, camels, grif-
fins and what not.16 The island of the Grail castle is square, with


** Histoire littéraire de la France, XXX, 44. Ibid., 43, he
thinks that Heinrich, alone, is responsible for the incidents of the episode.

*° Edited by Moritz Goldschmidt as vol. 216 of the Bibliothek
des Litterarischen Vereins in Stuttgart (Tiibingen, 1899). He says
nothing as to the date. A. Scheler, Le Bibliophile Belge, p. 253
(1866), puts it in the thirteenth century, although he does not say
in which half. The romance, however, evidently belongs to the latter half.

** In his “Sone de Nansai et la Norvége,” Romania, XXXV,
555, (1906), K. Nyrop, whilst recognizing these fantastic features of
the descriptions, argues that in certain matters of custom, fauna, etc.,
the author displays a knowledge of Norway which he could only have
acquired by actual travel in the country. I do not, however, feel
convinced. As far as custom is concerned, it seems to me that the
romancer is much more likely to be adapting materials here which
originally related to the Saxons and which he drew from Wace’s
Roman de Brut or some later Brut. Moreover, the name of the
Grail castle, Galoche(s), Galoces, is, surely, not a corruption of
Kastala-Klaustr (name of one of the old Norwegian monasteries), as
Nyrop (p. 568, note) is inclined to think, but of Old French Galesche,
Peredur, Diu Créne, and Sone de Nausay 351


a tower at each corner of the square and the Grail castle in the
middle. The place is ideally beautiful, with sculptured marble
walls enclosing the adjacent lawn and with springs and almond
and olive groves nearby. On the walk there were images of leo-
pards, which, when the wind struck their open mouths, emitted
the loveliest music. Sone learns from the abbot of the Grail
castle that Joseph of Arimathea, having arrived from Ascalon
(in Palestine), equipped with arms, had expelled the Saracens
from Norway (1. 475f.), converted the people, and made himself
king. Joseph loved the daughter of the pagan king whom he
had slain, had her baptized, married her, and begot a son upon her,
and the son was, likewise, crowned. Nevertheless, his wife con-
tinued to hate him for killing her father and many of her friends.
God afflicted Joseph for this foolish marriage, so that he was
unable to feed or help himself, and a physical blight fell on
his land, now called Lorgres (Logres) on account of its sorrows.
Fishing was his main solace, whilst he was in this crippled con-
dition, and he came to be known as the Fisher King (1. 4823).
At last, a knight cured him and he confounded the misbelievers.
Joseph’s son, Adam, died first, and his body was placed in a
shrine in the Grail castle. Later Joseph, himself, passed away,
but, before dying, he provided for the foundation of the Grail
castle or monastery. It was inhabited by thirteen monks (typi-
fying Christ and his twelve apostles). The abbot, then (ll. 4885ff.),
produces the Grail, a relic of the true cross, and the bleeding
lance. The people kneel and exclaim, ‘‘mea culpa’’, as this is
done. The abbot next shows them the respective shrines, where
Joseph and his son lay. A feast follows, and Alain and Sone,
after that, quit the island. We hear later on of a sword which
Joseph had guarded his realm with and which the abbot had given
to Sone for the latter’s combat with a giant King of Scotland.
This sword, however, was to be returned to the abbot after the


/
Galesce (= Welsh). The Grail castle, being situated in Gales (—= Wales)
was a ‘“castiax galesches’”. Owing to some misunderstanding or to
the corruption of his source, the author of the Sone de Nausay mistook
the adjective for a proper name.
352 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


combat — an agreement, however, which Sone was tardy in ful-
filling.

After the death of Alain (ll. 11778ff.), his daughter, Odee,
inherits the kingdom. She had long been in love with Sone, and
ultimately marries him. They go to the Grail castle to be crown-
ed (ll. 16914ff.) and after the coronation there is a religious
service in which the Grail and the relics exhibited on the hero’s
previous visit to the isle are brought forth, with the addition
of a candlestick that was borne by an angel, when the Virgin
Mary gave birth to Jesus. It may be remarked that in this
passage the last vestige of secrecy about the Grail has disappeared.
The Grail service is conducted in the sight of the whole people
(ll. 17055ff.) and after the ceremony is over, the abbot puts the
sacred vessel into an ivory box (ll. 171038ff.), exactly as a priest
of the period, after the sacramental service, would restore the cha-
lice to its appointed receptacle. Indeed, the main interest of these
Grail episodes of the Sone de Nausay lies in the fact that we see
here the old veil of mystery that had surrounded the holy vessel
in the earlier treatments of the theme finally thrown aside and
the identity of the Grail with a vessel of the eucharist acknow-
ledged without disguise."


** In his edition of the poem Goldschmidt, p. 556, assumes that
its author used lost sources that Wolfram also used. His reasons for
this assumption are: 1. that in both “verbotene Minne” is the cause
of the wounding of the Grail King—Joseph in Sone de Nausay, An-
fortas in the Parzival, 2. that both show a connection with: the
Swan-knight story. S. Singer and Miss Weston have adopted Gold-
schmidt’s suggestions enthusiastically — the former in “Uber die Quelle
von Wolfram’s Parzival’, Zs. f. d. A., XLIV, 330 (1900), the latter
in “Notes on the Grail Romances’, Romania, XLII, 403 ff. (1914).
Singer goes so far as to accept the points which Goldschmidt urges
as definitive proof that Wolfram used a different source from Chrétien’s
Perceval. “Nur ein voreingenommener,” he declares, “kann noch be-
haupten, dass Wolfram Chrestien beniitzt hat.’ But the two scholars,
just named, are blinded by their enthusiasm. Take the first of the
two points. There is, in reality, hardly any resemblance at all between
the cases of the crippled Grail Kings in the two romances. As we
have seen in the Sone de Nausay, Joseph became infatuated with
Peredur, Diu Créne, and Sone de Nausay 353


the heathen princess, and had her baptized — though she did not
accept Christianity in her heart and hated him for perfectly natural
reasons — and then married her. It was a foolish match for him
to make, but the marriage was an entirely legimitate one. On the
other hand, Wolfram, 472, 1. 26, stresses the fact that it was pride
(“hochvart’) that brought about Anfortas’s misfortune and caused him
to seek love “‘izerhalp der kiusche sinne’”, 1. 30. His liaison was
not with the heathen princess, Secundille, as Miss Weston, p. 412,
states, but with Orgeluse, who is a “lady of Logres’, and not a heathen.
As to her relations with Anfortas, see what Orgeluse herself says,
Parzwal, 616, llff. Equally without warrant is Miss Weston’s assertion,
ibid., p. 412, that the Sone de Nausay contains a Templar element.

As regards the combination in the French romance of the Grail
with the Swan-knight story, the only trace of this in the poem is to
be found in the four lines, 20807—20811, where it is said that
Sone’s son, Houdyans, married Matabrune, a cruel lady from the big
and fertile island (sic) of Bohemia. This has, however, no significance
whatever. The author is merely doing here what he does elsewhere
in the romance, viz. bringing in as minor actors in the story characters
who were well known in contemporary romance. Cp. Meleagant, I.
17151ff., Orson, 18017ff., Madoc, 18162ff. On the other hand, in
the prose introduction (pp. 552ff.), which furnishes a summary of the
events of the poem and is obviously by a different hand, we have the
Swan-knight tale epitomized in eight or nine lines at the point where
Matabrune is mentioned in the poem. There is nothing singular in
this, however, since the author of this introduction (like the author of
the poem), doubtless, lived in the Netherlands or in the contiguous
territory — that is to say, in the region where the Swan-knight legend
was most widely current.

As far as the supposed resemblances between our romance and
the Perlesvaus (cp. Miss Weston, p. 411) are concerned, these stand
the test of an examination about as poorly as the matters I have just
dealt with; but, if they were real, what difference would that make?
The Perlesvaus, like virtually all other Arthurian romances of any
importance, had been in circulation long before the Sone de Nausay
was written, and its pages were open to anybody who chose to
read them.

For the description of the square island. ll. 17131ff., (which lies
not far from the Grail castle), and its parallel in the Latin romance,
Historia Meriadoci, pp. 43f., see the discussion, pp. XXXIVf., in my
edition. of the Historia Meriadoci and De Ortu Waluuanii.


Hefperia, Ergdnzungsreihe: 8. 23
Chapter VIII.
Other Theories concerning the Origin of the Grail.


For the sake of completeness I will summarize very briefly
certain theories of minor importance that have been advanced to
explain the legend of the Holy Grail.

1. Attempts have been made to derive the conception of the
Grail from late Jewish, Syrian, and Arabic legends, which are
supposed to have reached Western Europe in the Middle Ages.
The authors of such theories have none of them been especial
students of the Old French romances, in which, of course, the
legend was first developed. With the exception of Wesselofsky,
they all start from Wolfram’s Parzival in which (alone of all the
Grail texts) the Grail is not a vessel of any kind, but merely a
stone. As we have seen, however, this conception of Wolfram’s
is indisputably the result of some misunderstanding, on his part,
of his French original, and so the whole basis of these oriental
theories is false.

The authors of these speculations and the essential features
of the respective theories are as follows:

; (a) M. Gaster, ‘The Legend of the Holy Grail,” Folk-Lore,

II, 50ff., 198ff., (1891): The Grail quest sprang from an episode
of the legend of Alexander the Great, viz. the Iter ad Paradisum,
or journey to the Earthly Paradise and the marvellous castle or
temple of the sun. The Grail, itself, was a certain sacred stone
of the temple at Jerusalem, which is still preserved in the so-
called Temple of the Rock of that city. A very severe criticism
of Gaster’s theory which Alfred Nutt appended to the second
instalment of Gaster’s study seems to have discouraged him from
ever publishing the promised continuation. Nutt pointed out that
the idea of connecting the Grail story with the Iter ad Paradisum
Other Theories concerning the Origin of the Grail 355


had already been advanced by Weismann in his edition (1850)
of the Middle High German Alexander by Lamprecht, II, 212,
note — moreover, that the description of the temple of the sun
in the French Alexander romances, which alone Chrétien and the
authors of the other Grail romances would have consulted, bears
no resemblance to the story of the Grail in these latter works.
The conception of the Grail as a stone, he observes, too, is pe~
culiar to Wolfram.

(b) Paul Hagen, Der Gral (Strassburg, 1900): Wolfram-
Guiot represents the legend in its primitive form in many res-
pects better than Chrétien, and he may have had an Arabic source,
It developed from the worship of baetyli (holy stones) in the
East. The author tries to connect it particularly with the legend
of Prester John. Hagen’s work is important for Wolfram, but
not for the Grail legend, in general.

(c) Willy Staerk, Uber den Ursprung der Grallegende, (Ti-
bingen and Leipzig, 1903): The Grail legend is simply another
form of the legend of an Earthly Paradise, which is found in
all parts of the world and, especially, in the East. The author
gives an interesting collection of examples of the latter idea, but
presents no evidence to establish an historical connection between
the two legends.

(d) A. N. Wesselofsky, ‘Zur Frage iiber die Heimath der
Legende vom heiligen Gral,” Archiv fiir slavische Philologie,
XXII, 321ff. (1901). For a list of Wesselofsky’s earlier wri-
tings on the Grail theme (mostly in Russian) cp. ibid., p. 321,
note. The author, who is an advocate of the Christian origin
af the Grail, concentrates his attention on the legend of Joseph
of Arimathea — and, hence, among the Grail romances, on those
in which Joseph plays a leading part, viz. Robert’s Joseph and.
the Grand St. Graal (Estoire del Satnt Graal) In these ro-


* The oriental Joseph legend which he outlines, pp. 325ff. is now
accessible in a German translation by A. Harnack: “Kin in georgischer
Sprache iiberliefertes Apokryphon des Joseph von Aramathia,” Sitzwngs-
berichte der kéniglich preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften,
Jahrgang 1901, pp. 920ff. The only part of it which is of interest
at all to Grail students, however, is a mere version of the Gospel of


23*
356 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


mances, ofcourse, the Grail is, as in the other French ro-
mances, a vessel of the sacrament. Wesselofsky’s theory involves
all sorts of inadmissible assumptions, e. g. that the passages about
Joseph and Glastonbury in the De Antiquitate Ecclesiae Glasto-
niensis are genuine, that the author of the Grand St. Graal drew
(independently of Robert de Boron) on an oriental Christian-
Jewish legend for his conceptions of the Grail. The object of his
article is, as he says (p. 322), to prove “‘dass in den Quellen
der Romane vom heil. Gral sich Legenden einer christlich-yi-
dischen Diaspora in Palastina, Syrien und Athiopien abspiegeln
und da ihre Anpassung an das Abendland sich auf dem Wege der
Ubertragung vollzogen habe, wobei es augenscheinlich ganz me-
chanisch herging.” In order to establish a connection of the
Grail romances with the East — especially with localities in Syria
and Mesopotamia — the author indulges, znter alia, in the most
fantastic Oriental derivations of the names of places and persons
in the Grail romances — above all, in the Grand St. Graat.?

(e) Theodor Sterzenbach, Ursprung und Entwickelung der
Sage vom heiligen Gral (Minster dissertation, 1908). He identi-
fies the Grail with a ‘“‘missorium’”’ (portable altar-stone, accord-
ing to Sterzenbach) which the Roman general, Aetius (fifth cen-
Pseudo-Nicodemus. To be sure, it offers some variants, but the main
one which represents Joseph as receiving the blood of Jesus in a head-
cloth and a large cloth (p. 923), is irreconcilable with the conceptions
of the Grail romances.

* Precisely the same criticism applies to Miss M. A. Murray's
attempt to establish an Egyptian origin for the Grail legend. See her
“Egypt in the Grail Romance,” in the organ of Egyptian research,
edited by Flinders Petrie and entitled Ancient Hgypt—volume for
1916, Part I, pp. 1ff., Part II, 54ff. She takes the Hstovre as the
basis of her studies and in Part I offers fanciful Egyptian derivations
for some of its names. In Part LI, she gives some illustrations of the
Eucharistic ritual of the Coptic churches. These illustrations are in-
teresting in themselves, but throw no additional light on Grail problems.
Outside of the Hstowre, the author evidently has little or no acquain-
tance with the long and intricate Old French texts, which must con-
stitute the true basis for all study of Grail origins. She, accordingly,
makes no allowance for invention on the part of the authors of these
texts, the possibility of one developing suggestions from the other, etc.
Other Theories concerning the Origin of the Grail 367


tury) is said to have presented to Thorismund, King of the West-
goths. He still further identifies it with a “tabula Salomonis”
that was captured by the Arabs in their invasion of Spain in
711, and King Roderick, the Spanish monarch, who was slain
on that occasion, is the Fisher King. This is all, really, too
flimsy for discussion.

(f) Ludwig Emil Iselin: Der morgenléndische Ursprung der
Grallegende (Halle, 1909). The author argues that a Syriac book
of sagas, Book of the Cavern of Treasures, is the source of the
Grail legend. This book dates from the fifth or sixth century.
It 18 one of the numerous Oriental works that pretend to give
a complete and edifying history of Adam and his earliest de-
scendants, filling out gaps in the Scriptures. The only tolerable
analogue to the Grail conceptions, however, which the book offers
is in the story of Melchisidek, who guarded the tomb of Adam
(this tomb being unapproachable by the profane) and obtained
strength and nourishment in a supernatural manner, and on whose
offerings the Holy Spirit descended. But the similarity here is
of too vague a nature to count for anything and the theory hag
gained virtually no adherents.*

2. Leopold von Schroeder, the eminent Sanskrit scholar, in
his treatise Die Wurzeln der Sage vom heiligen Gral,* has endeav-
ored to prove that the Grail legend is simply a variant of the


es tees


* See the very good review of Iselin’s book by E. Brugger, Zs.
f. frz. Spr. u. Litt., XXXVI", 74ff. (1910). A. Nutt, in The Aca-
demy for May 7, 1910, though rejecting the theory of the origin of
the Grail legend advocated by Iselin, commends his book as “the most
convincing plea for the purely Christian origin of the bulk of the Grail
cycle with which I am acquainted.’”’ But, as I have said above, Iselin
proceeds on the assumption that the Grail, according to the primary
conception of it, was a stone. Now, that assumption is indisputably
false, and, consequently, his solution of the “psychological problem in-
volved,” as. to how the sacrament of the Eucharist came “to be adapted
for the purpose of secular entertainment,” which Nutt finds “plausible”,
is without any real basis.

* Sitzungsberichte der Kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissen-
schaften. Philosophisch-Historische Classe, Band 166, 2. Abhand-
lung. Wien, 1910.


Go ogle


398 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


sun-myth. He seeks analogies in the Rig-Veda, which some scho-
lars have dated as far back as 1500 B.C. In the Reg-Veda, the
sun is conceived of as a vessel containing hot milk or broth.
Schroeder thinks that the same thing is true of the moon, though
here the matter is not so clear. He cites (pp. 34ff.) parallels
also from the mythological conceptions of other Indo-European
races and believes (although there is no extant evidence to that
effect) that similar conceptions prevailed among the Celts and
passed from them into the Grail romances. Altogether Schroeder
ransacks mediaeval legend for parallels to various features of the
Grail legend. He shows no knowledge of the Old French ro-
mances and the Indian analogues are so remote in time (some
2,000 years) and in space that they are really of no value. One
may remark that at one time or another, it has been the fate of
virtually every great saga to be reduced to the condition of a mere
variant of the sun-myth. The turn of the Grail-legend was bound
to come. Another Austrian scholar, Victor Junk, in his Gral-
sage und Graldichtung des Mittelalters,® accepts Schroeder’s
theory of the ultimate derivation of the Grail-legend, but regards
as the immediate source the Breton tale of Peronnik l’'idiote, which
he takes as the myth reduced to the form of a fairy-tale. This tale
however, was first written down by Emil Souvestre in 1845—6,
so that no one can say whether it was in existence in the twelfth
century, or, if so, whether it may not have been modified in
the course of subsequent centuries directly or indirectly by the
Old French romances concerning Perceval, or finally whether the
suspicion expressed by some scholars may not be well-grounded
— viz. that Souvestre “cooked” the story as it was current in
oral form. But, after all, the story resembles the Grail-romances


* For a refutation of Schréder’s theory, see the reviews of his
work by E. Brugger, Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt., XXXVIL*, 163#f. (1911)
and A. C. L. Brown, Journal of English and Germanic Philology
for Jan. 1913 — also, E. Windisch, Das Keltische Britannien bis
zu Kaiser Arthur, pp. 119ff.

* Ibid., Band 168, 4. Abhandlung, Wien, 1911. — W. Hertz,
Sage vom Parziwal und dem Gral, p. 25, (Breslau, 1882), had already
spoken of Peronnik l’idiote as plainly connected with the Perceval story.


Go ogle


Other Theories concerning the Origin of the Grail 3859


in so few respects that it could not possibly be regarded as the
source of these romances, even if we waived the objections just
enumerated. W. Golther, in his review of Junk’s treatise (see
Titeraturblatt for Dec. 1912) has pointed out that Peronnsk is
rather a variant of another well-known fairy-tale, The Journey
for the Water of Life.

Vienna, of recent years, has been particularly fertile in wild
theories respecting Arthurian themes. Julius Pokorny, the well-
known grammarian (Old Irish) has attained the ne plus ultra
in this line when he undertook to prove (Der Ursprung der ‘Arthur-
sage: Mitteilungen der anthropologischen Gesellschaft in Wien,
vol. 39, 1909) that the whole Arthurian story is simply a cuckoo-
saga in disguise. This writer derives the Grail legend from the
Irish saga of Cuchullin (see above Mittheilungen, vol. 42, 1912),
which in turn he derives from the same Indo-European myth as
von Schroeder.’


* One might include among these minor theories concerning the
origin of the Grail legend the one which G. Baist has briefly outlined
in his Parzwal und der Gral (Freiburg, 1909), pp. 39ff., and which
in certain of its aspects, I have discussed above, p. 264, note 54, and
p. 266, note 56. As we have seen, Baist assumes that the Grail ori-
ginally (i. e. as set forth in the “livre” which Count Philip of Alsace
gave to Chrétien) had no marvellous properties of any kind, (religious
or otherwise), and that the whole incident of the Grail procession is
simply intended to exemplify the rule that silence is not always golden.
Any other object would have done just as well. The question (in
Chrétien), “Whom does the Grail serve?” is merely the question that
serves to undo a spell, which is a frequent motif in saga and fairy-
tales. Chrétien purposely surrounds the matter with a factitious mystery.
Furthermore, the poet introduces the bleeding lance with reference to
tne meeting of Gawain and Perceval, which he planned for the end
of his poem. Chrétien represents the Grail king as nourished by the
“ostie’ (host), not because of any miraculous qualities of the Grail,
but because he was a holy man. Count Philip’s book, he thinks, be-
longed to the Latin “Unterhaltungsliteratur” of the early Middle Ages,
and “Weisheitslehren” (e. g. silence is not always golden) were, doubt-
less, emphasized in it. |

Baist brings forward no evidence to support the points which he
makes, and as far as J am aware, has won no adherents for his theory.
360 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


3. In concluding this chapter on the legend of the Holy Grail,
mention should be made of the hexagonal dish or basin,’ called
the Sacro (Sagro) Catino in the cathedral of San Lorenzo at Genoa,
which was long accepted as the Holy Grail, not only locally, but by
learned men elsewhere.9 This vessel, which was prized by the
Genoese beyond measure as early as the twelfth century, was re-
garded down to the first decade of the last century as of emerald
and was generally identified with the dish of the Last Supper.
In the eighteenth century, Fra Gaetano da Teresa produced a
book of 835 pages on the subject, entitled I] Catino di Smeraldo
Orientale, Gemma consagrata da N. S. Gesu Cristo nell’ Ultima
Cena degli Azimt, etc. (Genoa, 1726). This is a work of enormous
industry and nearly everything that modern scholars have said
about the Sacro Catino is drawn from it directly or indirectly.1°
It is needless to say that the author has the firmest faith that
this is the veritable dish which was used by Our Lord at the Last
Supper.

The first mention of this relic occurs in the Bellum Sacrum
of William of Tyre — a chronicle of the Crusades — in the latter


° There is a picture of it in C. Rohault de Fleury’s Mémoire
sur les Instruments de la Passion, Plate 23 (Paris, 1870).

° Cp. the article, Graal, in J. B. B. Roquefort’s Dictionnaire
de la langue Romane, (Paris, 1808). PP. Paris, of course, did not
share this belief, but he thought that this very vessel might have given
the first impulse to the composition of the Grail romances. See his
edition of the Old French (thirteenth century) translation of William
of Tyre, Guillaume de Tyr et ses Continuateurs, I, 353, note 3
(Paris, 1879), where he says: “Mais peut-étre l’auteur des deux fameux
Romans du Saint Graal, devenus Vintroduction et le dénoiment
d’anciennes légendes bretonnes d’un ordre tout différent, était-il parti
de ce vase de Césarée |i. e. the Sacro Catino] pour donner carriére
a& ses mystiques imaginations.”

'° This and Roquefort’s article, Graal, just cited, are the main
sources of the best modern treatment of the subject, viz., the one in
W. Hertz's Parzival, pp. 456ff. Hertz is discussing here blood relics,
in general.

*“ Book X, ch. 16.
Other Theories concerning the Origin of the Grail 361


part of the twelfth century. There is no mention made here of
the identification of the vessel with the dish of the Last Supper,
although the chronicle tells us that the Genoese estimated its value
so highly that they accepted it as their sole share of the booty.
on the fall of Caesarea. On the other hand, William already
intimates a doubt as to its being really of emerald, and from the
vehemence with which Jacobus de Voragine, archbishop of Genoa
and author of the famous Legenda Aurea, a hundred years later,
defends the venerated relic}? as a genuine emerald, questionings
on this head must have become louder and louder in the interval.
Nearly five hundred years later we find Fra Gaetano still endeavor-
ing to silence scepticism on this point.!8 The believers were fi-
nally discomfited, however, when in 1806 Napoleon I took the
Sacro Catino to Paris. There it was tested by a commission of
the French Institute and declared to be merely coloured glass.
It was restored to Genoa in 1814.

The earliest passage in which the identity of the Genoese
relic with the dish of the Last Supper is assumed is the one from
the Chronicle of Genoa by Jacobus de Voragine'* to which I have
already referred. He says there that in certain English books
it is told how Nicodemus, when he took the body of Christ down
from the Cross, collected the blood of Our Lord in an emerald
vessel, ‘‘et illud vas dicti Angh in libris suis Sanguinalia’ appel-
lant”. This passage was written manifestly under the influence
of the Grail romances — only Jacobus forgets that it was Joseph
of Arimathea in the romances, and not Nicodemus, who collected
the sacred blood. The Sacro Catino he identifies with this vessel.

There are two traditions!* as to how the supposed emerald
relic came to Genoa. According to one, as has been intimated


2 In his Chronicon Januense, ch. 18. Cp. the edition of Mu-
ratori, Rerum Italicarum Scriptores, IX, 32f. (Milan, 1726).

** Cp. Fra Gaetano, pp. XIIff.

** See the passage cited above.

** Fra Gaetano, p. 138, quoting the passage, has here Sangreal,
Muratori’s text, however, gives, no doubt, the original reading.

"© Cp. Fra Gaetano, pp. 1ff. and 250 ff. respectively. He de-
clines, pp. 272f., to decide between them.
362 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


above, it was a part of the Genoese booty on the capture of Cae-
sarea in 1101, during the first Crusade; according to the other,
it came into their possession in 1147, on the fall of Almeria in
Spain. The Genoese had assisted King Alfonso in the siege of
the city. The testimony of William of Tyre, however, seems to
prove beyond question that the first of these traditions is the
correct one. |


(Oo ogle


PART IIL.


THE PROSE ROMANCES.
Original from


Digitized by Google UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA


Chapter I.
Beginnings of the Prose-Romances.


As we have seen above, the production of the metrical ro-
mances was proceeding vigorously in the closing years of the twelfth
century and the opening years of the thirteenth, but it was just
in this period that the new genre of the prose romance began —
the genre which long before the end of the Middle Ages was destin-
ed to eclipse the metrical romances completely in popular favor.
The composition of romances in prose is simply one feature of the
general rise of French prose in the latter part of the twelfth
century, which, in turn, was favored, no doubt, by the more gene-
ral knowledge of reading that was characteristic of the time. The
author of the Old French prose romance, the Mort Artu, thought
it worth while recording of Arthur that he knew enough of letters
to understand a writing.! We see, therefore, that even royal per-
sonages were not very learned in the period under consideration.
According to Wauchier de Denain,? Perceval was still worse off,
for he could not read at all. As long as facility in reading was
confined to a few and even members of the higher classes were
mainly dependent on being read aloud to,’ the traditional form


* Bruce’s Mort Artu, p. 50.

* Cp. his continuation to Chrétien’s Perceval, 1. 33957, “Mais
Pierchevaus ne savoit lire’ (Potvin’s edition). — The line occurs in
the description of Perceval’s adventure at Mont Dolerous. On top of
the mountain there was a pillar with an inscription on it, declaring
that the achievement of the adventure was reserved for the best knight
in the world, but Perceval was unable to read it. — In the prose
Lancelot (Sommer, III, 154) we are told that Lancelot could read,
but Gawain could not.

* In the Lancelot (Sommer, Ill, 106) it is said that Lancelot’s
mother used to make her chaplain read saints’ lives aloud to her. This,
to be sure, does not necessarily imply that she could not read herself.
Even in antiquity reading aloud and in company was much commoner
than nowadays. In his Confessions, Book VI, ch. 3, St. Augustine
speaks of St. Ambrose’s habit of silent reading, as if it were unusual.


Go ogle


366 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


of narrative — namely, verse — was not likely to yield ground;
but as soon as a knowledge of reading became more general and
people were no longer dependent on professional reciters, the su-
perior attraction of prose for many who were interested in these
stories of love and adventure would be sure to make itself felt.
What is here said applies, of course, especially to women, who
must have constituted the majority of the romance-writer’s
cleentele.

Owing to the causes just indicated, the production of the
Arthurian prose-romances began about the end of the twelfth cen-
tury, and, to judge merely by the bulk of what has survived,
it must have been truly prodigious in the course of the next forty
to fifty years, to say nothing of the later period.


Probably, the earliest prose-romance was the prose-rendering
of Robert de Boron’s Joseph which, doubtless, owed this distinction
to its quasi-religious character. Down to this time virtually the
only French prose consisted of brief saints’ lives, and a work
of the nature of the Joseph, so closely akin to that species of
composition, would furnish a suitable transition from what was
substantially religious fiction to purely secular romance. The
Merlin which comes immediately after the Joseph in Robert’s
scheme, would naturally be the next of the romances to receive
a prose dress* — not unlikely, from the same hand — and after


* This prose-rendering of Robert’s Merlin begins, of course, the
Merlin branches in the so-called Walter Map and Robert de Boron
cycles of the prose romances. Cp. Sommer, II, 3—-88 and Huth-
Merlin, I, 1—146, respectively. In each of these cycles there are
continuations far longer than the prose-Robert, itself.

Brugger, Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt., XXIX', 75f. (1905), thinks,
too, that the prose-renderings of Robert's Joseph and Merlin were
the earliest prose-romances, and suggests that their author adopted
this form, in order to accentuate the historical character of Robert’s
narratives the better. The reason for this adoption given above, how-
ever, seems more satisfactory.

On the other hand. G. Paris, Mélanges de littérature frangaise
du moyen age, I, 50, expresses the opinion that the Lancelot (in an
earlier form than that which we possess) was the first prose romance.


Beginnings of the Prose-Romances 367


these would follow the longer prose romances which have come
down to us, also, in cyclic form and which, as we may safely
assert, were composed in prose from the start.)

Having already dealt with the brief prose-renderings of Ro-
bert’s Joseph and Merlin,® we shall begin our consideration of the
prose romances in this place with the great cyclic romances in
prose, which, as has just been said, never existed in metrical form.


He supports this opinion, however. with no evidence. The comparative
brevity of the prose Joseph and Merlin, also, makes their priority
more likely.

* It is possible that there existed, earlier than our cyclic ro-
mances, prose-renderings of metrical romances other than Robert’s, but
there is no evidence to that effect. Griber, Grundriss, II, I, 1004,
assumes that the adaptation of Chrétien’s Lancelot, which we find in
the prose Lancelot, was originally a separate work. Brugger, too,
conjectures, Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt., XXXI*, 276, that our prose
Lancelot is simply an adaptation of an earlier poem. Neither con-
jecture, however, is supported by any evidence.

° Cp. pp. 144 ff, above.
Chapter II.
The Prose Cycles.


There are two great cycles of Arthurian romances in prose:
(1) That which is known as the Vulgate or Walter Map Cycle.
(2) That which is known as the Pseudo-Robert-de-Boron Cycle.
The former is not only infinitely more important than the latter,
in every respect, but it is earlier in date,! and it will, therefore,
first claim our attention.

The Vulgate Cycle is so called, because it became the most
popular redaction of the romances in the Middle Ages, almost
completely displacing all other versions. It is made up of the
five great romances, L’Hstoire del Saint Graal (or Grand St. Graal,
as scholars have often called it, although this title is not found
in the MSS.), L’Estoire de Merlin (prose rendering of Robert’s
Merlin plus a continuation), Zi Livres (L’Estoire) de Lancelot, La
Queste del Saint Graal and La Mort Artu, and it exists either
complete or in part in a large number of MSS. — probably not
far from a hundred. The name of Map is, also, given to this
cycle, because the MSS. regularly ascribe to him the composition
of the last three members of the cycle.? This attribution, how-


* The contrary opinion which has been entertained by some
scholars will be considered below.
* The facts are correctly stated by Brugger, Zs. f. fre. Spr.
u. Litt., XXIX’*, 90, note 47, — only, as regards the Queste and
Mort Artu, he should have expressed himself more strongly; for the
ascription occurs regularly in the MSS. at the end of the former and
at both the beginning and the end of the latter. The few exceptions
are evidently due to an effort at condensation on the part of indi-
vidual scribes. At the end of the Mort Avrtu, as Brugger observes,
the language implies that Map wrote, also, the Lancelot, e. g. Add.
10294: “Si se taist ore maistre gautiers map de lestoire de lancelot.”
The ascription occurs, also, sometimes at the conclusion of the Lan-


CO ogle


The Prose Cycles 369


ever, is manifestly a fiction and has been generally rejected by
recent scholars. The following considerations prove that it is false:
(1) As will appear from our analyses of the romances and from
the discussion below, there is no likelihood that even the Lancelot
is the work of one man, much less three romances so different in
power, style, and tone as the Lancelot, Queste, and Mort Artu.
(2) No one has ever claimed for the Lencelot an earlier date than
the last decade of the twelfth century — generally it is dated
later — but even in 1190 Map was a man of about fifty years
of age‘ and it is in the highest degree unlikely — especially under
mediaeval conditions — that he should have taken to the writing
of romances at that time of life. (3) Map himself expressly


ee eee ee


celot, but one cannot say how often, until further collations of that
branch have been made. —- For MSS. of the Vulgate cycle cp. H. O.
Sommer, Vulgate Version of the Arthurian Romances, I, pp. XXIII
—XXXII. For the Lancelot MSS. cp. besides, the Vorwort to
G. Briuner’s Der altfranzésische Prosaroman von Lancelot del Lac
I Branche. Marburger Beitrdge zur romanischen Philologie, Heft II,
and for those of the Mort Artu, Bruce's edition of that romance,
pp. XII, ff. In the last-named list the following MSS. are omitted: 122, f.
fr. (B.N.) — which, like MS. 342, shows an unabridged text for the
passage, pp. 102ff. (Bruce's ed.) — and the Vatican MS. Palat. 1967.
For the latter (recently discovered), which contains only the Mort
Artu, cp. Romama, XLVI, 151 (1920). F. Lot has in preparation
a special work on the MSS. of the Vulgate cycle.

* Cp., for example, Birch-Hirschfeld, Sage vom Gral, pp. 227 ff.
(Leipzig, 1877), G. Paris, Manuel, 62, and Sommer, Zs. f. rom. Ph.,
XXXII, 336 (1908). As will be seen, however, below, p. 371, note 8,
the old idea of Map’s connection with the cycle has been revived in
a modified form by certain scholars.

“ For the life of Map, see H. L. D. Ward's Catalogue of the
Romances in the Department of Manuscripts in the British Museum,
I, 734 ff. (1883), and the article on him in the Dictionary of Na-
tional Biography. These are better than the fuller, but antiquated,
life by Georg Phillips, Walter Map: Ein Beitrag zur Geschichte
Kénig Heinrichs von England und des Lebens an seinem Hofe,
Sitzungsberichte of the Vienna Academy of Sciences, Philos. = hist.
Klasse, X, 319ff. (1853). Concerning earlier views about W. Map
and the Lancelot, cp. Graesse, Lehrbuch einer allgemeinen Laterdér-
geschichte, Band II, Abtheilung III, pp. 188 ff. Dresden and Leipzig (1842).

Hefperia, Ergdngungsreihe: 8. 24


(0 ogle


370 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


states in the oft-quoted words preserved by Giraldus Cambrensis®>
that he wrote little or nothing. According to Giraldus, Map said
to him: “Multa, magister Giralde, scripsisti, et multum adhuc
scribitis: et nos multa diximus. Vos scripta dedistis et nos verba.”’
He goes on to say that, although the writings of Giraldus were
of much more importance than his (Map’s) words, (i. e. spoken
words), yet, because his words were in the vernacular, which every-
body understood, they had brought him greater profit than all
of his friend’s Latin.®

The implication of this statement of Map’s is borne out by
the little that we know of his life and activities, his only authentic
literary production being the De Nugis Curialium (Courtiers’
Triflings), which is a collection of tales and anecdotes loosely
thrown together. In his own time his reputation was that of
a wit and satirist, and there is no evidence that he possessed even


° Hiberniae Expugnatio, Rolls Series edition of Giraldus’s Works,
V, 410f. (1867).

* P. Paris, Romans de la Table Ronde, I, 472, tried to get
around the plain meaning of these words by interpreting scribere as
writing in Latin, dicere as writing in the vernacular, but there is no
such distinction as this elsewhere. Cp. Birch-Hirschfeld, p. 229.
Brugger, too, op. cit., p. 98, note 49, denies any importance to these
words reported by Giraldus; for, as a matter of fact, he says, Map
did write the De Nugis, and he may have counted the (supposed)
Lancelot romance as just as little worth mentioning as that work.
The two works, however, would certainly be on a different plane, for
the De Nugis, as said above, is a mere disconnected collection of
anecdotes and tales and there is no likelihood that Map ever attempted
to make it generally known, seeing that it exists in only one (fifteenth
century) MS. Cp. the recent and best edition of the book by M. R. James
(Oxford, 1914). Indeed, James Hinton, whose study of the De Nugis,
viz., “Walter Map’s De Nugis Curialium, its plan and composition,”
PMLA, XXXII, 81ff. (1917), is the ablest we have, concludes that
Map left this book in the condition of loose fragments, which were
put together by some one else after his death. So, too, Henry Bradley,
English Hist. Review, XXXII, 400 (1917). |

It should be remembered, moreover, that many poems, not com-
posed by Map, were fathered upon him. Cp. the volume edited by
Thomas Wright for the Camden Society, Latin Poems commonly
attributed to Walter Map (London, 1841).
The Prose Cycles 371


in the prime of his life the power to carry through a work of
sustained invention, such as is exhibited in even the shortest of
the three romances named above.?’ He was one of the chief men
of his age and of Welsh origin, and it was doubtless on these
accounts that some scribe or redactor, or possibly even the author
ox some part of the cycle, endeavored to win the prestige of his
name for these pseudo-Celtic stories.®


” Similar is the conclusion of Hinton, op. cit. p. 142. J. Bar-
doux in his Paris thesis, De Walterio Mappio, pp. 159 ff. (1900) had
argued that Map supplied the material for the romances that are as-
cribed to him, although he did not write them himself.

* Ward, p. 734 of the Catalogue cited above, quotes a passage
from the [pomedon, Il. 7183 (edition of E. Kélbing and E. Koschwitz,
Breslau, 1889), of Hue de Rotelande to prove that Map really com-
posed a romance, which he conjectures to have been a metrical Lan-
celot, of which our Vulgate Lancelot is the prose rendering. Hue,
who wrote between 1174 and 1191, lived near Hereford, with which
place Map was connected all his life, and he presumably knew Map.
Shortly after a passage based on the three tournament motif in his
Ipomedon, (the passage ends with 1. 6772) Hue excuses himself in
a jesting manner for lying and says:

“Sul ne sai pas de mentir lart,
Walter map reset ben sa part.”


Now this same three tournament motif is found in the prose
Lancelot, II, 214ff., and Ward accordingly concludes that Hue, in
writing his own passage on this motif, had in mind Map’s treatment
of the same subject in a hypothetical verse original of the prose Lan-
celot. Ward’s theory has been taken up enthusiastically by Miss
Weston, Three Days Tournament, pp. 6ff. (London, 1902), and in
her article on Map in the Encyclopaedia Britannica (Eleventh edition)
— also, by Brugger, Zs. f. fre. Spr. u. Litt. XXIX', 90ff., (1905),
both of whom identify this hypothetical verse Lancelot with the French
original of Ulrich von Zatzikhoven’s Lanzelet.

Hue’s allusion to Map, as we have seen, occurs in a jesting
passage, and the most natural interpretation of it would be that he
was simply getting off a pleasantry at his friend’s expense. Kdélbing,
p. VI of his edition, suggests that the allusion may be to Map’s De
Nugis. The three days tournament motif is so common a one in
folk-tales and romances that the instances in the [pomedon and Lan-
zelet need not be directly connected with each other. In any event,
we certainly require something more solid than the proximity of this


24*


Go ogle


372 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


motif and the allusion to Map in the [pomedon (they are really se-
parated by about 460 lines) to justify the hypothesis that Map wrote
the lost French poem which is used at the beginning of the prose
Lancelot. Generally speaking, the latter owes precious little to this
lost French original of the Lanzelet (cp. RR, X, 54f, note), so that,
even if we accepted Brugger’s and Miss Weston’s hypothesis, Map’s
contribution to the evolution of the cycle would be extremely slight.

H. Suchier, Zs. f. rom. Ph., XVI, 273 (1892) accepts the ge-
nuineness of the ascription of the cycle to Map on the ground that
Manessier (Potvin VI, 158), who, in his opinion, wrote between
1214 and 1220 — so shortly after Map’s death — had already be-
fore him the Qweste with the same conclusion that we find in our
extant MSS. about the original narrative of the Grail quest being pre-
served at Salisbury. As a matter of fact, Manessier here does not
mention Map’s name, though it stood very probably in his MS. of the
Queste. If it did, this would merely prove that the ascription got
into the MSS. very early, not that it was genuine. But the whole
passage in question at the end of the Qweste, including the ascription
to Map, is, on the face of it, a fraud, for although the fact has been
generally overlooked by Arthurian scholars, there was never any mo-
nastery at Salisbury. Cp. Dugdale’s Monasticon Anglicanum and
Abbot Gasquet’s English Monastic Life, p. 301 (London, 1904), —
the list of English religious houses.

Suchier’s views were adopted by E. Wechssler, Die Sage vom
heiligen Gral, pp. 126ff. (Halle, 1898).

Birch-Hirschfeld, Sage vom Gral, pp. 234, ff., it should be ob-
served, has called attention to the improbability of Map’s always
speaking of himself in the third person, as he is made to do in these
ascriptions which we find in the MSS. of the Vulgate cycle. He sug-
gests that such ascriptions got into the MSS. of that cycle through
the confusion of some Meistre Gautier or other with the Walter, arch-
deacon of Oxford, who, according to Geoffrey of Monmouth, at the
end of his Historia, brought the (fictitious) original of that work “ex
Britannia”. But this is not likely.

Of as little value as the passage in Manessier are the oft-quoted
passages (cp. for instance, Birch-Hirschfeld, pp. 230f.) from the pre-
tended Helie de Borron, viz. in the Prologue to Guiron le Courtois
and in the Epilogue to the Bret, which speak of Map, “qui fu clers
au roy Henri” (Prologue), as the author of “lestoire’ (Prologue) or
“lou propre livre’ (Epilogue) ‘de monseigneur Lancelot dou Lac.”
There is no ground, however, for believing that this self-styled Helie
de Borron, who certainly was not writing earlier than 1230, knew
any more about the matter than we do. He was simply repeating or
The Prose Cycles 373


drawing inferences from the ascriptions in MSS. like ours— particularly,
MSS. of the Queste and Mort Artu. This explains sufficiently what
C. L. Kingsford in the article on Map in the Dictionary of National
Biography regards as a confirmation of the correctness of Helie’s
statement, viz., the fact that he does not speak of Map as archdeacon —
the rank which Map held from the year 1197 on — but as a simple
clerk, which he was in his earlier life — i.e. at the time when he
was most likely to write romances.

The MS. of the Estotre printed by Hucher even assigns, III,
504, to Map a share in that romance. Robert wrote it with the “aid”
of Map!
Chapter III.
The Vulgate Cycle.


Referring our readers to Vol. 2 for analyses of these romances,
we shall now examine the successive members or “branches” of
the Vulgate cycle in the same order that they occur in our cyc-
lic MSS.

| 1. L’Estoire del Saint Graal.

The Estoire del Saint Graal presupposes the Lancelot and
the Queste,1 and there are apparently allusions in it even to the


* That the Queste was older than the Estoire was the opinion
of Birch-Hirschfeld, pp. 55 ff., Nutt, pp. 108ff., and G. Paris, Manuel,
§ 60. See, too, quite recently A. Pauphilet, in his review of Lot’s
Lancelot in Romania, XLV, 524ff. Pauphilet argues convincingly,
also, that the Estoire and Queste are by different authors. The present
writer had already expressed the same views, MLN, XXXIV, 397, on
both points. Some scholars, however, hold the contrary opinion: viz.,
on the one hand, Heinzel, pp. 125ff., who believed, moreover, that
the two romances were by different authors, and, on the other, E. Wechssler,
Sage vom heiligen Graal, p. 126 (Halle, 1898), Miss Weston, Legend
of Sir Lancelot, p. 1389 (London, 1901), Brugger, Zs. f. frz. Spr.
u. Intt., XXIX*, 89, note 45, and 99, note 58 (1905), and Lot,
Lancelot, pp. 122ff. (1918), who believe that they have the same
author. On these matters see, still further, note 3, below.

If the four scholars last named were right, the numerous allusions
in the Estoire to the Queste would be to a work planned, but not
yet executed. Heinzel supposes that such allusions did not belong to
the hypothetical first form of the Hstoire which Nutt, pp. 75, 95,
and himself assume. (The redaction of the only extant form of the
Estowre he places, p. 125, after 1223, because of an allusion in Hucher’s
text, III, 655, to King Philip Augustus as dead. The allusion, how-
ever, may well be a late scribe’s addition.) As a matter of fact,
apart from the question of the relative dates of the Estoire and Queste,
there are some circumstances that excite suspicion that there did exist
such a version. For example, the introduction from Robert of the
Bron-Alain Grail-keeper group towards the end of the branch (Sommer,
I, 247), when the whole action of the romance up to that point had
been carried on by an entirely different set of Grail-keeper characters


Go ogle


The Vulgate Cycle 375
Mort Artu.2 In his Joseph, Robert de Boron had given an ac-


— Joseph excepted. Observe, too, that, according to the extant MSS.
of the Estoire, the Grail Winner (Galahad) had no connection by
descent at all with the original Grail-keeper (Joseph of Arimathea).
The latter’s direct descendant, according to the romance, is Yvain,
who, of course, nowhere in Arthurian romance has any real connection
with the Grail. (When Sommer, side-note to p. 281, also, makes
Gawain a direct descendant of Joseph’s this is an error). It is hardly
credible that such was the case in the original authentic text. On
all this see Bruce, RR, IX, 253f. — Note, also, that according to
the Estowre I, 81, the Maimed King, who is to be cured by Galahad’s
coming, is destined to be wounded with the (Grail) lance — a con-
ception which harmonizes with Queste, VI, 150, where this king, here
called Pellinor in some MSS., enters Solomon’s ship, despite the war-
ning inscription, draws David's (the Grail) sword, and at the same
moment is pierced through the thighs with a lance. On the other
hand, in the Estoire, I, 290, the Maimed King, here called Pelleam
(Pellehan), got his wound (with what weapon is not said) in a “ba-
taille de Rome”, the author (as Lot, Lancelot, p. 241, has suggested)
having, no doubt, in mind Chrétien’s Fisher King, who was thus woun-
ded (ll. 3471ff.). Lot, doc. cit., sees no difficulty in accepting these
conflicting statements as the blunder of a single author. I confess
that I find this explanation not so easy.


It may be remarked in passing, that the names, Pelleam and
Pellinor, are doubtless really the same name, the one springing from
the other by MS. corruption. See, respectively, Bruce’s “Pelles,
Pellinor and Pellean in the Old French Arthurian Romances,’ MPh,
XVI, 113ff., 337ff. (1918), where Pellinor is taken to be the original
form, and Lot, Lancelot, pp. 242ff. (1918), where Pellehan (variant
of Pelleam) is supposed to be the original.


In regard to the question under discussion it should be observed
that in two of the extant MSS. of the Hstowre there is an indis-
putable interpolation, viz., the Grimaud episode, Hucher's edition, I],
311ff. This failed to fix itself in the general MS. tradition, but it
is possible that some earlier changes or interpolations were more for-
tunate. Especially open to suspicion is the prose fabliau, I, 171ff.,
concerning a woman’s deception of the wise physician, Hippocrates.
Apropos of this episode, Lot himself remarks, p. 382, note 2, that
the text of the Estoire shows “traces de remaniement.”

* Cp. references to this branch in the Estoire, I, 226, 280, 283.
To be sure, the Tower of Marvels, I, 226, does not occur in the
Mort Artu.
376 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


count of the early history of the Grail that is thoroughly imbued
with the spirit of mediaeval Christian legend and doctrine. In
this work, however, neither Lancelot nor his ancestors nor his
posterity had been brought into any sort of connection with the
Grail, as, indeed, they are not mentioned in the whole poem. But
Just as in the Queste such a connection is established for the quest
of the Grail through the supplanting of Perceval, the original
Grail Winner, by Lancelot’s son, Galahad, so for the early history
of the Grail this connection is also established in the Estoire
through the linking of the vessel’s fate in its earlier wanderings
with that of the ancestors of Lancelot and his son. Now, whether
we accept the theory of some scholars that these intimately con-
nected branches, the Hstotre and Queste, were the work of the
same hand? or not, it seems reasonable to suppose that the latter


* For arguments against identity of authorship, see Birch-Hirsch-
feld, pp. 58ff., Nutt, pp. 81, 108f., and Pauphilet, op. cit., pp. 522¢ff.

Birch-Hirschfeld cites the fullness with which in the Queste
matters related in the Histoire are recapitulated as tending to prove
that the two were by different hands. It is true that we do have
incidents in the former retold in the latter rather fully (cp. respec-
tively, VI, 24ff. with I, 21 ff., VI, 54f. with I, 216, VI, 60ff. with I,
231ff.), and, in at least one case, a long passage copied virtually
verbatim (cp. VI, 151, 1. 11—161, 1. 22 with I, 124, 1. 6—137, 1. 3).
To a single author, says the German scholar, a mere allusion to the
other romance would have seemed sufficient. One might object to this,
with some plausibility, that, after all, the two romances were separate
works and that the author could not count on both of them being at
the same time in the hands of his readers, so that he may have in-
serted in the two romances such passages by way of supplying the
necessary thread of connection. In my own opinion, however, these
insertions are much more likely to have been the work of the redactors
of the cycle. It may be remarked, furthermore, that if such redactors
did undertake to interpolate passages of this kind, there is no reason
to doubt that they made other adjustments of the two romances to
each other — more particularly, of the Queste to the Estoire.

Birch-Hirschfeld, also, cites supposed contradictions between the
_ two branches as proving that they were from different hands. These,
it is true, have, for the most part, been reasonably explained away by
Lot, Lancelot, pp. 80ff. Such inconsistencies, however, as the following
seem, to say the least of it, very singular, under the theory of single


Go ogle


bd


The Vulgate Cycle 377


was first composed. The great departure in Grail tradition which —
distinguishes the two romances is the substitution of the chaste Gala-
had for the unchaste Perceval of Chrétien and his earlier continua-
tors as the Grail Winner. But the ascetic who first hit upon
the idea of this substitution would surely have proceeded forth-
with to endow his new conception with life — to create his new
hero and put him in action — instead of first composing a long
romance (the Estotre) about this hero’s ancestors and their re-


authorship: (1) In the Estoire, I, 247, the vacant seat at the Grail
table is reserved for Christ or for some one whom he will send to
fill it, and Moys (a relative of Josephe’s, according to I, 248), who
tries to occupy it, is snatched away by fiery hands; in the Queste,
VI, 55, this seat is said to be reserved for Josephe, and a rebellious
relative (unnamed) of his, who tries to occupy it, is swallowed up by
the earth. (2) In the Estotre (I, 247) the vacant seat is at the Grail
table; in the Queste (VI, 5,7) at the Round Table.

In the present writer's opinion, however, Pauphilet, loc. cit. has
furnished a conclusive argument against the theory of identical author-
ship, by pointing out essential differences of conception between the
two in respect to various passages not noted by Birch-Hirschfeld, in-
eluding those in the respective romances (I, 40, VI, 190, 578) which
reflect the conflicting views in contemporary theology as to the point in
the sacramental service when the miracle of transubstantiation took place.

In conclusion, with regard to these questions of identical authorship
and relative date, I wish to add the following: If the Bron-Alain
group really belonged to the Hstoire from the beginning — which, to
be sure, is very doubtful — and is not a later addition, it would seem
that considerable force should be credited to Nutt’s argument that, if
the Queste were later than the Hstoive, some mention would have
been made of this group in it. Again, such an obscure allusion as
that to the maiming of the Maimed King by the lance in the Estoire,
I, 81, seems much more naturally interpreted as an allusion to an
incident already related (Queste, VI, 150) than to one that the author
merely intended to write about. If the latter supposition is true, he
took his time about executing his intention; for, leaving out of account
the intervening branches, I, 81 and VJ, 150 are separated by up-
wards of 400 quarto pages.

Although generally similar, moreover, in style, the differences
noted above, between the two works in this respect should be observed.
‘The Queste is compact and austere, the Hstoire runs easily into the
romantic and the sensational.
378 | Evolution of Arthurian Romance


lation to the early history of the Grail — a romance, indeed,
half as long again as that which tells the hero’s own story.‘ Just
as in the chansons de geste the poets naturally began by celebrating
the great deeds of their heroes, performed in the full vigor of
maturity — the deeds that had given these characters their renown
-— and only later (the original author, or more frequently, another),
if occasion arose, exploited the curiosity which the narration of
such feats of arms may have awakened among their hearers or
readers by presenting, still further, the story of the enfances
(achievements of early youth) of the heroes in question, so, doubt-
less, it was with the Grail. First would come the narrative of
the holy vessel, where its quest constituted the highest adventure
that could enlist both the bodily and the spiritual energies of the
best knights of Arthur’s court; in the second line would come
the history of its origins and early fortunes. Thus everything.
in the Estoire would be conditional on the conceptions and narra-
tive of the Queste. But when the two romances were brought
into intimate manuscript union, as members of the Vulgate cycle,
such insertions would have to be made in the Queste by the as-
sembleurs as would harmonize it with the new inventions con-
cerning the early history of the Grail (the Estoire). Similar in-
sertions were certainly made in the original Lancelot after the


“ Lot, who believes that the Hstoire and the Queste are by the
same man and that the Qweste was the later of the two has the
following theory (pp. 122ff.) concerning the composition of the Estoire:

Owing to certain allusions to Perceval as the Grail Winner in
the early part of the Lancelot (cp. Part IV, below), he conjectures
that the author of the Lancelot-Grail corpus had written a conside-
table portion (approximately, a third) of the Lancelot before it occurred
to him te deprive Perceval of that honor in favor of a new character,
Galahad. He then laid aside the Lancelot, went back and composed
the Estoire, returned again to the Lancelot, completed it and composed
thereafter, in succession, the Queste and the Mort Artu. For criticism
of this theory see Bruce, RR. X, 385f. and Pauphilet, Romania,
XLV, 521f. The enormous length of these romances, besides, should
be remembered; but, even in the case of shorter compositions, can
anything parallel to the procedure which Lot attributes to his hypo-
thetical author be found anywhere in the world’s literature?
The Vulgate Cycle 379


composition of the Grail romances of the cycle, so that there is
nothing arbitrary in assuming modifications of this kind in the
Queste.®

Looking, however, exclusively at the Hstoire for the present,
the author takes Robert’s account of the early history of the Grail
as the basis of his romance, but he modifies his source so as to
make it conform to the new conceptions throughout, keeping con-
stantly in mind, above all, the new hero (Galahad) and the as-
cetic ideal which that character embodies. Just as this ascetic
ideal, however, required a new champion as the knight of the
Grail quest, so it required a new and stricter representative of
the church as the guardian and minister of the Grail in its early
wanderings in the Orient and in Great Britain. The tone of
Robert’s poem is profoundly religious, but to an ecclesiastic with
strongly orthodox and ascetic views, such as our author evidently
held, there was a flaw even in Robert’s conception of the first
Grail-keeper (Joseph of Arimathea): He did not fulfill the con-
dition of celibacy which was required by the mediaeval church
of the ministers of its sacraments (symbolized by the Grail).§
Accordingly, just as in the Queste the Perceval of Chrétien and
his continuators has to yield the first place to Galahad, so in
the Estoire Robert’s Joseph has to yield the first place to a new
creation, Josephe(s), who fulfilled this necessary condition. Never-


° I am postulating here, of course, contrary to Lot, that the Lan-
celot-Grail corpus is not the work of one author. For the weaknesses
of Lot’s theory see Part IV, below, and RR, X, 377ff. — also,
A. Pauphilet, Romania, XLV, 521 ff.


° This is obviously the reason why the new character, Josephe(s),
was created. Similar is the opinion expressed by Lot, Lancelot,
p. 205. There is no reason, therefore, to imagine with Heinzel,
pp. 105ff., that already in Christian legend, before the composition of
the Grail romances, Joseph had been given a son, Josephe, owing,
in some way, to a confusion, originally, of the former with the historian,
Josephus. So, too, Brugger, who derives the. Hstoire from the Per-
lesvaus, discusses, Zs. f. fre. Spr. u. Litt., XXIX’, 100f., the creation
of the character, Josephe, as if it were a great problem. It might
be, if the EHstotre really were dependent on the Perlesvaus, but on
that subject see Part IV, below.
380 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


theless, it is to be noted, that in neither case is the previous hero
totally discarded; he is merely subordinated to the new one.? In
the case of the Estotre, moreover, the author softens the change
by making the new hero the son of the old and by conferring
on this son (Josephe) the father’s name, only in a slightly variant
form.®

In the new romance, as in Robert’s Joseph, the identification
of the Grail with a vessel of the Eucharistic service is complete —
except that, through an inopportune recognition of the fact that
the true meaning of the word, graal (grail), was a kind of dish,
the author rejects Robert’s more harmonious conception and makes
this vessel the dish,® not the chalice of the Last Supper. Since
our Lord, himself, however, had declared that the chalice con-
tained his blood, this circumstance, apart from the natural fitness
of that vessel for the purpose, had pointed to it rather than to
the dish as the proper receptacle for the blood which flowed from
his wounds on the day of his crucifixion. Nevertheless, in other
respects, the choice between the two vessels was immaterial, for
the ineffable sanctity that pertained to the Grail was due to the
holy blood, itself, and not to the containing vessel. Furthermore,
it is as a general symbol of the Eucharistic mysteries and doc-
trines that the Grail is clothed with majesty and power.!° Con-
sequently, there is nothing inconsistent when we find it side by


* Even in his subordinate réle, however, Perceval is represented
in the Queste as perfectly chaste, to suit the spirit of that romance.


* On these names, derived, respectively, from Joseph and
Josephus, cp. Perlesvaus section, Part IV, below.


° Cp. I, 13, “lescuele en le quele li fiex dieu anoit mangiet.’
This term, escuele, which is applied generally to the Grail in this
text (cp. I, 14, 18, 19, et passim), often designates a bowl or similar
vessel. For example, it was commonly used in the Middle Ages of
the receptacle in which beggars received the food that was given to
‘them. On the other hand, it, also, meant sometimes simply dish, as
in Pseudo-Wauchier’s description of the dinner at the Grail castle,
Potvin, II, 367.


*° This general symbolism, no doubt, encouraged vagueness in the
description of the Grail.


Go ogle


The Vulgate Cycle | 381


side with actual individual vessels that are used in the celebration
of the mass.!2

The wanderings of the Grail company in Robert’s poem, so
obviously modelled after those of the children of Israel in the
wilderness, in the book of Exodus, suggested the idea of the ark
in which our author represents the sacred vessel to have been borne
about.!? But this ark, too, like everything in the narrative, has
its symbojical meaning. It is Holy Church which carries in her
bosom the fundamental mysteries of the true faith.

For our author, as for Pseudo-Wauchier,! and Wauchier,!*
the bleeding lance is the lance with which the side of our Lord
was pieroed whilst he hung on the cross. The blood, then, which
drips from its point, is the blood of the Savior, and it, accord-
ingly, possesses, in a miraculous degree, the power of healing.15
On the other hand, Chrétien, another of his sources, had ascribed
to this same lance a terribly destructive power: the whole king-
dom of Logres was one day to be destroyed by it.1¢ Consequently,
according to our author’s conception, it is an instrument of wrath


Cp. I, 33, 41. Heinzel, p. 132, cites these passages as pro-
ving that, owing to orthodox hesitations, the author of the Estoire,
after all, did keep the Grail worship separate from the mass. The
explanation, however, which I have given in the text is, I believe,
the true one. On the other hand, when at the end of the Queste,
VI, 190, Christ, himself, and not a mortal, conducts the sacramental
service, the questers receive “la haute viande” direct from the Grail.

** I, 208, 30ff. et passim.

** Potvin, IV, I, 4f.

* Ibid. V. 143¢f. .

** Kstoire, I, 80. So, too, in Queste, VI, 191, the restoration
of Nascien’s sight, in the first of these passages, with blood that drops
from the lance, corresponds exactly to the Longinus legend. Cp. Miss
R. J. Peebles, Legend of Longinus, pp. 21, 48ff., 194.

*® Potvin, II, 252, Baist’s ed., ll. 6129ff. The Montpellier MS.
(ep. Potvin, loc. cit.), to be sure, leaves out the statement about the
destruction which the lance is fated to cause and says “La pes sera
par ceste lance,” but this is, no doubt, an unauthorized change of
the true text. Certainly Pseudo-Wauchier had the commoner reading
before him, when he penned ll. 20288ff., although he attributes there
this destructive power to the sword.


Go ogle


382 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


as well as of beneficence.!? By thus combining both of the previous
accounts, he is able to enhance greatly the interest of this weapon
as a symbol of the two-fold attributes of our Lord — first, his
power to heal and save, secondly, his power to inflict vengeance
on those who disobey his will. The Bible furnished illustrations
enough of both sides of the divine nature, and there was besides,
the well-known story of the spear of Achilles!® to support our
author in ascribing to the Grail lance this union of apparently
contradictory qualities.

One would imagine from the “dread voice” of the angel in
his words of thunder, spoken to Josephe, after the blood from
the mystical weapon had healed the latter’s wound and restored
Nascien’s sight,!® that the lance was destined to play a part of
the highest importance in the story. From this time on, the
heavenly messenger declares, not a drop of blood will fall from
the lance until the Grail adventures shall commence in the land:


7 Op. cit. p. 192, Miss Peebles has cited from the fifteenth
century Meditation of the Five Wounds a passage in which the
terribleness of the spear is emphasized and, at the same time, the
saving power of the blood, which gushed forth from the wound that
it made.

Lot, p. 233, has rightly explained these “contradictions” as due
to the writer’s use of Chrétien and Pseudo-Wauchier, respectively.
To my mind, however, he exaggerates their effect on the Grail ro-
mances of the Vulgate cycle. To our author (or authors), for the
reasons given in the text above, I do not believe that they seemed
to be real contradictions.

** The lance of Achilles could both wound and heal. Heinzel,
p. 131, has suggested the influence of this story. He cites, besides,
as parallels, Wolfram’s Parziwal, 490, 13ff. and Lt Chevaliers as
deus Espees, 1. 10692.

*° I, 80f. The MS. followed by Sommer is very corrupt at the
beginning of the angel’s speech — so much so, indeed, that Sommer
in his marginal note, interpreting the text of this MS., makes Josephe
the speaker and Nascien the hearer. It is really, however, the angel
who is speaking to Josephe. Hucher's text, II, 310ff., is much better,
although there are some corruptions here, also, in the case of indi-
vidual words.
The Vulgate Cycle 383


(Great Britain) whither God is to lead Nascien. Then it will
bleed again and the marvels which this bleeding is to inaugurate
will be so great and awful that all people will be filled with fear.
At that time the good knights will undertake feats of earthly
chivalry, in order that they may know the marvels of the Grail
and the lance. Only one man will ever be struck by the lance —
namely, a descendant of Nascien.2? This person will be a king
(the Maimed King) — ‘“‘the last of the good.’’ He will be pierced
through the thighs by the lance and will not be cured until tho
wondera of the Grail shall have been revealed to him who is to
be full of virtues (Galahad) — the last of Nascien’s lineage.
Just as Nascien was the first to behold these wonders, so the
last to do so will be the last of his lineage. Christ has determined
to execute vengeance on Nascien and his descendant (the Maimed
King), in order that they may testify that, when he was on the
cross, his death was sought through the lance by the wicked Jews.
‘As many days as Joseph bore the lance-head in his thigh, ~
over so many years will the Grail adventures extend in the land
(Great Britain) whither God will take Nascien.*!


After all this pother, however, which owes its inspiration,
doubtless, to the prophetic speeches of various angels in the Book
of Revelation, the lance is henceforth dropped from the Estotre,


*° This is an error, however, for Galahad was descended from
Nascien through his father (Lancelot), not through his mother (member
of the Grail family, to which the Maimed King belonged). Cp. I, 293.

"2 As Lot, Lancelot, p. 234, has observed, the author here limits
to twelve years the flow of blood from the spear, which, according
to his source. Pseudo-Wauchier (Potvin, IV, 4), would continue forever.
In Lot’s opinion, the author made the change, because the idea of
the Savior’s blood flowing eternally seemed to him an irreverence. It
strikes me, however, that the writer’s love of symbolism is more likely
to have been the eause. Perhaps, after all, he may have forgotten,
for the moment, Pseudo-Wauchier’s idea on the subject and invented
this detail for the nonce. In any event, he forgot the limitation sub-
sequently, for nowhere else in the Hstoire (or Queste) is it implied
that the Grail adventures lasted twelve years. A part of Galahad’s
quest lasted five years (Queste, VI, 186f.), but we know nothing more.
384 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


save for one casual allusion,?? and when it reappears in the Queste,
it does not fill at all the function which is predicated for it in
the angel’s speech. On the contrary, it is not mentioned untal
most of the Grail adventures are over and the narrative of the
stroke by which it renders the Maimed King maimed is merely
incidental and of the tamest kind.?? At the end of the Queste
it appears again (p. 189), along with the Grail, in the mass which
the spirit of Josephe holds for the questers, and, on the com-
pletion of this service (p. 191), Galahad, in fulfillment of the
angel’s prophecy, heals the Maimed King with blood from the
sacred weapon. Finally (p. 198). just after Galahad’s decease,
a celestial hand, in the sight of Bohort and Perceval, snatches
both Graii and lance up to heaven, since when, as the author of
the Queste leaves us to understand, it, like the Grail, has been
seen no more by mortal eyes.

As we have seen above, ‘‘the sword of the strange hangings’’,
which is found already in Chrétien’s Perceval (ll. 4668ff.), though
hardly as a Grail relic in this poem, had increased immensely in
importance in the continuations to that work. In the same spirit
the author of the Hstowe has thrown the greatest lustre about
it (pp. 121f.), so that, at the same time that it duplicates, in a
measure, the functions of the lance, it eclipses here that relic more
than ever in the economy of the Grail story. In the execution
of his design to connect everything in his narrative with Christian
history and doctrine, the writer identifies (pp. 133f.) this sword,
so obscure in its origin, with the sword of David, who was, on


** I, 107, where, in an allusion to the wound of Joseph by the
lance (p. 77), the weapon is called “la lanche vengeresce.”” The only
passages in the Hstoire where the Grail lance is mentioned are I,
32f. (it is here enumerated among the relics that are carried in the
ark with the Grail), 77—81 (wounding and healing of Joseph, re-
eer Nascien’s sight, and angel’s prophecy), 107 (allusion to
pp. 77 ff.).

** VI, 150. The Maimed King, although usually nameless in
the Vulgate cycle, is here called Pellinor in some MSS. Cp. Sommer,
loc. cit. This name, however, was most probably introduced late into
the manuscript tradition from the Vulgate Merlin continuation. See
Bruce, MPh., XVI, 337ff.
The Vulgate Cycle 385


the human side, the greatest of the progenitors of Christ. Through
the Dolorous Stroke (p. 290), when King Brulan(s), newly con-
verted to Christianity, slew Lambor, the sainted Grail King, with
his sword, it caused a magical blight to fall on the latter’s land
{Terre Foraine or Logres)** and provoked such wars of retaliation.
against the realm (Gales-Wales) of the former that the two king-
doms came to be known as the Waste Land (Terre Gaste). Thus,
as in the case of the bleeding lance, the sword is said to bring on.
a series of afflictions, which, we may suppose, were not to cease
until the coming of Galahad. Here again, however, having im-
parted to the mysterious weapon the prestige of marvels to come,
the author drops the subject and says nothing more of these marvels.
As in the case of the lance, the sword does not appear again in
the two Grail romances until towards the end of the Queste (pp.
161 ff.) — in this instance, when Galahad enters Solomon’s ship.
Here, as a symbol of the redemption of mankind by the Virgin
Mary from the curse which Eve’s sin brought upon our race, Per-
ceval’s sister replaces with her beautiful hair the cheap hangings
of tow which Solomon’s wife had attached to the sword and girds
the weapon upon Galahad. From that point on, the sword is |
mentioned incidentally only a few times.


* According to Pseudo-Wauchier, Potvin, IV, 5, such was the
nature of the blight that rested upon the Grail country after the stroke
of the Grail sword. Our author is here borrowing from this passage
in Pseudo-Wauchier, just as, in making the calamities which afflict
Wales the ordinary ones of war, he is borrowing from Chrétien, ll.
4640 ff. (describing the disasters that ensued from the wounding of
the Fisher King).


*° In Chrétien’s Perceval, ll. 3622ff., the sword forged by Tre-
buchet was destined to fail the person who handled it in his need.
The author of the Quweste, VI, 149, had that passage in mind when
he makes David’s sword break in Nascien’s hands (p. 149), because
of his unworthiness, although the pure Mordrain is able to unite the
pieces again.

David’s sword, it should be remarked, is duplicated in the sword
with which the seneschal of Argon wounds Joseph in the Estoire,
J, 256. Galahad joins the pieces of this sword together again in the
Queste, VI, 188.


Helperia, Ergdnzungsreihe: 8. 25
386 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


- Robert de Boron’s Joseph, as we have already noted, is the
main source of the Hstowrre. To that poem our author owes his
conception of the origin and early history of the Grail and of
its connection with Joseph of Arimathea — also, of Joseph’s pro-
selytizing activities and of his- wanderings with the Grail and
the Grail company in Eastern lands — finally, of the transference
of the Grail to the West and of the conversion of Britain to
Christianity by Joseph, Josephe and Celidoine.** It will be
evident, however, from the analysis of the Estoire, given below,
that its author modified, according to his own pleasure, the
materials which were offered to him by his source and that
he, still further, filled out Robert’s framework with elements that
were derived from a great variety of extraneous sources. Inasmuch
as Robert, himself, moved so completely in an atmosphere of
Christian legend, it is natural that in the sources of his follower
legendary materials should, next to the Joseph, have occupied the
first place. It 1s very questionable, however, whether our author
had a first-hand knowledge of the apocryphal narratives concern-
ing the careers of the primitive apostles after the ascension of
Christ, such as has been attributed to him.?” These constituted, of


** It will be observed that these elements constitute the fun-
damental framework of the Hstoire. There are, besides, of course,
other borrowings from the Joseph. Among them is the Grail group
— Bron, Alain, etc., — first introduced tewards the end of the
Estoire. As I have ‘said above, I do not feel quite sure that this
group is not a late addition to the romance.

*? Heinzel, pp. 136ff. maintains that (1) the Latin legend of the
Acts of the Apostles, Simon und Judas, and (2) the Passio Mat-
thaei are sources of the account of the conversion of Evelach and
his kingdom, I, 21ff., — moreover, that our author had access to
historical narratives (now unascertainable) of the events with which
the above-named legends are connected. For the texts of the legends
just indicated cp. J. A. Fabricius, Codex Apocryphus Novi Testa-
mentt, I, 608ff., 636ff., (2 vols, Hamburg, 1719), respectively. For
the historical narratives referred to, see the parallels from Persian
and Abyssinian history which Heinzel, pp. 137, 139, has assembled.
Brugger, Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt., XXIX?! , 100, accepts Heinzel’s views.
So, too, Lot, Lancelot, p. 206, who thinks, however, that the author


Go ogle


The Vulgate Cycle 387


course, the fountain-head of all legendary narratives in regard to
the conversion of pagan lands to the Christian faith, but the mar


of the Estoire did not follow the two legends closely, but .was ue
inspired by them. --

‘Let us take first the Acts of Simon and Judas: The re-
semblances here are of a very general nature. If our author, instead
of conveying Joseph and the Grail directly to Britain :decided to ex-
pand Robert’s accounts with episodes of that hero’s proselytizing : acti-
vities, the scene of such activities would have to be laid in Western
Asia, since Joseph was still in that part of the world at the close
of Robert's poem.

. For the rest, in -the legend of Simon and Judas, there is no
battle between the Persian General (Varardach) or his king (Xerxes)
and the invading army, for the latter voluntarily surrenders (p. 615)
before there is any fighting and the only advantage to the apostles
in the premises is through this verification of their prediction as to the
issue of the war, as against that of the magi, to overthrow whom
they came to Persia in the first instance. The models of the Estoire
here were, obviously, such legends as those of Constantine the Great
(Inventio Crucis) and Clovis (Gregory of Tours, Book I, ch. 30—31),
who were converted to Christianity, because Christ granted them vic-
tory in answer to appeals offered in hours of danger. — Again, the
advocates, who, in the Latin legend, are so prominent (pp. 618ff.) as
instruments. of the apostles in humiliating the magi in contests of
eloquence, do not appear at all in the Estowre. Indeed, in the latter
there is only one heathen clerk who disputes with the Christians
(Joseph and Josephe), and that only in one scene (pp. 62f.). — Simi-
larly, there is nothing in the Estoire to correspond to the episodes
of the torture of the magi by the serpents which they call forth, of
the deacon who is vindicated by the speech of the one-day-old child,
of the tigers miraculously tamed, of the priests of the temple where
images of both sun and moon are worshipped and of the conflict of
these priests with the apostles. It will be seen, then, that in only
a few cases have the episodes in the legend of Simon and Judas anything
corresponding in the Estowre. In a still smaller proportion of cases,
of course, do the far more numerous episodes of the Hstovre find parallels
in the legend. —

The main points of resemblance between the Latin legend and
the Hstoire are in the power of the missionaries to overcome demons
and expel them from the idols whence they have'been accustomed to
deceive the people through false oracles. Cp. the Latin legend, pp.631 ff.,
and- the Hstowre, pp. 45ff., 75ff. But this was a commonplace. of

25*
388 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


vellous elements in such stories had been so frequently repeated
as to have become a part of the general tradition of mediaeval


saints’ lives and even of secular literature. Cp. MPh., X, 575, note I.
Cp., besides Acta Bartholomaei, C. Tischendorf: Acta Apostolorum
Apocrypha, pp. 243¢ff., (Leipzig, 1851), and the life of St. Patrick
by Jocelyn of Furness (twelfth century), Acta Sanctorum for March,
II, 552 (idol is overthrown by Patrick’s prayer), 555 (the idols fall
and break of themselves, as soon as Patrick approaches the temple).
Examples of this superstition could be cited almost indefinitely.

‘As far as the Passio Matthaei, itself, is concerned, there is
really no resemblance at all here to the Hstoire. On the other hand,
the historical events in the life of the Ethiopian king and saint, Caleb
Elesbaan (first half of the sixth century), with which, in a disguised
form, this Latin legend is ultimately connected, do offer some resem-
blance to the story of Mordrain, but the similarity is only a general
one. Besides, Heinzel has produced no evidence that there existed
any account of these events, so distant from our author with respect
to both space and time, to which he might have had access. For the
life of Caleb (the monarch’s original name) or Elesbaan (his epithet,
meaning in the Ethiopian language, “the blessed”), as he is more ge-
nerally called, see the article, Elesbaan, in Smith and Wace’s Dictionary
of Christian Biography. In the Acta Sanctorum his life is given
under the date of Oct. 27. Cp. the Bollandist edition, Octobris, vol.
XII, pp. 296ff. For other details touching his crusade cp. ibid., vol.
X, 694ff. (in the account of the martyrdom St. Arethas, etc.). The
events in question are as follows: Dhu Nowas, about 523 A. D., over-
threw the rule of Elesbaan in Homeritis (Southern Arabia or Yemen),
then a province of Ethiopia, and massacred the Christians — espec-
ially at Negran, where St. Arethas and St. Ruma were among the
victims. Urged by the emperor Justin and the patriarch of Alexandria,
Elesbaan in 525 A. D. led a great expedition to the Yemen, defeated
and slew Dhu Nowas, restored Christianity in the land and returned
to Ethiopia. Pious narratives of these events (cp. op. cit., X, 758)
represent that just after his return from this crusade he abdicated his
throne and entered a monastery, where he died some time later. As
a matter of fact, there was an interval of something like twenty-five
years between his crusade and his abdication and retirement to a
monastic life.

Now, it will be observed that the most important elements of this
situation were familiar to all educated Europeans at the beginning of
the thirteenth century in a form that affected them much more closely
than this story of the royal saint of times already ancient in far —
The Vulgate Cycle 389


piety. As far as the Hstoire is concerned, the conversions both
of Evelach’s land and of Great Britain follow, in essentials, the


off Abyssinia —- namely, in the crusades of the period to the Holy
Land, especially the Third Crusade (1189—1192). In both cases, of
course, the expeditions were undertaken, not for the rescue of im-
prisoned missionaries, but to recover a land which unbelievers had
wrested from Christian rule and, incidentally, to avenge the cruelties
which had been inflicted on the followers of Christ. Apart from the
requirements of his story, the success of the First Crusade in 1099
might well have justified the author of the EHstotre in making Mor-
drain’s expedition successful. That he should have added the idealizing
touch, by which this monarch, having won his victory, is represented
as renouncing earthly glory and adopting a life of religious devotion,
would be surely natural in an ecclesiastic of that age.

The similarity which Heinzel sees (p. 139) between the réles of
Elesbaan’s sons and those of Mordrain’s in the Grimaud episode of the
Estotre is negligible, apart from its vagueness, for this episode occurs
in only two MSS. and is, beyond question, spurious.

The true motive which, above all others, no doubt, has led Heinzel
and his followers to imagine that the life of Elesbaan was a source
of the Estoire is their identification of Kalafes (Calafres)- Alphasan
(Aufassain, Alphesim, Alfesim, Alfasein), name of the king of the
Estoire, I, 286ff., who became a Christian on being healed of leprosy
by Alain, with Kaleb (Caleb) — Elesbaan, name of the famous
monarch of Ethiopia. As a matter of fact, in the extant records he
is called either Caleb or (more often) Elesbaan, never Caleb Elesbaan,
as far as I have been able to discover. To call the historical Caleb
or Elesbaan, Caleb Alfassam, as Lot does, pp. 206, note 10, 207,
is, of course, unwarranted. But the identity of these names is ex-
tremely questionable. There is no real correspondence at all between
their second elements, and, besides, as I have observed in Part IV,
below, Alphasan is, no doubt, derived from Elisaphan, Exodus, VI,
22, and Numbers III, 30. On the other hand, Calafres (the reading
of Hucher’s text, III, 287) is, doubtless, the correct form of the original
heathen name of the king, for that is a mere variant of Galafres,
which is one of the commonest of all names for heathen kings in the
chansons de geste, as a glance into E. Langlois’s Table des noms
propres dans les chansons de geste will show. That the Calafes
of Sommer’s text is merely a corruption of Galafres is virtually cer-
tain, for in Hucher’s text the wicked pagan who excites his fellows
against Nascien is called, II, 334 Calafres (Calafer), but, II, 336,
Galafres, Galafre. Sommer’s text here I, 87ff., has Calafer.

As is generally agreed, the story of the conversion of Kalafes


Go ogle


390 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


natural. course of such events in the authentic history of Christi-
anity, under like conditions,** and the fables with regard to the
intervention of supernatural agencies in such episodes find their
parallels in the mediaeval chronicles of Western Europe. In the
romance, as in the actual life of the times, the conversion of the
king meant inevitably, also, the conversion of his subjects. Ac-
cordingly, when the missionaries had gained the permission. of
the monarch, a great assembly would be held in which they would
preach the new doctrine before him.*® The priests of the pre-
vailing heathen religion would be present — generally, we may
conjecture, in a hostile mood®® — and questions and debates would
naturally be features of such occasions.*! Then, when the king
had decided to embrace the new religion, the first act would be
the destruction of the temples and idols of the vanquished gods.*?
Moreover, according to the legends of the chroniclers about the
time of the missionaries’ arrival the monarch might be engaged
in a desperate battle with his enemies, and so might be impelled
by the urgency of his peril to promise the adoption of the new.
faith, if the god of its votaries will secure him the victory.*°


Alphasan in the Estoire is imitated trom the legend of Abgar, King
of Edessa, Fabricius, I, 317f.

*° For example, in the conversion of England by St. Augustine
and other missionaries, as related by Bede, Historia Kcclesiastica
Gentis Anglorum.

*° Cp. Bede, Book I, ch. 25-26 (St. Augustine’s conversion of
Ethelbert, King of Kent) and Book II, ch. 13 (Paulinus’s conversion
of Edwin, King of Northumberland).

*° Occasional subsequent lapses into paganism, as in the case of
Ethelbert’s sons, Bede, II, ch. 5, confirm this natural inference from
the conditions. This was not always true, however, if we may accept
the accounts of our ecclesiastical chroniclers — eo. g. Bede, I, 13,
just cited, and Gregory of Tours, I, (conversion of Clovis).

’ Cp., especially, Bede, Il, 13, The romancer, besides, would
be influenced by Jesus’s disputations with the Pharisees in the Gospels.

** In the celebrated passage in Bede, Il, 13, it was the con-
verted high priest of the heathen religion who led in the destruction.

** Besides the legends of Constantine and Clovis, already cited,
cp.. too, the similar story concerning Edwin, King of Northumberland,
in Bede, I, 9.


(0 ogle


The Vulgate Cycle | 391


Next in importance among the writer’s innovations is the
allegory of Solomon’s ship (Holy Church) and the mystical ob-
jects which it contains — the bed, the golden crown, the spin-
dles made from the wood of the Tree of Life, and King David's)
sword (pp. 120ff.). The oriental legend of Solomon and Marcolf,
according to which the wise king is so often the victim of his
guileful wife, has here been taken as the starting-point of one
of the most remarkable outbursts of the mediaeval imagination,
as bizarre as it is vigorous. Our author, however, did not restrict
himself to Christian or oriental legend.** His purpose was that
of story-tellers in all ages — namely, to interest his readers or
hearers — and provided he attained that object, he felt himself
at liberty in his romance to compound with the deepest theo-
logical and mystical conceptions of his time stories of piracy,*
of voyages tmaginaires,** and even, perhaps, of farce.’

The Estotre del Saint Graal derives such plan as it possesses,
as well as its most significant conceptions concerning the Grail,
from Robert de Boron’s Joseph. There already we find, first,
the history of the Grail down to the departure of Joseph of Ari-


** On the minor sources of the Hstoire, see particularly Heinzel,
pp. 145ff. The references, however, vary very much in pertinency.
In MPh., X, 522, the present writer has cited some more exact
parallels to the curious motif of Mordrain’s cohabitation with the
wooden image of a beautiful woman, I, 83.

*° 1, 89ft.

** Mordrain’s and Nascien’s experiences, I, 89ff., 114ff. The
Navigatio Sancti Brendam, whose influence Nutt has detected, also,
in the beginning of our romance, is especially important here.

*7 The Hippocrates fabliau, I, 171ff., the genuineness of which,
however, is not altogether certain. Its sources are given by Heinzel,
pp. 145f.

*° Hucher’s text, pp. 12f., as Heinzel, p. 149, remarks, seems
intended to indicate a sort of division into four parts, i. e. accounts
of (1) lineage of the Grail family, (2) account of the Grail (origins?),
(3) paours, incidents displaying the powers of the Grail? (4) mer-
veilles, adventures of the Grail company? As Lot observes, Lancelot,
a tripartite division was more likely the author's true intention. The
matter, however, is of little importance, as he really does not carry
out the indicated divisions.


Go ogle


392 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


mathea from Jerusalem, then, the wanderings of Joseph and the
Grail company in the East, and lastly (merely foreshadowed) the
journey of the Grail and its guardians westward for the con-
version of Great Britain. We have just seen with what materials
its author filled out these meagre outlines, but if we except the
tripartite division of the adventures of Mordrain, Nascien, and
Celidoine before their arrival in Britain — another tribute to the
power of the mystical number three (the number of the Christian
Godhead), which is a sort of obsession with the writers of the
Grail romances — there is nothing that evinces any real reflection
in the arrangement of these materials. The author dulls the effect
of his finer conceptions, such as the allegory of Solomon’s ship
and its contents, by a deluge of minor incidents that are
both insignificant and extravagant. As a result, we have the
usual formlessness of Arthurian romance in a heightened degree,
owing to the length of the work. Few other productions even of
the Middle Ages illustrate so well the truth of the Greek proverb —
that ‘‘the half is better than the whole”. The climax of in-
competence, however, in respect to form would be reached, if our
author were really responsible for the eleventh-hour introduction
of Robert's Grail family as guardians of the Grail, after cha-
racters of his own creation (save Joseph) had been fulfilling that
function through nearly five sixths of the romance. The two sets
of characters are fundamentally irreconcilable and it is difficult
to believe that a writer of any capacity whatever, such as the
author of the Hstotre, despite all his limitations, was, would have
wantonly spoiled his work in this fashion.*® It seems much more


*° The bungling of the genealogies excites similar suspicions. —
Cp. p. 375, note I, above. The case of the elder Galahad is particularly bad.
The character has no raison Wétre at all. Lot, Lancelot, p. 223,
thinks that an unlucky penchant for fanciful etymologies on our author’s
part caused his creation and that afterwards our author himself was
embarrassed by this new Galahad. If this is so, the remedy was
easy: All he had to do was to strike out the few passages in which
the character occurred. Heinzel’s idea that he was derived from a
preexisting legend (p. 134f.) is, of course, a purely gratuitous as-
sumption.
The Vulgate Cycle 393


likely that some redactor who regretted the loss of the Grail cha-
racters of our author’s source (the Joseph) endeavored to save
them by combining them in this impossible manner with those of
the derivative romance.“

The Hstotre has, of course, its share of the religious sym-
bolism which hangs like a heavy cloud over its companion romance,
the Queste, but the application of the allegorical method is much
less constant and rigorous here than in the case of the latter.
Whether its author was identical with the author of the Queste
or not, the romance exhibits the common mediaeval delight in
descriptions of fighting in a much greater degree than the Queste
and it presses into the service of religion a much greater variety
of romantic incident than is found in the companion‘! work. But
this very variety gives the Hstotre its rambling character and
there is no one “divine event’’ at the end of the romance to hold
the author down to a certain concentration in the development
of the action, as is the case with the Queste. In accordance with
these characteristics, the romance, though in the same general vein
as the Queste and moving within the same range of ideas, as
compared with the latter, leaves an impression of inferior spiritual
earnestness, or fanaticism, if you will.

That both of these romances are the productions of eccle-
siastical workshops has never been questioned and is not likely
to be. No one but an ecclesiastic would have possessed in the
same degree such learning in matters pertaining to the Bible, to
ritual, and to dogma, or such mastery of contemporary methods
of allegorical interpretation. It would seem, indeed, that the ro-
mance, itself, supplied an indication as to the place of its origin;

*° Lot, Lancelot, p. 81, rejects the theory of alteration, here


suggested.

** This is, also, apparent from the variety of sources used in this
romance.

“* On this subject cp. Bruce, “Mordrain, Corbenic and the Grail
Romances,” MLN, XXXIV, 385ff. (Nov., 1919). The name, which
is of Germanic origin, is only found in the extant documents in the
Latinized forms, Maurdramnus, Maurdrannus, Mordramnus, Mor-
thrannus. Our meagre records do not state where he was born. The
fact that whilst Maurdramnus was abbot of Corbie, a king, Desiderius
394. Evolution of Arthurian Romance


for the name of the heathen king who, strange to say, was born
(according to the romancer) at Meaux in France and who, after his
conversion and zealous service in the cause of Christ, adopted ‘a
religious life and died in a monastery of his own founding, viz;
Mordrain(s), has been discovered nowhere else in mediaeval re-
cords save as the name of the abbot who presided over the famous
Benedictine monastery of Corbie in Picardy from 769 to 781,
A. D.* It appears obvious that only a monk of Corbie would have
had an interest in conferring on his royal saint the name of an abbot
of this foundation — one, too, who had been dead for upwards
of four centuries. It accords. with this indication that the name
given to the Grail castle (“palais spiriteux’’) in this romance
and in the Queste, viz., Corbenic, coincides with that of Corbeni
(in the Middle Ages, Corbiniacum), a town, somewhat southeast
of Laon (so, in the same general region as Corbie), where there
was and had long been a royal palace and at the same time a
Benedictine establishment connected with one of the most famous
and venerable shrines of France (St. Marculf’s). That the name
of the Grail castle in our romances was derived from the name
of this place is hardly open to doubt.

of Lombardy, was actually leading a life of religious devotion in the
abbey may have led our romancer to combine the two characters in
Mordrain. Note, too, that the four hundred years’ interval between
the death of Maurdramnus and the composition of the Quweste may
be responsible for the author's making Mordrain live four hundred
years. Cp. VI, 62.

** For details concerning Corbeni, the palace and shrine, see my
article just cited.

In view of what has been said in the text above it seems need-
less to discuss A. Wesselofsky’s effort, “Zur Frage iiber die Heimath
der Legende vom heiligen Gral,” Archiv fir Slavische Philologie,
XXII, 321 ff. (1910), to trace the names in the EHstotre to extra-
Biblical oriental sources. His identifications are fantastic to the last
degree. The same thing is true of Miss M. A. Murray’s attempt in the
journal, Ancient Egypt, (London and New York), for 1916, Part I,
pp. 1ff., to establish an Egyptian origin for certain of these names.
Thus she derives Nascien’s name from a hypothetical Arabic noun,
Ndshv’un, which would mean “one who is growing up.” But Nascien


is, beyond question, derived from Naasson in the genealogy of Christ,
St. Matthew, I, 4. Ex uno omnia.
The Vulgate Cycle — 395


2. L’Estoire de Merlin.


As has been stated already, the Merlin branch of the Vulgate
cycle consists of (1) the prose rendering of Robert de Boron’s Merlin
and (2) a continuation of this prose rendering, which is much
longer than the original work.

It is generally agreed that this continuation is the latest in
date of any division of the cycle.** Its frequent allusions to other
branches and its dependence on these same branches in numerous
episodes put this beyond doubt.

It will be observed from the analysis given below that the
continuation is, for the most part, made up of interminable des-
criptions of wars between Arthur and his rebellious barons, or
between Arthur and the Saxons, or between the rebellious barons
and the Saxons. Of more interest than these prolix and mono-
tonous descriptions are the occasional passages that deal with in-
cidents of peace — particularly, those that relate to Arthur's
courtship and marriage of Guinevere.4¢ After all, however, the
Vulgate Merlin continuation might well have been left a prey
to oblivion, without any loss to the world, were it not for the
famous episodes concerning the enchanter’s passion for Vivien and
her treacherous imprisonment of him through the force of his


““ Cp., e.g. Brugger, Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt., XXIX*, 109ff.
(1905), Lot, Lancelot, p. 7 (1920).

*° Cp. allusions to the Lancelot: the incestuous conception of
Mordred, Sommer, II, 129, the veiled prediction (in allegorical form)
of Lancelot’s career, ibid. p. 214, the part played throughout the con-
tinuation by Ban (Lancelot’s father), pp. 245ff. (Guinebaut and the
magic chessboard), etc.; allusion to the Estowre, pp. 221f. (circum-
stances of its composition); to the Queste: p. 335 (Galahad, the Grail
Winner, as the perfect knight); to the Mort Artu: p. 265 (Mordred’s
treason). As is said below, the whole continuation is obviously a sort
of introduction to the Lancelot, and passages in it that were sugges-
ted by the latter might be counted by the scores. — The Pelles of
the Vulgate Merlin continuation is, of course, derived from the Lan-
celot and Queste — only he is here always called “Pelles de Liste-
nois.” Cp. MPh., XVI, 126f. Lot, Lancelot, p. 239, note 3, makes
a distinction between the two Pelles, but this is unwarranted.


“* pp. 157 ff, 2166.
396 Hvolution of Arthurian Romance


own magic spell which he had been weak enough to betray to her.**
An exception, perhaps, might, also, be made in favor of the spirit-
ed description of Arthur’s combat with the monster cat on the
shores of the “Lake of Lausanne’’.‘

‘The continuation which we are discussing was composed as a
sort of introduction to the Lancelot. There was no obstacle to
the assumption that the coronation of Arthur — at which point
Robert’s Merlin ended — and the birth of Lancelot — with which
the Lancelot began — were separated by a considerable interval,
and the author of our continuation availed himself of this cir-
cumstance to exploit the general interest in the Arthurian story
in his own behalf — doubtless, with some particular patron in
view. Huis work, then, is a pseudo-history of Arthur’s reign,
down to the birth of Lancelot, and it constitutes, accordingly,
an introduction to the Lancelot. Merlin continues to play a lead-
ing role in the events of that reign, but, inasmuch as in the
Lancelot we hear of him only in the episode,*® probably inter-
polated,5° in which the story of his imprisonment by Vivien is
told, our author is under the necessity of accounting for the magi-
cian’s disappearance, and he does so by adopting and expanding
the conceptions of the Lancelot episode just alluded to. |
| In general, the writer’s main guide in the composition of
his chronicle is Wace’s Brut,*! possibly, in an expanded form,°?
47 Op. pp. 20988, 4504. ‘8 op, 441 ff.

** Cp. Sommer, III, 19ff.

*° Cp. Brugger, Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt., XXX*, 188. On the
supposed source of the interpolation (viz. the hypothetical Brut by a
certain Martin — of Rochester, according to some MSS. of the Vul-
gate Merlin), cp. ibid. pp. 181ff.

*? In the Huth-Merlin, I, p. XXIV, G. Paris, in speaking of the
sources of the Vulgate Merlin-continuation, mentions, besides the Lan-
celot, Geoffrey of Monmouth and “le Perceval de Robert” (i. e. the
Didot-Perceval). But we may safely assume that the romancers always
used French paraphrases of Geoffrey — especially, Wace’s — rather
than the Latin original. — Instead of the Didot-Perceval, Paris should
have mentioned the Perlesvaus, I, 170, 219ff., whose influence in the
passage, II, 316, relating to Kay’s murder of Arthur’s son, Lohot,
seems undeniable. |

** Namely, the lost original of Layamon, or Brugger’s Martin of
Rochester, if the latter ever really existed.
The Vulyate Cycle 397


but he has also developed suggestions of the Lancelot®* and, doubt-
less, of still other romances.*4 There are probably, in addition,
some episodes of the author’s own invention, but it is safe to
assume that, if such there be, they are of little significance; for,
on the whole, the Merlin continuation is decidedly the dullest
and least original portion of the whole Vulgate cycle.


3. Li Livres de Lancelot.


There is no certain indication of any division or divisions
in the text of the Lancelot, itself,5> and we shall see below 5® that,


** Already at II, 97 — so within nine pages of the beginning
of the continuation — Ban and his brother, Bohort, are introduced
as allies of Arthur and they are prominent in the action down to the
end of the romance. The author took them, of course, from the Lan-
celot. So, too, with the character of Claudas, II, 98, 206f., 279, etc.
At II, 214, there is a veiled prediction of Lancelot’s career as told
in the Lancelot; at II, 159, 346, mention is made of Pelles’ daughter,
and so on. The continuation is dependent on the Lancelot in so many
episodes that further citations are superfluous. The author, indeed,
refers, II, 221, directly to that romance as the one which will relate
Lancelot’s adventures.

** There is a direct reference to the Estoire del Saint Graal
in the passage, II, 221, where the author introduces the younger
Nascien (his own creation) as the kinsman of Celidoine and of the
older Nascien. Cp., too, I, 334f., where the references to Joseph,
Galahad and Sarras evince a knowledge of both the Hstoire and the
Queste. The allusion, II, 885, to the fatal encounter of Arthur and
Mordred on Salisbury Plain is, of course, based on the Mort Artu,
VI, 365ff. The story of Mordred’s incestuous birth, II, 129, may have
been suggested either by the Mort Artu, VI, 325, 349, 377, or the
Lancelot, V, 284. — Meraugis de Portlesguez has supplied the con-
tinuation with the character of that name who fights against the Saxons,
II, 148, as the Vengeance de Raguidel of the same poet has supplied
the “vile del gaut destroit,”’ II, 164. On the other hand, the Chastel
des Caroles, II, 246, is borrowed from the Lancelot, V, 149ff., not
from Meraugis, ll. 4334 ff. (source of the Lancelot episode). The
reference to the expedition of the Argonauts and to the children of
Oedipus, II, 230, are, doubtless, derived from the Roman de Trove
and Roman de Thebes, respectively.

*° On this subject see, especially, Lot, Lancelot, pp. 9ff. There
are divisions, to be sure, in the manuscript tradition. Particularly
common in this tradition is the division into two parts, the so-called


C30 ogle


398 Kvolution of Arthurian Romance


according to the theory recently advanced by Ferdinand Lot, the
whole of the Lancelot is really the work of a. single author —
the same that composed, also, the Estoire del Saint Graal, the
Queste del Samt Graal, and the Mort Artu. Having given in an-
other place my reasons, however, for rejecting this theory, in the
following pages I shall adopt the view as to the plural authorship
of this branch which has been generally held by Arthurian scholars
and which I have attempted to justify elsewhere.*”

There was, of course, no connection, originally, between the
stories of Lancelot and the Grail. Chrétien’s Lancelot contains
no allusion to the Grail and his Perceval contains no allusion to
Lancelot. It was the creator of Galahad who first connected the
two. Owing to the considerations which have already been set
forth,5® we cannot accept the Lancelot and the Queste as works
of the same author, yet the dependence of the latter on the former
is obvious, and the Lancelot was certainly the earlier romance.
Galahad, of course, exists purely as the hero of the Grail quest
and must therefore have been created by the author of the Queste.


Agravain forming the second part. Lot’s explanation of this division,
op. cit., pp. 11f., as due to purely material considerations — to have
included the whole romance in one volume would have been intolerable,
on account of its bulk — is, doubtless, correct, but a want of har-
mony in the narrative between the beginning of the Agravain and
the end of the preceding part still needs to be explained. Cp. RR,
X, 63 ff.

Some MSS. (cp. Lot, pp. 13 ff.) assume a tripartite division, viz. 1.
Galehaut (through Galehaut’s death) 2. Charete (Charrette). 3. Agra-
vain. This division has been frequently adopted in discussions of the
Lancelot, and, in the opinion of the present writer, is connected with
a real difference of authorship for the parts in question.

The summaries of the preceding narrative given at irregular in-
tervals throughout the Lancelot (cp. Lot, p. 15) are, I believe, without
significance. They are very likely scribal insertions, intended to serve,
in a rudimentary fashion, the purpose of modern tables of contents.


°° Cp. Part IV.
*7 In “The Composition of the Old French Prose Lancelot, "RR
IX, 241 ff., 353ff. (1918), X, 48ff., 97ff. (1919).


** Cp. study just cited.
The Vulgate Cycle 399


All references then, to Galahad and Grail matters®® which we find
in the Lancelot — and the same thing is true of other branches
of the cycle — must have been later additions to the primitive
text of this romance. Some of these references are brief, but
others involve whole episodes.®

Apart from such interpolations, the enormous length of. the
Lancelot and the differences of style in different parts of the ro-
mance®! render it virtually certain that this branch, as it stands
in our extant MSS., is not the production of one hand, but’ repre-
sents rather the result of successive continuations and other ad-
ditions to the original work,®? just as is the case with the Conte del
Graal and with the prose Tristan in its cyclic form. To be sure,
it is not always easy to fix the limits of these various expansions
of the original romance. The Galehaut,*+ however, has been gene-


_ ** All references to Grail matters in the Lancelot imply that
Galahad is the Grail hero. Many of these references are to the Queste,
but others are to the Hstowre, in which Galahad, of course, is assumed
to be the Grail Winner, as well as in the Queste.

*° See my article, already cited, in RR, IX, and X. We have,
for example, Sommer, III, 226, a passing remark that a certain quest
for Lancelot was “la plus haute queste qui onques fust apres celi del
Graal.” On the other hand, we have long episodes like the visits of
Gawain, Lancelot, and Bohort to the Grail castle.

*’ Lot, it is true, in his Lancelot, pp. 65ff., disputes that there
are such differences. My discussion of the different branches, how-
ever, will show, I believe, that he is wrong.

** Cp. RR, IX, 241 ff., for a summary of critical opinion to
this : effect.

** Cp. op. cit., pp. 244ff. There are four continuations to
Chrétien’s Perceval (Conte del Graal), viz. Pseudo-Wauchier, Wauchier,
Manessier and Gerbert. Moreover, in the first of these continuations
there are, incontestably, interpolations, and not improbably, also, some
of minor extent in Wauchier, at least. Besides, we have prefixed to
Chrétien’s romance in certain MSS. the so-called Elucidation and
Bliocadrans-prologue. Note, too, the introductory and final episodes
of Wolfram’s Parzival, which, as we have seen, many scholars attri-
bute to the much-discussed Kyot (Guiot). These episodes represent
additions to Chrétien’s poem. — For the prose 7'ristan cp. E. Liseth,
Le roman en prose de Tristan, p. XII (Paris, 1890).

_ * This extends from the beginning of the romance down to IV,
155 (death of Galehaut).
400 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


rally accepted as a separate division—justly so, we believe, since,
despite a multitude of extraneous episodes, it forms a complete
narrative, in itself, of Lancelot’s love for the queen and his friend-
ship for Galehaut — a narrative, which is, in the main, uniform
in spirit and style.® Immediately after the Galehaut comes the
Charete section (IV, 155ff.) —- so called, because it begins with
a paraphrase of Chretien’s Lencelot (Conte de la Charete). It
has been customary to regard this section as extending down to
the point where Agravain ‘suddenly appears in the quest for Lance-
lot (V, 8). A more natural line of division, however, seems to
be furnished by the beginning of this same quest (IV, 321). The
narrative of this search for Lancelot by Gawain and other knights,
which embraces nearly one-third of the whole Lancelot (IV, 321—
V, 318), was, probably, a separate continuation. There were, still
further, two more continuations, it would seem, viz. 1. Brumant’s
disastrous attempt to occupy the Seat Perilous, Arthur’s wars with
the Romans and with Claudas, which end with Lancelot’s recovery
of his patrimony (V, 318—377).% 2. The concluding section of
the romance, in which, for the first time, Perceval is introduced
as one of the characters of the Lancelot*? (V, 377—409). The


*® Among those who have accepted the division of the Lancelot
into 1. Galehaut, 2. Charete, 3. Agravain, cp. G. Paris, Huth-
Merlin, I, p. XXXVII, note 2, and G. Gréber, Grundriss, Band IL,
Abteilung I, pp. 996ff. The latter attributes distinctly each of the
divisions to a different author. I believe, however, that the composition
of these divisions is not so simple as Gréber imagines — moreover,
that the Galehaut was written before the Charete. The fact that
the Charete follows rather closely its metrical original (Chrétien's
Lancelot) doubtless inclined Gréber to date this part of the Lancelot
before the other parts which are more independent.

** On this continuation cp. RR, X, 109ff. The author probably
had before him the whole of the Lancelot — substantially as we
know it in the extant MSS. — down to p. 318 — also, the Estoire,
Queste and Mort Artu. Arthur’s wars here were doubtless based
on his wars against Lancelot and the Romans in the Mort Artu,
VI, 317. Cp. RR. IX, 390ff.

*’ His brother, Agloval had already appeared — for the first
time in extant Arthurian romance — at the beginning of the long
The Vulgate Cycle 401


number of passages in these last two sections which reveal a know-
ledge of the Mort Artu prove that they were both written after
that branch.* |

Each of the divisions of the Lancelot which I have just in-
dicated, except the last two, appears, however, to have undergone
changes and interpolations of various kinds. For example, there are
reasons for doubting whether the characters, Lionel, Bohort, and
Hector, figured in the original Galehaut,®® and the episodes of
Merlin’s magical imprisonment by Vivien (III, 19ff.), of Arthur's
infatuation with the false Guinevere (IV, 10ff.), of Galehaut’s
dreams (IV, 19ff.), not to mention others in this same section,
were, most likely, later interpolations. So, too, doubtless, with
the episode of Bohort and Brangoire’s daughter in the Charate
section (IV, 270ff.), which is, obviously, an imitation of the story
of Galahad’s conception in a later part of the Lancelot (V, 105ff.).

Of all parts of the romance most subject to interpolation
and expansion was the one (commencing IV, 321) in which the
long quest of Gawain and his companions for Lancelot is narrated


quest for Lancelot, IV, 321, and had played a considerable réle in
the subsequent narrative.

Lot, Lancelot, p. 207, note 1, derives Agloval’s name from Ag-
lebtil, a variant for Aeglippus, name of a king of Ethiopia in the
Passio Matthet. The Ethiopian Aglebal is, itself, derived from Aglibal,
the name of one of the gods of Palmyra. Lot arrives at his derivation
as follows: According to his theory, the Lancelot and the Estoire
are by the same author—but, siace this author seems to have drawn
upon Ethiopian history (cp. Heinzel, Grail treatise, pp. 138f.) for names
in the Estoire, he may have done so, likewise, in the Lancelot.
Granting, however, that the Lancelot and the Estotre were from the
same hand — which, as we have seen, is extremely doubtful — it
is very improbable that even an ecclesiastic in Northern France at
the beginning of the thirteenth century would have had access to
writings on Ethiopian history. As a matter of fact, this name, Aglebil,
has only become known to European scholars in recent years.

“° Cp. RR, X, 109ff., 114ff.

** Cp. RR, X, 57ff. Lot, Lancelot, p. 125, derives Bohort’s
name from that of Beor, a king of Ethiopia in the Passio Matthet.
But the name, Beor, occurs only once in that text, and the derivation
is not probable. Cp., too, what I have just said in the previous note


Hefperia, Eegdngungsreihe: 26
402 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


— the part which, in a large measure, coincides with the so-
called Agravatn division of the Lencelot. The loose quest form,
as it were, invited additions and expansions. It is here that -we
have inserted the episodes which connect the Lancelot with the
Queste’® and Mort Artu™ that follow it in the cycle. .

Here, however, as in the other divisions of the Lancelot, many
of the inserted passages are not cyclic either in aim or in effect.
They are of the same general character as other adventures in
Arthurian romance and were composed by the continuators or ex-
panders of this branch in its earlier form (or forms) simply for
the additional entertainment of their readers.

Among the latest interpolations of the Lancelot should be
reckoned especially a certain number?? — doubtless, by the same
person — which were inserted, it seems, with the object of unit-
ing the Lancelot and the Estoire. These include probably the brief
phrases which, in conformity with the ideas of the Estoire, re-
present Lancelot as descended from the line of David, the holy
king of Israel,’? the motive for imputing this descent to our hero,


° Especially, the visits to Corbenic (Grail Castle) of Gawain,
IV, 339ff., Lancelot, V, 105 ff. (which includes, of course, the account
of how Galahad was begotten), and Bohort, V,. 139ff., 294 ff.

™ Cp. V, 215ff. (Lancelot, treacherously imprisoned by Morgan,
paints on the walls of his chamber the picture of his intrigue with
Guinevere, which convinces Arthur in the Mort Artu, VI, 236ff., of
his wife’s adultery), 284f. (a priest, tells Mordred of his — Mordred’s —
incestuous birth and predicts that he and his father, Arthur, will slay
each other — a prediction which is fulfilled in the Mort Artu, VI, 377).

Other parts of the Agravain are, probably, also from the pen
of the author of the Mort Artu, but, unlike the ones just cited, . they
have no cyclic significance. Cp. RR, X, 99ff., 105 ff.

"I, 3, 13, 88, 140, IV, 174 Et, S214, 324 ff., v, 231 ff.
243 ff., 249, 27TH. The passages, IV, 321f., S04 tf. indeed, are re-
produced bodily from the Histoire, only with somewhat ‘abbreviated text.
The distribution of these interpolations seems to show that they..were
first made after the Lancelot had been expanded down to V, 318. On
the whole subject see more fully RR, X, 120f.

** III, 13, 88 (Lionel and Bohort, whose ancestry was the same
as Lancelot’s), V, 17, 237. The passage, III, 8, about Lancelot’s
change of name from Galahad. to Lancelot was, also, written under
The Vulgate Cycle 403


in turn, being the desire to derive Galahad, his son, from this
same line; for Christ was a descendant of David’s, and Galahad
typifies Christ.

As regards the sources’ of the Lancelot, it was, no doubt,
the fame of Chrétien’s Lancelot (Conte de la Charete) that led the
author of the prose work in its primitive form’ to make this
character the subject of a full biographical romance; for Chretien,
after all, had dealt with but one episode in -his career. To be
sure, there already existed such a biographical romance relating
to Lancelot — namely, the lost French original of the Middle
High German Lanzelet — but, apart from its literary inferiority,
Lancelot and Guinevere were not lovers in that romance; yet it
was the story of their intrigue that had rendered the former an
object of general interest to contemporary readers. Notwithstanding
his adoption of Chretien’s ideas in regard to his hero, as the lover


the influence of the Hstowre, although the subject of his descent from
David is not here touched upon. For a discussion of Lancelot’s gene-
alogy cp., particularly, Bruce, RR, IX, 250ff. Lot, Lancelot, pp. 218f.,
has, also, discussed the genealogies of Galahad and Lancelot, but he
makes the serious mistake of failing to recognize that, just as Galahad
typifies Christ, his genealogy is equated with Christ’s. As we have
seen above, the fact that the name of the head of his paternal line,
viz. Nascten, is taken from the genealogy of Christ (St. Matthew, I)
— so, too, with that of his uncle Eliezer puts the matter beyond: doubt.
Consequently, what the French scholar says in regard to the influence
of Abyssinian tradition on this genealogy is beside the mark. The
fact that the original Grail Winner, Perceval, was connected with the
Grail king on his mother’s side is, also, to be reckoned with in the
discussion of Galahad’s ancestry.

* On this subject, cp. P. Martens, “Zur Lanzelotsage,” E. Boehmer's
Romanische Studien, V, 643ff. (1880) and, especially, Lot, Lance-
lot, pp. 166 ff. (1918).

It may be observed here, once for all, that the sources of ‘the
Lancelot are purely literary. There is no ground whatever for be-
lieving that our author had access to any oral traditions of the Celts
concerning Lancelot or any of the other characters. This view is,
also, that of Sommer, I, p. VII and Lot, op. cit. p- 182, note 1. |

® Brugger, Zs. f. fre. Spr. u. Litt., XXXI1°, 276, conjectures
that the primitive Lancelot was in verse, but there is no evidence
to support this conjecture.


26*


Go ogle


404 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


of the queen, and, above all, as a lover who exemplified impeccably
the rules of the amour courtots, the author of the new prose work
took, with modifications, from this earlier biographical romance,
the account of Lancelot’s origin and childhood and of his first
departure from his foster-mother’s dwelling in search of adventure.
In the lost poem, as we see from the German adaptation, it was
told how Lancelot was the son of Ban, king of Benoic,’* and how
by an uprising of his subjects the latter was driven out of his
kingdom. On his flight, however, Ban dies from his wounds. His
wife, who was tending him at the time of his death, had laid the
infant Lancelot down under a tree, when she went to her husband’s
side. Whilst she was thus occupied, a water-fairy carried off the
child in a mist to fairy-land (Maiden-land) and there brought
him up in ignorance of his name and rank and of everything,
indeed, that pertained to knighthood, with the ultimate purpose
of obtaining through him, when grown, the deliverance of her
son from an enchanter. Accordingly, when he was fifteen years
old, the fairy permitted him to ride forth to seek his fortunes,
but she would not reveal to him his name or parentage until
he had conquered a certain knight, the strongest in the world —
the enemy of her son. With these initial incidents all resemblance
between the Lanzelet and the Lancelot virtually ceases.” The

** Pant, King of Genewis, he is called in the Lanzelet. Pant,
however, is evidently the same name as Ban, being derived from the
oblique form (Bant) to a nominative, Banz (variant of Bans). Moreover,
Lot, Romania, XXIV, 335 (1895), has pointed out that the German
poet’s Genewis is identical with Chrétien’s Gomeret (Bans de Gomeret,
Erec, 1975) and with Benoic, all three being alterations of Gwynedd,
the Welsh name for North Wales. Cp., too, the same scholar’s Lan-
celot, p. 147, note 8, where the alternative derivation from Breton
Guenet (Modern French Vannes) is rejected. On these matters and
on Brugger’s identification of Ban with Scotch Bain (accepted by
Lot, Lancelot, p. 166, note 4, though not by the present writer) see
his article in the Morf Festschrift, pp. 53ff. (Halle, 1905) and Bruce,
RR, X, 55, note.

? P. Martens, op. cit., pp. 690ff. lists, it is true, some additional
similarities for the part that follows Lancelot’s setting forth on his
adventures. They are all slight, however, as he, himself, acknowledges,
and, in most cases, mere commonplaces of Arthurian romance. The
The Vulgate Cycle 405


reader, however, will have observed that the author of the prose
work has not adopted even these meagre borrowings without alte-
ration, for he has rationalized the fairy into a great lady of the
Middle Ages and explained her lake as a mere illusion. Above
all, in order to relieve his hero’s father of the discredit of a do-
mestic rebellion, he represents this father’s disasters and unhappy
end as due not to his own tyranny, but to the aggressions of an
unjust foe, King Claudas of the Desert Land,?* who becomes,


same remark applies substantially to Lot’s list, op. cit., pp. 167f. An
exception should, probably be made, however, in the case of the name
of Lancelot’s friend, Galehaut, son of the beautiful giantess{(cp. Som-
mer, III, 201, etc.). In the Lanzelet (1. 7544) there is a young giant
named Esealt, which represents doubtless a distortion of Galehalt in
its lost French source.

** Identified with the province of Berry in France, II, 3. In
Old French berrie meant “desert plain,’ hence by popular etymology
the province of Berry becomes the “Terre Deserte.” This is so al-
ready in the chanson de geste, Girart de Roussillon. Cp. Lot,
p. 189, note 1. — Claudas’s capital was Bohorges (Bourges) and he
was, himself, “hom le roi de Gaule qui ore est apelee Franche.” Ban’s
kingdom was contiguous to Claudas’s — i.e. it was in France. In
the Lanzelet it was placed in Great Britain.

Among other speculations as to places and persons that are named
in the beginning of the Lancelot, P. Paris, Romans de la Table
Ronde, Tl, 109ff., suggests (p. 109) that Clandas is identical with
Clovis or his successor, Clothaire I. Brugger, Morf Festschrift, p. 57,
note 2 (1905) and Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt, XL*, pp. 55ff. (1912)
accepts the identification with Clovis and conjectures that the Claudas
story represents an actual oral tradition concerning Clovis. In his
appendix on Claudas’s name, Lancelot, pp. 356f., Lot speaks with
some severity of this identification. I agree with him as to the histo-
rical tradition. Nevertheless, in certain Tristan MSS. we find a form
very near Claudas, viz. Claudes (Claudex) as a variant of the name
of the first Christian king of Gaul, where other MSS. have Clodovez,
Clodeus, Clovis, etc. Cp. Liseth, Le roman en prose de Tristan,
p. 6, note 4, and p. 477. It seems to me, then, that the name Claudas
may, after all, be a variant for Clodeus (Clovis). If this is so, it
came to the prose Lancelot, no doubt, either from the lost chanson
de geste, which I have suggested above, or from some chronicle source.

Lot, loc. cit., derives the name from the same Ethiopian source
as Agloval. Cp. p. 401, note 67, above. But the objections which I
have raised to that derivation apply, also, to this.
406 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


of course, a character of the first importance in the romance.’
On the death of Ban’s brother, the older Bohort, Claudas seizes
the kingdom of Gannes (Bohort’s realm), also, and thus usurps
the patrimony of Lionel and the younger Bohort, as well as of
Lancelot.

Next comc the episodes concerning the usurper’s strife with
Bohort’s children and with his own rebellious barons. These epi-
sodes delay the narrative of Lancelot’s career, which, in the Lanze-
let, develop without interruption after the pattern of the usual
biographical romance. They show, however, such vigor and so firm
@ grasp on reality that a different hand from that which penned
the Lancelot enfances seems discernible in them. In any event,
their similarity to the chansons de geste in style and spirit is
manifest and it appears highly probable that we have combined
here with the original Lancelot theme an adaptation of some lost
poem of that species.%

Aside from the general influence of Chrétien’s Lancelot, noted
above, specific use is made of this romance in the so-called Charete
section of the prose Lancelot.*! The basis of this section, indeed,
as we have seen, is a free paraphrase of Chretien’s poem.*? The
influence of the same writer’s Perceval is, likewise, strongly stamp-
ed on the Grail interpolations of our romance®® — especially,

** Lot, loc. cit., points out, too, how the author of the Lancelot
annuls the relationship which, according to the Lanzelet, subsisted
between Lancelot and Arthur, and how he deprives Guinevere of the
son, Lohot, who is accredited to her in the Lanzelet, ll. 6875 ff.,
as in some other romances. It would have seemed odious, if Lance-
lot’s adultery had been committed with the wife of a kinswoman, and
Guinevere, herself, in this intrigue, would have found a son em-
barrassing.

*° On the discussion of these matters see RR, X, 48 ff.

*) IV, 155 fff.

** For discussions of this Charete section, its composition, its
relations to Chrétien’s poem, the significance of the interwoven episodes,
ep., respectively, Lot, Lancelot, pp. 170ff. (1918) and Bruce, RR, X,
57 ff. (1918). The former assumes single authorship for this section
as for the entire Lancelot-Graal corpus, the latter plural authorship.

** The influence is partly direct, partly indirect (through the
Queste). Lot, op. cit. pp. 1731. has enumerated a number of details
The Vulgate Cycle — 407


on the narrative of Gawain’s visit to the Grail castle (Corbenic).*4
Moreover, it is, doubtless, owing to a reminiscence of the Yvain
(ll. 2804ff.) that, in the prose Lancelot, difficulties that arise
in Lancelot’s love affairs with the queen drive him on various oc-
casions® into a frenzy.

The continuations of Chrétien’s Perceval by Pseudo-Wauchier
and Wauchier de Denain, respectively, are, likewise, among the
undoubted sources of the Lancelot. The self-playing chessmen of
the Forest Perdue (III, 151f.) are borrowed from Wauchier (ll.
22442ff.).8° That the band of questers in Gawain’s long search
for Lancelot should have been fixed at forty (IV, 321) appears
to betray, also, the influence of the same writer, (1. 31421), and
similarly with the luminous apparition of the Grail in the forest
(V, 392), — far from its habitual shrine in the Grail castle, —
through which the wounds of Perceval and Hector are healed.%?
In this last case, it is true, the conception may have reached our
romance through the Queste (VI, 42), as an intermediary.®


in other parts of the Lancelot which he thinks were derived from
Chrétien’s Perceval, the sending of vanquished knights by the hero
to Arthur or Guinevere, the characterization of Kay, numerous proper
names, etc. In many cases, however, it is impossible to say whether
the derivation is direct.
-** Ty, 339ff. Here, as in Chrétien’s Perceval, ll. 3047 ff., the
lord of the Grail castle is an unnamed maimed king; moreover, as in
Chrétien’s poem, ll. 3182 ff., the Grail is borne in by a girl. Contrast
with this Lancelot’s visit, V, 105ff., where the lord of the Grail
castle is called Pelles and is not maimed.

°° Til, 414, IV, 155 (ep. p. 151), V, 381.

°° For the affiliation of the various versions of this motif cp.
RR, IX, 375f. In the Dutch Walewein (edited by W. J. A. Jonck-
bloet, Leiden, 1846), which G. Paris, Histoire littéraire de la France,
XXX, 82ff., has analyzed, under the title of Gavain et l’échiquer,
there is a marvellous chessboard, but no self-playing chessmen attached
to it. For this motif, however, see the Dutch Lancelot, Book II,
l..18391ff., which derives it from the prose Lancelot, Ill, 151f.

*" Cp. Conte del Graal, ll. 34407 ff.

** Lot, Lancelot, pp. 175f., cites some additional points of in-
fluence which appear to me more doubtful — especially, those that relate
to style. The fact that the prose Lancelot (as it stands in our MSS.)
408 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


From Pseudo-Wauchier (ll. 15892ff.) is derived the incident
(III, 272), when Arthur wounds himself at the table whilst he 1s
leaning on a knife in melancholy revery over the failure of his
knights to undertake the promised quest for Lancelot.*® So, too,
with the whole conception of Gawain’s visit to the Grail Castle.
Furthermore, it was because of the example of Pseudo-Wauchier
and Wauchier that in the Lencelot there is only one king® at
Corbenic (the Grail Castle) and that, except in the episode of
Gawain’s visit, just referred to, this king is unmaimed. The
idea that the blight which rested on the Grail land and which only
the predestined Grail knight could remove was due to the do-
lorous stroke of a mysterious sword is drawn by the author of
Lancelot’s visit to Corbenic directly from the Hstotre,*! but it
was ultimately derived from Pseudo-Wauchier,®? and, doubtless,
the author of the episode in question was familiar with it, also,
in its original form.%


With the exception of the compositions of Chrétien, Pseudo-
Wauchier and Wauchier, no romance, perhaps, has supplied more
important materials for episodes of the Lancelot than Raoul de


combines passages of a mystical import with others bordering on license
he attributes to the example of Wauchier. — Lot is probably right,
pp. 180f., in ascribing also to imitation of Wauchier some points in
which the Lancelot might seem to be imitating Li Biaus Descouneus.

*? On this incident cp., more fully, RR, X, 54, note 119.

°° Cp. IV, 339ff. (Gawain’s visit), V. 105 ff. (Lancelot’s), 139 ff.,
294 ff. (Bohort’s two visits).

** The Estoire is explicitly cited, V, 110, as the source.

** Il, 20288 ff. .

°° Lot, Lancelot, pp. 177ff., cites a few other potnts, which are
less certain. He lays stress, especially, on the indebtedness of the
Lancelot, IV, 156, and the Queste, VI, 6, to Pseudo-Wauchier,
ll. 12610ff., for the well-known motif according to which Arthur
would not sit down to table on feast-days, until some adventure was
announced. Pseudo-Wauchier may well be the source here, since the
authors of the two passages in question undeniably show elsewhere a
knowledge of his work, but Lot overlooks the fact that this motif is,
also, found in Chrétien’s Perceval, ll. 2784 ff., whence Pseudo-Wauchier,
doubtless, derives it.
The Vulgate Cycle 409


Houdenc’s Meraugis de Portlesguez.9* From this source (ll. 3663f£f.,
4331ff.) comes the famous incident of the enchanted carols in the
Forest Perdue (V, 123f., 148ff.), to which for a time even Lancelot
succumbs, but the spell of which he ultimately undoes, as the
best knight in the world. So, too, with the vows of the knights
at Brangoire’s court to perform various fantastic exploits for the
sake of their ladies (IV, 266), and the adventures of Yvain and
Bohort which begin with the exaction of a kiss from the former
by a hideous woman (V, 127).%

The reading of the authors of the Lancelot, however, was,
of course, not confined to Arthurian romance,” and it is accordingly
not strange if we, also, find here and there traces of the influence
of the other forms of literature that were then most in vogue —


** The best study of the relations of the two romances is G. Huet’s
“‘.e Lancelot en prose et Meraugis de Portlesguez”, Romania, XLI,
518ff. (1912). In the opinion of the present writer he proves that
the Lancelot is the borrower. Brugger, Zs. f. fre. Spr. u. Intt.,
XXVIII’, 59, note 107 (1905), was inclined to the contrary view.

** Lot, Lancelot, p. 186, speaks of this episode as inspired by
the “gabs” (boasts), of Charlemagne and his knights in the Pelerinage
de Charlemagne. Huet, op. cit., p. 531, had already shown, however,
that the Meraugis, ll. 1777ff., was the source.

°° Cp. Meraugis, ll. 1447—2632 and ll. 4445ff. Huet, op. cit.,
pp. 524ff., has analyzed and discussed the relation of these episodes -
to Lancelot, V, 127ff.

*? In addition to the romances which I have noted above, Lot,
Lancelot, pp. 182 ff., counts among the sources of the Lancelot the
Mort Arthur section of the Didot-Perceval (J. L. Weston’s Legend
of Sir Perceval, Ul, 82ff.). In the RR, IX, 390f., however,.I have
tried to prove that the episodes in question — Arthur’s wars against
Claudas and the Romans, V, 335ff. — are really based on the account
of his wars with Lancelot and the Romans in the Mort Artu, VI,
317 ff., supplemented by Wace, ll. 10341 ff. These episodes of the
Mort Artu, in turn, were developed indisputably from the lost French
original of Layamon’s Brut. Cp. RR, IV, 452ff. In any event,
‘Wace, alone, would have sufficed as the basis of these Lancelot epi-
sodes. — On the relation of Lancelot, V, 335ff., to the political
situation in the early thirteenth century, Lot, p. 185, note 2, has
some interesting remarks. He is probably right when he maintains
that Frollo is here made a German because of French hostility to the
410 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


saints’ lives,®* chansons de geste, romances of antiquity.1%° In
a.passage which is manifestly from the hand of a cleric — namely,
the one concerning the interpretation of Galehaut’s allegorical
dream (IV, 23) — there is even a reminiscence of a philosophical
treatise,!°! Alexander of Neckham’s De Naturis Rerum (ch. 74).
The passage in this work, it is true, which caught our cleric’s.
attention contained not the record of a scientific observation, but
one of the fictitious vaticinations of the Arthurian enchanter and
prophet, Merlin — in this case, with regard to the destined migra-
tion of wisdom from Oxford to Ireland.

‘Taking the Lencelot, as it is preserved to us in our extant
manuscripts, it is unquestionably one of the most rambling’ pro-
ductions in European literature. Coherence had never been a virtue
even of the metrical romances, but, after all, if we exclude the
Conte del Graal (Chrétien’s Perceval and its continuations), they
had, at least, been compositions of moderate length, whereas in the
Lancelot, as stated above, we have, with one or two exceptions,1»?
the longest work of fiction in the whole history of European


German Empire at that time, but it is not necessary to assume that
the battle of Bouvines (1214) had already been fought.

Some episodes of the Lancelot are, doubtless, derived from Ar-
thurian and other romances, now lost. P. Paris, RTR, IV, 208,
note 1, conjectured that this was the case with the episode of Gawain’s
imprisonment by Caradoc in the Dolorous Tower, IV, 85ff. It seems
quite likely, too, that Agloval (Perceval’s brother) was drawn from some
lost metrical romance. These matters, however, are purely speculative,
so that there is nq profit in lingering over them.

** Lot, p. 186, sees in the episode of the mad Lancelot, living
unrecognized and contemned at Corbenic, an imitation of the legend
of St. Alexis.

°° Ibid. Lot cites Girart de Roussillon among the sources.

79° The story of Aeneas which Lancelot, V, 217, saw painted
on the wall at Morgan’s palace is more likely to have been derived
from the French romance Eneas than from Vergil. So, too, with the
name of the enchantress, Camille, III, 406. The name Serses (Cerses)
= Xerxes, V, 144, is doubtless taken from the Roman de Troie,
ll. 6854, e¢ passim.

°* This is pointed out by Lot, p. 186, note 8.

1°? French romances of the seventeenth century.
The Vulgate Cycle 411


fiction, and, in varying degrees, we encounter in every part of
the romance the same desultory combination of incoherent elements.
To unify and at the same time to impart an air of verisimilitude
to the narrative, an apparently coherent system of dating the move-
ments of the hero, such as one might find in the chronicle of
an actual historical personage, is adopted — especially in the
Galehaut section. Nevertheless, the effect, of this device is feeble
and its very existence passed unobserved until recently.1°° On the
other hand, the principle, which is applied, more or less, every-
where in the Lancelot of interlacing the various episodes is ob-
vious enough.!* An episode is interrupted, to be resumed later on
in the midst of another episode, whose further development is
thus postponed — to be resumed, perhaps, in its turn, in the midst
of still a third episode. The structural unity, however, which re-
sults from this second device, is purely mechanical, since the inter-
woven episodes, for the most part, have no organic connection with
one another and the essential incoherence of the narrative ele-
ments is still patent. The device becomes, then, most frequently,
a mere trick to pique the curiosity of the reader by breaking off
abruptly the adventures of one character and turning to those of
another at a point where the former appear to be approaching a
dénouement. There is never any trouble about prolonging the
narrative, for, under these conditions, the author has no scruples
in regard to sudden transitions or the introduction of new char-
acters. Above all, the quest motif, which Chrétien had employ-
ed,1% was always at hand to give a new start to the flagging story,
and nothing else is so much responsible for the inordinate length
of our romance as the frequent application of this motif, with
its inevitable temptations to accumulate to an indefinite extent
disconnected adventures. A number of knights set forth in search


*°* Cp. Lot, Lancelot, ch. II. He calculates (p. 35) that the
action from Lancelot’s arrival at Arthur’s court to the end of Sommer’s
first volume covers three years and four months.

7° Cp. Lot, ibid. ch. Il. The inference as to the single author-
ship of the Lancelot, however, which the French scholar draws from
this device is disputable. Cp. Bruce, RR, X, 380f. |.

7° Cp., particularly, the quest for Guinevere in his Lancelot.
412 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


of the hero, say; after a while they separate, and each of the
original company has his own series of combats and other‘‘ moving
accidents by flood and field’? — in most cases, entirely independent
of the rest. Obviously, under such circumstances, the bulk of the
narrative depends merely on the writer’s whim as to the number of
questers he will put on the hero’s track and the number of adven-
tures he will allow any individual quester to achieve. There is
no organic plan to be interfered with.

Altogether, the only true unity which the Lancelot possesses
is a certain unity of spirit which pervades the whole, as it per-
vades the Arthurian romances, in general, this spirit being of
a kind to foster an idealistic attitude of mind, and through the
exhibition of examples of knightly valor and honor and noble
conduct, to stimulate the reader to the attainment of high stand-
ards of physical and moral excellence.!% From the modern point
of view, to be sure, in one domain of morals there are serious
limitations to the ideals of conduct which are expressed by the
romance — namely, in that of the sexual relations; for, in the
Lancelot, as in the metrical romances, love is practically always
illicit and often adulterous. The hero’s passion for the queen,
which furnishes the raison d’étre of the work is, of course, adulter-
ous, and the divine champion of religion and chastity (Galahad)
is himself the fruit of an irregular and transient union. Needless
to say that Arthur is no better than his spouse, as is shown by
his affairs with Camille and the false Guinevere. These in-
stances are the most conspicuous, but many others occur in the
course of the narrative. The immorality of the underlying con-
ceptions concerning the relations of the sexes is hidden, to some
degree, in the case of the love-story of Lancelot and Guinevere


*°° Cp. the excellent remarks on this subject by Gréber in his
Grundriss, Band II, Abt. I, p.998. He is speaking of the prose-
romances, in general, but his description applies with especial force
to the Lancelot. For an important study of the relations of the
prose Lancelot (Charete section) and Chrétien’s poem to each other
in respect to spirit, as well as matter, cp. Mme. Lot-Borodine in
F. Lot’s Lancelot, pp. 383¢f.

" II, 410ff. and IV, 10ff., respectively.
The Vulgate Cycle 413


by the veneer of the contemporary code of courtly love which this
affair illustrates, but it appears in its full grossness in such epi-
sodes as those of Agravain and the “damoisele roigneuse” (III,
318ff.) and of Guerrehes and the Lady of the Pavilion (V, 31ff.).

Since the merits of the Lancelot are not to be found in the
skilful disposition or development of the narrative as a whole,
we have to seek them in the individual episodes. Even here, how-
ever, there are glaring faults enough — especially, the fault of
monotony through endless repetitions of the same motéfs.1% The
number of cases in which the interest of an encounter between
two knights, whether in tourney, battle, or single combat, turns
on the fact that the adversaries are friends or kinsmen who are
unaware of each other’s identity’ must run into the scores. And
such episodes do not exhaust the instances in which the motif of
Lancelot’s own incognito is exploited. In the French original of
the Lanzelet his name had not been disclosed to him until he had
distinguished himself by a notable achievement, and this fairy-tale
conception is taken over into the prose-romance, despite the general
rationalizing tendency of the latter. It is, perhaps, fitting that
this hero, who was so long nameless in his youth, should, in his
maturer years, so often choose to disguise himself in armor, not
his own, although his superiority in feats of arms always betrays
his identity in the end.

Apart from these episodes and the innumerable combats which
differ hardly at all from each other, many other instances of
repetition might be cited — such as the hero’s three frenzies,}!°


0° Lot, Lancelot, pp. 263ff., gives a partial list of nineteen
such cases.

70° This is, of course, an extension of the wide-spread Sohrab
and Rustem motif (combat between father and son). A few of the
numerous examples of the extension (combats between kinsmen and
friends) are given in M. A. Potter's Sohrab and Rustem, pp. 208tf.
‘London, 1902). Cp. too, Bruce, Mort Artu, pp. 268f. Occasionally,
however, in the Middle Ages, there were actually such encounters,
mutual recognition being prevented by the armor. Thus William the
Conqueror came near being killed by his son, Robert of Normandy.

9 I, 414ff., IV, 155, V, 381.
414 Evoclation of Artharvan Romance


his two imprisonments by Morgan.?™ the carrving off of knighr=
by giants on two oecasions,* various rescace of others from cay
tivity. Lancelsi's double cohabitation with Pelles’ danghter.***
ev. In Bobort we have even a character who 1s the mere rephea
of another charact-r — namely. Lancelot — and whose exploits
are all virmally pale reflections of those of his model?> The
same thing is true, in some degree. also, of Hector.

The present writer, it is true, believes that the repetitions
with which the narrative in our extant MSS. of the Lancelot
is dilnted are due, in a large measure, to later expansions of the
primitive romance, but probably at no stage of its existence was
the Lancelot entirely free from this weakness. It was the ro-
mance, however, in its expanded and cyclic form that has been
read ever since the fourth decade, say, of the thirteenth century.
and in our analysis it is needless. therefore. to concern ourselves
with any earlier hypothetical form. however plausible. in which
it may have existed.

The Lancelot is frequently marred, still further, by the trivial
or absurdly fantastic nature of the adventures. Take, for instance.
the very first exploit of the hero after his arrival at Arthur's
court, when he pulls the lance-heads and sword out of the wounded
Trahant’s body and swears to avenge him (Trahant? “on all who
liked him less than the man that wounded him’.U* How is it
possible for a modern reader to follow with anv interest adventures
based on a pure absurdity like this that possess no charm either
for the reason or the imagination? In a somewhat similar way.
we have preceding the excellent episodes in which Gawain’s and
Lancelot’s visits to Corbenic are respectively described the pre-


**) TV, 124ff., V, 215 ff. ™* TV, 88, V, 88.

**5 III, 167, 4235, ete. ™ Vv, 110, 379.

*** For the numerous points of similarity between the two, cp
KR, X, d9f.

**° Ill, 126ff. In one of the episodes which constitute the sequel
of this vow, Lancelot finds himself compelled to combat a knight who
has just entertained him most hospitably. Bound by his vow, however,
he drowns his host, weeping for the necessity of the act as he commits
it. Cp. I, 199.
The Vulgate Cycle 415


posterous incident of the girl who for an undefined sin is con-
demned to sit in a tub of scalding water.'!? In a few cases tha
extravagant code of courtly love is responsible for the absurdities
in question, as when Lancelot barely escapes drowning at Camelot,
his gaze being fixed so ecstatically on Guinevere that he does
not observe that his horse is taking him into the river." In the
aimlessness of the combats which make up so much of its narra-
tive, the Lancelot, it is true, does not differ from the other Ar-
thurian romances, — only here, owing to the length of the work,
the accumulation of such incidents is immensely greater than any-
where else.

Instances of obtuseness in matters of art being so numerous
throughout our romance, it is, perhaps, not surprising that we
should find the process of euhemerisation applied so frequently
to the highly poetical materials of folk-lore origin which it con-
tains.1!9 As we have seen, even in the beginning of the romance,
the lake of Lancelot’s fairy foster-mother is reduced to a mere
illusion. She and her damsel do still retain some super-natural
powers,!° but by the end of the work they have been stripped
even of these.12!, Similarly, access to Sorelois, which is modelled
after Chrétien’s Gorre, is no longer by such perilous approaches
as the swordbridge and the underwater bridge, but by ordinary
causeways.!22 In the episode of Guinevere’s visit to the Fairies’
Fountain, even the fairies are explained away as, in reality, simply
beautiful ladies.!25 It is only the more delicate or extravagant


“7 Tv, 342 and V, 106.

71° ITI, 303. This incident is developed from Chrétien’s Lance-
lot, ll. 3685ff.

"*® Lot, Lancelot, pp. 272ff., has some very good remarks on
this subject, although he exaggerates somewhat the thoroughness of
the euhemerization.

**° Cp. IL, 55ff., where Saraide, obeying her mistress’s command,
turns Lionel and Bohort into greyhounds.

8) V, 321 ff.

88 III, 269f.

'** Iv, 305. The words are: “Cele fontaine estoit apelee la
fontaine a fees, pour chou que cil qui en la forest habitoient disoient
quil y auoient veu de trop beles dames, et si ne pooit on riens sauoir
416 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


fancies of the popular imagination, however, that we find rejected
here and there in the Lancelot; for the more palpable forms of
- enchantment or supernaturalism we meet with everywhere in the
romance — in the copper men and marvellous shields of Dolorous
Gard,'!™% in the terrors of Escalon the Tenebrous,!** in the spell
that rested upon the Valley of False Lovers,!** in the carols and
automatic chessboard of the Lost Forest,'%" etc.

As over against the weaknesses of the Lancelot which have
been analyzed above, one may point to a great number of episodes,
especially, in the Galehaut section, totalling in the aggregate some
hundreds of pages, which constitute admirable specimens of the
narrative art. This is true, for example, of the whole series of
episodes that extend from the beginning of the romance down to
the hero’s arrival at Arthur’s court,!?* although they are probably
of composite origin. These pages include, tnter alia, charming
pictures of aristocratic boyhood (Lancelot and Lionel),!2® and in
the wars of Claudas with his barons,!*° a narrative of feudal strife,
unsurpassed in vividness and energy by any other that has come
down to us from the Middle Ages. The conquest of Dolorous
Gard,!*! though somewhat long drawn out, is, on the whole, an
excellent re-telling of a fairy-tale exploit in terms of contemporary
life. Similar adaptations of folk-lore motéfs, effected with a high
degree of literary skill, are the episodes of the False Guinevere'%?
and of the Valley of the False Lovers.1%8 They are brought close
to actual life, yet retain much of the wild charm of their origin.

In the later divisions of the romance, also, we have such
striking episodes as those of the visits of Gawain and Lancelot to
Corbenic, when they first see the Holy Grail,!** Lancelot’s second


de lor estre, et por ce disoit on que ce estoient fees.” Lot, Lance-
lot, pp. 272f., has called attention to this passage.


86 TTT, 144, 150. "3 TV 111,
6 IV 117ft. 87 Vv 149.
8 TTT 125. 89 TIT 33th, 50ft., 11147.
180 TIT G OF. 8. NT 143¢f.
8 TV, 110ff. 2 IV 116¢f.


4 TV 339ff, V, 105ff.
The Vulgate Cycle 417


imprisonment at the hands of Morgan,!* and the hermit’s pre-
diction of Mordred’s evil end,!8¢ all of which are instinct with
imaginative vigor.

The elements in the Lancelot, however, which have won for
it its greatest fame are, of course, the love-story of Lancelot and
Guinevere and the story, inspired by classical models, of the
friendship of Galehaut and Lancelot. Both suffer, it is true, from
the want of concentration, which is the bane of the romance —
the main themes are interwoven with all sorts of extraneous epi-
sodes — but, after all, the total impression produced in both in-
stances is a memorable one. The part of the love-story which
lies within the Galehaut section of the work represents the highest
reach in literature of the amour courtots in its purest and most
serious form.!? This remark applies especially to the scene%8 —
immortalized by Dante in the Paolo and Francesca episode of the
Inferno (V, 127f£f.) — in which Guinevere bestows on her lover
the crowning kiss.%° The picture of the meek submissiveness of
the great exemplar of chivalry in the presence of his mistress
and of the latter’s arch consciousness of her power possesses an
old-world charm. Admirable, too, is the episode of the first meeting
of the two lovers,'#° with the fine psychological touch by’ which
Guinevere is represented as pretending dissatisfaction with the
young aspirant to knighthood, in order that she may hide the
really profound impression which he has made upon her.

A deeper note, however, is struck in this love-story in the
last division of the romance (the so-called Agravain), where the
queen’s jealousy is aroused!*! by Calles’s daughter — the girl who
had healed Lancelot in the poisoned spring incident. The author
of these pages has his eye fixed upon nature, rather than upon
the artificial rules of the amour courtois, and so, besides the pas-

"OV, 215 ff. "8° V, 284 ff.

**7 Chaucer's T'rotlus and Criseyde, although it, too, suffers,
from prolixity, is, of course, a greater work of art than the Lancelot,
but it contains humorous and even ironical elements.

1*° III, 258ff., but one should read also the preceding passage.
253 ff. (the dialogue of the queen with Galeheut).

** I, 263. “0 TIT, 125f. *) Vv, 59ff.

Hefperia, Erganzungsreihe: 8. 27
418 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


sages: just alluded to, we have such excellent scenes as the one in
which the king is led to interpret his wife’s illness as purely physi-
cal, although it is really caused by her anxiety about Lancelot, or
the one in which she feigns cheerfulness, despite the sorrow with
which her heart is filled on her lover’s account.‘*? The variations
which are wrought on this theme of Guinevere’s jealousy and on
an additional new motif, viz. that of her intimacy with Lancelot’s
kinsmen, Bohort and Lionel, impart. an individuality to the cha-
racter in this last division of the romance moe it lacked in ee
earlier divisions.14 ,


Altogether, characterization in our romance, as in most works
of the Middle Ages, is elementary, but the principal figures,
although dim in outline, as compared with the best masterpieces
of later ages, have a certain grandeur of their own. This is true
not only of Lancelot and Guinevere, but of Galehaut — noble and
melancholy, to whom the foreknowledge of his early death in-
volves no pang so bitter as the thought of his separation from his
friend — dnd of Claudas — the most complex character in the
romance — a leader of men, astute, avaricious, jealous of power,
and full of ruthless energy in the prosecution of his evil ambitions,
yet capable of a deep paternal tenderness and of acts of generosity
towards the youthful foes whom he has wronged. _


t


*8 V, 60ff. Lot, Lancelot, p. -27 i: calls attention, also, to the
fine scene later in the Lancelot, v, 193f. where Guinevere reproaches
herself with being the cause of Lancelot’ s failing in the Grail quest.

“* These two motifs are fundamental in the Mort Artu. There
are so many similarities between that branch and certain episodes in
this part of the Lancelot that I believe they are by the same author.
For a detailed discussion of the subject cp. RR, X, 97ff. .


“““ In the romance, itself, III, 26f., this mixture of good and
evil qualities is commented on and the respective qualities are enume-
rated. The passage is a remarkable one and gives us a life-like por-
trait of Claudas. One gets the impression that some actual Beeemage,
so to speak, sat for this picture.
The Vulgate Cycle 419


4. La Queste del Saint Graal.


As was stated above, the Queste del Saint Graal is the.
companion-romance to the Estoire del Saint Graal, the latter being
the early history of the Holy Grail down through the conversion
of Britain by Joseph and other members of the Grail company,
the former a narrative of the quest for the sacred vessel.by certain
knights of Arthur’s court in that monarch’s reign, some four
hundred years after the conversion.’ We have seen that in the
Estotre references forward to incidents in the Queste are frequent.
In a similar manner, in the Quweste, references backwards to in-
cidents in the Estotre are also frequent — indeed, there is one
long passage (about the spindles in Solomon’s ship) in the former
that is taken over from the latter with but little change of word?
ing.147 From the nature of the case, moreover, the main sources
of the two branches were bound to be the same — namely, Chre-
tien’s Perceval and its first two continuations,'** besides Robert de
Boron’s Joseph — since these were the only works on the Grail,
except Chrétien’s lost livre, that had been composed up to that


4° Cp. p. 3744f., above. I have discussed there everything per-
taining to the mutual relations of the two romances. The Queste is
printed, VI, 3—199 in Sommer’s Vulgate Version.

° Op. Queste, VI, 62, where Mordrain, who was so prominent
in the Estoire and who dies in the Queste, is said to have lived
this number of years.

**7 On this passage, VI, 151—161, and the cross-references be-
tween the two branches cp. p. 376, note 3, above.

“8 The continuation of Pseudo-Wauchier is much the most im-
portant single source for the Queste, barring Robert’s Joseph, from
which the definitely Christian, mystical, conception of the Grail was
derived. In MLN, XXX, pp. 395f, note 29, I have already noted
the indebtedness of the Queste to Pseudo-Wauchier in the following
points: 1. The Fisher King (Pelles) is not maimed, (VI, 5, 98, 114).
2. The Grail is brought into the hall supernaturally, and not by
attendants (VI, 13). 3. The dolorous stroke which causes the blight
of the land, (VI, 146f.). 4. The importance ascribed to the joining
of the sword, (VI, 187f.). 5. The chapel and the bodyless hand
(VI, 108).

Perceval’s sister is doubtless derived direct from Wauchier, her
inventor. On this character in the Queste cp., especially, Madame

27*
420 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


time. The minor sources, however, though of the same general
character, are less varied in the case of the Queste1° than in the
case of the Estotre.

We need hardly repeat here1*! that the purpose of the author
of the Queste, in supplanting Perceval, the earlier Grail Winner,
with his new creation, Galahad, was to make the Grail knight an
incarnation of his own rigid ideals of asceticism. No person who
failed to fulfill the requirements of these ideals seemed to him


Lot-Borodine in Lot’s Lancelot, pp. 432ff. Madame Lot regards
her as a reincarnation of the Virgin Mary.

As to these borrowings, see, still farther, RR, IX, 367, note 77.
On the character, Pelles, who originated probably with the author of
the Queste, cp. Bruce, “Pelles, Pellinor, and Pellean in the Old French
Arthurian Romances’, MPh., XVI, 116ff. For notes on Chrétien as
a source of the Queste, cp. Lot, Lancelot, pp. 192f.

*® T have combated below, Part IV, the hypothesis that the Per-
lesvaus was earlier than the Estotre or the Queste. Similarly, with
regard to the hypothesis that the Didot-Perceval was a source of
these romances, cp. ibid., below. Lot, Lancelot, p. 190, on the
other hand, goes so far as to declare that the Didot-Perceval (the
extant MSS. of which include a brief Mort Arthur) suggested the
idea of writing the Queste and Mort Artu of the Vulgate cycle.

7*° When Galahad draws the sword from the stone after Gawain
and Perceval had failed, VI, 10, this is imitated from Robert de
Boron, I, 83, in which Arthur is the hero of a similar incident. —
The incident of the grateful lion, VI, 69, is taken, doubtless, from
Chrétien’s Yvain, ll. 3341ff. — The bestiaries (©. gz. Hugo of St.
Victor’s) and saints’ lives (St. Eustace, etc.) had already made the
stag as a symbol of Christ familiar to the Middle Ages, and from the
time of the patristic writers the four evangelists had been identified
with the man, the eagle, the lion and the ox of Hzechiel, I, 10. Cp.,
on these subjects, Alfred Maury, Croyances et Légendes du Moyen
Age, pp. 257 ff, 279ff. (Paris, 1896). These, then, are the sources
of Galahad’s adventure in the forest, VI, 166, which, in turn, is, no
doubt, the source of Estoire, I, 257ff. and Lancelot, V, 249. — The
episode of the dead girl (Perceval’s sister) whom Lancelot finds in a
ship with a scroll in her hand that tells her history, VI, 175, is
imitated from Historia Apollon Regis Tyri, ch. 25—26. (edited
by A. Riese, Leipzig, 1893) — the story of the hero’s daughter.
Cp. Brace, Mort Artu, pp. 280f.

7** Cp. p. 379, above.
The Vulgate Cycle 421


fitted to win the vessel which symbolized the most sacred mysteries
of the Christian religion. Chastity, however, was the essential
basis of asceticism, and Perceval, as the writer found him in
Chrétien (ll. 2030ff.) and Wauchier (ll. 25017ff.), was not chaste.
. On the other hand, it had, of course, been an implication of Robert’s
Joseph that in the sequel to that poem, which was probably never
written, his Grail hero (whether Perceval or another) would satisfy
this condition, and in the invention of Galahad, the author of the
Queste was doubtless merely putting into effect Robert’s conception.
The same condition is likewise applied to Perceval and Bohort,
the other members of the trinity of questers,5? who share with
Galahad the mystic vision of the Grail, but who, in proportion
to their lapses from the ideal perfection of chastity,° are inferior
to him in the marks of divine favor.


It may well be that the contemporary order of Knights Temp-
lars, also, offered suggestions for the new character,!5« since he,
like the Templars, is a monk-knight — ascetic yet militant. But
Galahad is even more than that, for he moves on a semi-divine
plane and typifies Christ himself; indeed, he is merely Christ in


armor.155


**2 This number was adopted to correspond to the number of
the Christian godhead.

53 Perceval is represented as chaste in act (cp. VI, 58), but
not in intention (cp. VI. 78). No mention is made of his lapses from
virtue that had been recounted in Chrétien and Wauchier. — Bohort,
it is said, (VI, 119), was unchaste only once, viz. in the affair with
Brangoire’s daughter (IV, 270 ff.) and then through the influence of magic.

>“ ‘The influence of this order on the description of the Grail
Knights in Wolfram’s Parzival, Book XVI, ll. 171, 201, et passim
is, of course, beyond dispute. Alfred Nutt saw its influence, also, in
the characters of Mordrain and Nascien in the Hstotre and Queste.
Cp. his pamphlet, The Legends of the Holy Grail, pp. 481.: Po-
pular Studies in Mythology, Romance and Folklore, No. 14 (Lon-
don, 1902). Galahad, however, embodies the Templar ideal much
more perfectly than these two.

55 In the Queste, VI, 57, Galahad at the Round Table is com-
pared to Christ at the table of the Last Supper. Resemblances of
Galahad to Christ, have been noted, besides, by Heinzel, Gralromane
422 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


In one important respect, the Queste is very superior to the
branches of the Vulgate cycle which we have so far considered —


p. 142, and Wechssler, Sage vom Heiligen Gral, p. 117. See, too,
Bene Zs. f. fre. Spr. u. Titt., XXIX" 97 aa Lot’s Lancelot,
p. 432. The present writer, moreover, has shown in his article “Ga-
lahad, Nascien and Some Other Names in the Grail Romances’, MLN,
XXXIII, 129ff. (1918), that Nascien, the name of the head of Ga-
lahad’s paternal line, and Hlvezer, the name of his uncle, are both
drawn from the genealogy of Christ, St. Matthew, I, and St. Luke,
Ill, where they appear respectively as Naasson and Eliazer. — The
identity of Galahad and Christ was so obvious that the story of the
conception of the former in the Lancelot, V, 105ff., is, substantially,
a sort of parody of the story of the conception of the latter. Cp.
Bruce, RR, IX, 368ff. (1918). Each is begotten of a virgin for. the
express purpose of becoming a savior of the people. In Robert de
Boron’s Merlin, Il, 4ff., the story of Christ’s conception had already
been parodied in the account of how the Devil begot Merlin upon a
virgin, with the idea of raising up an Antichrist. God, however, frus-
trated his purpose. It is possible that this passage in Robert sug-
gested the parody of Galahad’s conception.

Malory and Tennyson have standardized Galahad as the name
of the Grail Winner, but in the MSS. of the Old French romances.
the usual form is Galaad, which in the Latin Bible (Vulgate) is the
equivalent of the Gilead of our Authorized Version. Galaad (Gi-
lead) occurs most frequently as the name of a district in the Bible,
but it, also, occurs as the name of three different persons: (1) a great-
grandson of Joseph’s. Cp. Numbers, XXVI, 29, XXVII, 1, et passim.
(2) Jephthah’s father, Judges, XI, 1, 2. (3) chief of a family of
Gad, I, Chronicles, V. 14. None of the three, however, are really
prominent and there can be little doubt that the assonance with
Gales really determined our author in choosing this name. Perceval
had been of Gales (Wales) — hence the author of the Queste, who
needed a biblical name for his religious hero and, at the same time,,.
wanted to keep up the connection with Gales, selected Galahad. This
view is confirmed by the statement in the Estoire, I, 282, that Gales
was named after Galahad. The reverse, of course, was the truth.
Possibly the name of the famous friend of Galahad’s father, viz:
Galehaut, may have had some influence, too, for that seemed also
connected etymologically with Gales. — On the matters here discussed.
see my article in MLN, just cited. Heinzel, Gralromane, pp. 134f.,
imagined that the name was taken from the first of the three Bible
Galahads, because, he, too, had an ancestor named Joseph. Lot, Lan-
The Vulgate Cycle — 423


namely, in unity of plan. The plan here again takes the form of
@ quest, — the form which had already been employed so often
in the Lancelot, — but, in the present instance, the effect of the
device 1s not weakened by repetition: the whole book is made up
of a single quest, in which the participants and adventures are
relatively few. Moreover, the object of this quest is not to recover
an absent companion of the Round Table, but to obtain possession
of the mysterious symbol of our highest spiritual aspirations: in
other words, the quest, in this case, is a quest for the ideal.
Throughout, everything is centred on the attainment of the ideal
object. The knights leave Arthur’s court in search of it and those
who had been predestined by divine grace to achieve it meet at
the end in the enjoyment of the deepest spiritual satisfaction that
the heart of man can know. Thus, by giving a new direction to
a threadbare device, the writer, despite many shortcomings, has
turned it into an instrument for expressing the mystical spirit
of the Middle Ages with a power that is hardly equalled else-
where. Certainly no other expression of that. spirit has captured
the imagination of subsequent ages so widely or so enduringly.

Notwithstanding this unique achievement, our author has, by
no means, rid the quest form of its inherent weakness. The ad-
ventures of the individual knights are still as disconnected as ever.
Furthermore, in a considerable proportion of cases, these adven-
tures are the old familiar commonplaces of Arthurian romance,15¢


celot, p. 120 (including notes) thinks that Galahad was selected be-
cause of some mystic meaning and cites Genesis, XXXI, 47, where
as a place-name, it is interpreted as “acervus testimonii’. The authors
of the Grail romances, however, did not seek very far in such matters.
For example, the name of the heavenly city, Sarras, is. obtained by
cutting off -tn from Sarrasin, the name of the people (Saracens)
among whom it was situated. Cp. Estoire I, 21. — On Rhys’s im-
possible derivation of the name, Galahad, from the Celtic, Arthurian
Legend, pp. 166ff., cp. MLN. XXXII, 132, note 5, — On Christ
as a knight in mediaeval conceptions cp. Lot, op. ctt., p. 449.
1° @. g. VI, 100 (Lancelot joins the black knights in a tourney,
because he sees that their side is the weaker), 124 (Bohort champions
a disinherited damsel), 140 (Galahad joins the weaker side in a tour-
ney), ete. | |


Go ogle


424 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


and in still other cases they are as vapid as any in the Lancelot.
The writer, it is true, endeavors to invest them with a religious
significance by attaching to the narrative of each adventure an
allegorical interpretation, just as was done in the contemporary
exegesis of the Scriptures. The method, however, is unconvincing,
and there is no trouble about discerning through the attempted
disguise the essential triviality of the incidents in question. The
only advantage of the method, in such cases, is that its regular
and rigorous application helps to impart a certain unity to the
succession of isolated episodes.

In characterization the Queste falls much below the Lancelot.
In fact, only in the case of Galahad and Gawain is there anything
that even distantly approaches individualization in the romance.
For the purpose of exalting the ascetic ideal, as contrasted with
the prevailing ideal of worldly chivalry, the author emphasizes
the sinfulness of Gawain, the chief type of the latter. According
to the first hermit who receives the confession of this character,
he is so hardened in sin that the good man gives up the effort to
convert him because of its uselessness.!5? According to Nascien,
he is lacking in charity, truth, and abstinence.'5* Moreover, he
is represented as the slayer of the noble Baudemagu, and others.159
Nevertheless, it is mainly in the reproofs of the confessional that
Gawain’s portrait is painted in these dark colors, and, in general,
his character is much the same as elsewhere, only the outlines
are fainter.

Galahad, of course, represents the antipodes of the Gawain
of this romance as depicted by the confessors of that “flower of
courtesy’’. After all, however, he, too, is not a living figure, but,


**7 VI, 40. °° VI, 115.

**° Cp. VI, 37, 109, 184. The actual slaying of Baudemagu
is not related in our MSS. of the Queste, though it is referred to at
p. 184. It must have stood, however, in the original version. Very
likely identical with the original version is the account of the affair
in MS. 112, Part III, fol. 97, col. 1, which the present writer pointed
out some years ago, Mort Artu, p. 266. References are made to it,
too, in the unpublished part of the Portuguese Demanda, Huth I,
273. (cp. Bruce, loc. cit., including notes and Mort Artu, VI, 204.)
The Vulgate Cycle — 425


in the main, a mere puppet of the ascetic imagination. There is
@ certain impressiveness about his first appearance at Arthur’s
court — his occupation, as by right, of the Perilous Seat and his
drawing from the stone the sword which even the greatest cham-
pions had failed to draw and which, indeed, was reserved ex-
clusively for his use in the prosecution of the Grail quest. For a
long time after that, however, the adventures which he achieves
do not differ from the ordinary adventures of Arthurian romance,
except in the fact that they are explained in an allegorical sense,
and he, himself, does not develop any individual traits. Only
in the final scenes of the romance is the character again lifted out
of the common run of Arthurian knights — first, at the Grail
castle, by the ecstacy of his aspirations for union with the divine
spirit, and, later, through the sanctity of his death and the marvels
that attend it.

There are other religious elements in the Queste, however,
besides those which have just been indicated — such, for example,
as Solomon’s ship with the five staves, the Maimed King (Mord-
rain), whom only Galahad can heal,!® Perceval’s sister — “‘a
thing enskied and sainted’”” — the allegorical stag and lions.
Everywhere, moreover, as we have already seen, even the most
commonplace incidents are interpreted in terms of religious alle-
gory, so that the work has been well described as a “forest of
allegories’”’.16 The air of the enchanted forests of Arthurian ro-
mance thus becomes heavy with symbolism. A religious fanatic
has entered them and put them under the spell which was already
binding and cramping the minds of the Middle Ages in every
other line of effort.1*


°° These first two belong, of course, to the Estoire, also.

6} Cp. A. Pauphilet, Romania, XXXVI, 605.

*** If we take the Grail romances as they stand—leaving aside
the problems of their evolution — the most penetrating appreciation
of the two Grail heroes, Perceval and Galahad, that we have is Mme.
Lot-Borodine’s, “Les deux conquérants du Graal, Perceval et Galaad”,
Romania, XLVII, 41ff. (1921). I regret that the same writer's
Trois essais sur la Queste du Saint Graal (Paris, 1921) did not
reach me until this book had gone to press.
426 Evolution of Arthurien Romance
5. La Mort Artu.’”


The most widely known of all the traditions concerning Arthur
was the one that related to his last battle, the mortal wound which
he received in that conflict, and his subsequent translation to Ava-
lon, the Celtic Elysium. This tradition, as we have seen, had
been made famous especially by Geoffrey of Monmouth’s Historia
and its derivatives, not to mention the same writer’s Vita Merliné,
the circulation of which, however, seems to have been limited.
The very fact that this phase of the Arthurian story had already
received such frequent treatment was, no doubt, in part, respons-
ible for the comparatively late appearance of a prose romance
on the subject. Besides, the Grail theme, which, owing to its
religious character, exercised an irresistible attraction for the
Middle Ages, was now absorbing the main energies of the Ar-
thurian romancers, whether their chosen vehicle of expression was
verse or prose. In any event, there is no ground for doubting that
the Vulgate Mort Artu was the first prose-romance on the Death-
of-Arthur theme! and that it was composed later than the Queste,
to say nothing of the Lancelot, its dependence upon which is
manifest on nearly every page.1® As regards the second of these


*¢® ‘The text has been printed by J. D. Bruce, Mort Artu (Hallea. S.,
1910), and by Sommer, VI, 203—391 (1913) in his Vulgate Version.

** Miss Weston, Legend of Sir Perceval, Il, 336 and Lot,
Lancelot, 193, both of whom regard the Didot-Perceval as a prose-
rendering of a lost poem by. Robert de Boron, take the Mort Arthur
section of that romance as the model for the Vulgate Mort Artz.
Neither, however, is able to point to any specific borrowings of the
latter from the former, so that their assumption of a general influence,
one may fairly say, is entirely unsupported by any evidence. As has
been observed, pp. 30f., above, the previous Death-of-Arthur narrative,
which constituted the source of the Vulgate branch, was Layamon’s
lost French original.

76° The passages in the Mort Artu which show the influence
of the Lancelot, are so numerous that it would be supererogatory to
give a list of them. The main ones, with the corresponding passages
in the Lancelot, are already recorded in notes to my edition of the
Mort Artu — .e.g. those that relate to the quests for Lancelot,
his incognito participation in tournaments, the unrequited love which
The Vulgate Cycle 427


points, it should be observed that in the Mort Artu, apart from
its opening paragraphs, which connect it explicitly with the
Queste,!*6 there are several other allusions to that branch.!*7 More-
over, in the beautiful passage (VI, 256f.), which describes how
a boat bearing the dead body of the Maid of Ascalot (Escalot) 1%
drifted down the river to Camelot and how a letter in the hand
of the dead girl laid the blame of her death upon Lancelot, who
had not requited her love, we have an indisputable imitation of
the episode in the Queste (VI, 175) of Perceval’s sister, whose
dead body, as discovered by Lancelot in Solomon’s ship, bore,
likewise, in its hand, a scroll relating the manner of her hfe and
death. So, too, with Lancelot’s retirement into a hermitage at
the end of the present romance (VI, 386ff.) which is modeled


maidens cherish for him, his rescue of the queen from burning, his
stronghold of Joyous Gard, etc. As I have stated above, p. 418, note 143,
the connection between the Mort Artu and the last division of the Lan-
celot, viz. the so-called Agravain, is particularly close — indeed,
some episodes in the latter, in all likelihood, are by the author of the
Mort .Artu. Such episodes were doubtless inserted in that division,
to prepare for corresponding episodes in the Mort Artu.

_*°° Miss Weston, Legend of Sir Lancelot, pp. 137 (note), 145,
184, Folk-Lore, XX, 497f. and Sommer, VI, 204, note.10, maintain
that these opening pages of the Mort Artu originally formed a part
of the Queste. For a refutation of this assumption see Bruce, RR,
Ill, 173ff., IV, 458 ff.

487 Galahad is named, Sommer, VI, 219, 390, — pp. 24,
262. We have, besides, mention of the Perilous Seat of the Queste,
Sommer, VI, 293 (sonnrain lieu) = Bruce, p. 125 (Sieges Perilleus)
and of the Sword of the Strange Hangings Sommer, VI, 379 = Bruce,
p. 247. The former appears already in Robert’s Merlin, Il, 56f., but
it is called there the “Empty Seat’, not the “Perilous Seat.” The
above-mentioned sword is also found in Chrétien and his continuators,
as we have seen. Inasmuch, however, as other passages show that
our author knew the Queste, doubtless this allusion, too, is drawn from
that romance.

‘°° As suggested by J. Rhys, Studies in the Arthurian Legend,
p. 393, Ascalot is, no doubt, derived from Alclut, the old Welsh name
of the Rock of Dumbarton in the Clyde. On this name and its variants
see, still farther, Bruce, Mort Artu, pp. 269f. :
428 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


on Perceval’s similar retirement after Galahad’s death at the end
of the Queste (VI, 198).1%

On the other hand, in the Quweste, there is not a single refe-
rence of any kind!” to the Mort Artu. The former romance, in-
deed, gives us no reason to suppose that the downfall of the Round
Table had been connected with the love-affair of Lancelot and
Guinevere at the time that it was written. The confession of
Lancelot to the hermit afforded the best opportunity possible for
some allusion to the tragical consequences which the sin of the
lovers was to entail — an opportunity which the author of the
Queste with his craze for sermonizing would surely have availed
himself of — but there is no such allusion. The reason is plain:
That conception was the invention of the author of the Mort Artu
and the Mort Artu was not yet written.

In view of these circumstances, there is obviously no reason
for adopting the view, which has been expressed by some scho-
lars,17! that the Mort Artu is of earlier date than the Queste.

The author of the Mort Artu, at the beginning of his ro-
mance,!7? links it with the Queste, but his interests were secular, ——


‘°° The two agree even in detail: Lancelot has a companion
* (Hector) in his hermitage, just as Perceval had one (Bohort). When
Perceval dies, he is buried in Galahad’s tomb; so is Lancelot in
4ialehot’s.

‘7° In my article, “The Development of the Mort Arthur Theme
in Mediaeval Romance,” RR, IV, 403ff. (1913), I have discussed,
pp. 458ff., the relative dates of the Queste and Mort Artu. The
next three sentences are taken from that discussion, pp. 461f.

** This is implied in Miss Weston’s Legend of Sir Lancelot,
p. 145 (1901) and Folk-Lore, XX, 497f. Cp., too, Brugger, Zs. f.
Srz. Spr. u. Latt., XXIX’, 95 (1905), XXXVI*, 207 (1910). In
the article mentioned in the previous note I have endeavored to show
that the views of these two scholars as to the Mort Artu’s being
a compilation or the result of successive accretions to an original
nucleus are without foundation. If we except Geoffrey and his deri-
vatives (including the Mort Arthur section of the Didot-Perceval)
every version of the Death-of-Arthur theme in existence is derived
from the Vulgate Mort Artu. This is clear from the above-mentioned
investigation.

‘7° Bruce’s edition, pp. 1—3, Sommer's edition, VI, 203—205.


Google. _.


The Vulgate Cycle 429


not religious, — and in spiritual kinship he stood far closer to
the authors of the Lancelot than to the fanatic who penned the
Queste. Nevertheless, apart from the direct allusions to this latter
romance which his work contains,!73 he was otherwise profoundly
indebted to it; for the Queste had stressed the sinfulness of Lance-
lot’s adulterous relations with the queen,!”* and it was, no doubt
this circumstance that suggested to our author the happy inven-
tion of making the passion of the guilty pair, which had been
glorified in the Lancelot, the cause of the downfall of Arthur
and the Round Table.

As a work of art, the Mort Artu is superior, at every point,
to the preceding branches of the cycle; in this respect, it out-
weighs all the rest put together. In the first place, it is the
only one of the branches that is marked by a genuine constructive
skill. The narrative of the love affair of Lancelot and Guinevere
and its fatal consequences is developed continuously throughout
the romance with virtually no interruption from digressions; 75
for even the episodes of the Maid of Ascalot!” and of the poisoned }
fruit}? which might appear at first sight to retard the action, in.
reality, reinforce it, since Guinevere’s jealousy, in the one in- /
stance, and Lancelot’s rescue of her, in the other, strengthen the
lovers’ passion, so as to render the tragical issue all the more ine-
vitable. With similar skill the motéf of Lancelot’s encounters,
incognito, with Gawain and his (Lancelot’s) kinsmen in the lists,


78 See above, p. 427, including note.

** Cp. VI, 45ff. (Lancelot’s confession to the hermit).

77° There are, perhaps, two exceptions; 1. VI, 358f. the lord of
Beloe kills his wife out of jealousy of the dead Gawain. 2. VI, 347 ff.
the Roman wars. The first seems an inopportune invention of our
author; the second was traditional.

17° VI, 208 ff.

"7 VJ, 248ff. A Scotch knight wishes to kill Gawain and at
the table hands Guinevere some poisoned fruit with the idea that she
will pass it on to Gawain, not knowing that it is poisoned. She,
happens to give it, however, to the brother of Mador de la Porte,
who dies from eating it. Mador accuses her of having poisoned his
brother on purpose and she would have been burned as a punishment
but for Lancelot’s rescuing her.
430 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


though repeated so often already in the Lancelot, is made effec-
tive here through the superior concentration of the narrative and
from the fact that the combats in question are so intimately con-
nected with the story of the unhappy Maid of Ascalot, and hence
with the development of the vital theme of the queen’s jealousy.
From the point where this jealousy is quenched by Lancelot’s
rescue of the victim from the stake and the lovers are surprised.
in the queen’s chamber, the action unfolds itself, without a break,
through the successive stages of the flight of the detected pair
to Joyous Gard, Arthur’s siege of that stronghold, the inter-
vention of the Pope and the consequent reconciliation of the king
and his consort, Lancelot’s return to his native land, Arthur’s
reluctant renewal of the war against Lancelot in the latter’s do-
minions, Mordred’s treason and the king’s return to Logres, Guine-
vere’s retirement to a nunnery, the final battle on Salisbury
Plains,178 involving Mordred’s death, the annihilation of the


*7° In Geoffrey's Historia, XI, 1—2, and its derivatives we have
three battles between Arthur and Mordred. Cp. Bruce, Mort Arte-
pp. 291 ff. It was one of the numerous marks of our author’s cons
structive skill that he reduces these three to one. Moreover, he place-
the last battle on Salisbury Plains, whereas according to the Geof-
freyan tradition, it was fought in Cornwall. Only in the Didot,
Perceval (Miss Weston’s edition, p. 111) was it fought in Ireland,
the author of that romance desiring to bring it nearer to the supposed
site of Avalon, whither the wounded king was to be taken. Cp. Lot,
Lancelot, p. 195, note 1. Lot, zbid. pp. 194 ff. (including notes) suggests
that the author of the Vulgate Mort Artu put the last battle on
Salisbury Plains, under the influence of Goeffrey, VI, 15, or Wace,
ll. 7409ff. — more likely the latter — because Geoffrey implies
and Wace expressly declares that the treacherous massacre of the
British princes by Hengist, the Saxon chieftan, took place on these
plains. It is hardly open to doubt, however, that our author really
derived this idea from Robert de Boron’s Merlin, Sommer, Il, 49 ff.,
where Arthur’s father, Uther, is already represented as defeating the
Saxons on Salisbury Plains in a battle of which the prophet, Merlin,
had said (II, 50): “puis que sainte crestiente fu establie en ceste ille
not mais si grant bataille ne naura en nos tans com ceste sera.” It
was evidently with this prediction of Merlin’s concerning the earlier
battle in mind that he, also, inserted in his work a prophetic inscription
The Vulgate Cycle . 431


knights of the Round Table, and the fatal wounding of Arthur,
which is followed by his translation to Avalon and his mysterious
burial at the Vaire Capiele.179 Among the heroines of the imagi-
‘nation, only Guinevere and Helen of Troy, by the enchantment
of their beauty, have provoked: such storms of passion or called
down upon the nations such overwhelming catastrophes. For
modern tastes, the description of the last battle is, perhaps, too
much prolonged. Nevertheless, the total impression of these final
chapters of Arthur’s eventful history is, unmistakably, one of tra-
gic sublimity.!% The significance of the stupendous disaster seems
to pass beyond the limits of an individual tragedy, and the ruin
of the legendary monarch and his hosts becomes full of profound
suggestion as to the general lot of man and the transitoriness of
all earthly glory. In the sequel, too, of the translation to Avalon
we have a corresponding expression in adequate imaginative form
of the infinite longings of the human heart for some far-off super-
natural abode where we shall be permitted to enjoy eternally the
felicity that is denied-us in this world.

So much for the superiority of the Moré Artu in respect to
construction. Perhaps, even more important, however, 1s the fact
that its author does not aim at engaging or holding the reader’s
attention by cheap supernaturalism or by the puerile extravagance
of his hero’s exploits or by appeals to the prevalent taste for the


by the same sage in regard to Arthur’s final battle (VI, 362f.) and
at a corresponding point — namely, just before the description of the
battle, itself. In both cases, moreover, the enemies of the British
king perish to the last man. Cp. respectively, II, 51 and VI, 377.

7° The present writer has already pointed out, Revue Celtique,
XXXIII, 432 (1912), and RR, IV, 454, (1913), that the author here
awkwardly combines the old popular tradition concerning the wounded
Arthur’s being borne to Avalon with the new idea, first started by
the monks of Glastonbury in 1191, that he was buried in Glaston-
bury abbey.

8° Brugger, 23. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt., XXIX,' 95 (1905), speaks
of the “erhabene Tragik’ of the Mort Artu, as well as of its other
beauties. E. Freymond, Deutsche Literaturzeitung for May 3, 1913,
has rightly declared it to be one of the most important prose-works
of Old French literature.
432 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


artificial fashions of courtly love. The potency of his narrative
rests rather on permanent elements of human interest — on the
variety and, in the climax, the grandeur of its action, on its de-
lineation of powerful passions of different kinds, on its dramatic
interplay of character with character. We have, consequently, a
subtler psychology displayed in the invention of situations and
in the portrayal of the actors in the story than is observable in
the other branches of the cycle, save, possibly, in a few of the
earliest1®! and latest episodes’®? of the Lancelot. Take, for in-
stance, the scene18* just before Gawain learns of the death
of his brothers, Agravain, Guerrehes, and Gaheries, in com-
bat, with Lancelot and his companions. The first two and
Mordred had surrounded Lancelot and Guinevere at an assig-
nation. Lancelot escapes, but Guinevere is about to be burnt for
adultery, when Lancelot comes to her rescue. Gawain’s brothers,
except Mordred, are all killed in the affray, but Gawain, himself,
is absent, for he had refused to be present at the burning of the
queen. He comes forth at last, and, as he goes to the king’s pa-
lace, he sees all the people silent and plunged in grief, as he be-
lieves, for the queen, but it is really on account of his brothers,
and so, ignorant of the cause of their sorrow, he passes down the
street with the sad and sympathetic gaze of the throng fixed upon
him. There is a Homeric strength and simplicity about the un-
known French writer’s treatment of this fine situation.

The same qualities which excite our admiration in the hand-
ling of a situation such as that which has been just described, re-
veal themselves naturally, also, in the author’s delineation of cha-
racter. We do not expect to find a thirteenth century romancer
penetrating to the obscurest recesses of the human soul, like the
best masters of fiction in the present age of science. Indeed, the


*** More particularly, the Claudas episodes.

*** The episodes in which the motifs are Guinevere’s jealousy
and her chequered friendship with Lancelot’s kinsmen. I have already
given reasons (p. 418, note 143, above) for my belief that these episodes
are by the author of the Mort Artu.

*°? Bruce, pp. 116ff., Sommer, VI, 286 ff.
The Vulgate Cycle : 433


men and women that moved about him in the actual life of the
time were framed on simpler lines than has been the case under
the more complex conditions of recent centuries. Measured, how-
ever, by the standards of characterization in the mediaeval ro-
mances, the Mort Artu shows, in this respect, also, a remarkable
advance on its predecessors. Through a combination of traits and
incidents, such as her jealous agitation with regard to Lancelot,1#
her troubled relations with Bohort on that account,!® her self-
reproaches at having driven her lover from court,1%* the compassion
which she inspires in the poisoned fruit affair, when she is about
to be executed on an unjust charge,'*? the character of Guinevere
here takes on a distinct individuality. Similarly, Gawain, who,
in previous Arthurian tradition, had figured merely as a general
embodiment of chivalrous valor and courtesy, is brought down
to earth by the indignant pity on Guinevere’s account which causes
him to absent himself from her intended execution,'** by his pro-
phetic anticipation of the evils that will flow from his brother
Agravain’s disclosures to Arthur of Lancelot’s intrigue with the
queen, and his vain protests against these. disclosures,!® and by
his implacable wrath against the friend whom he had loved best
(Lancelot ),!9° when, through no fault of his own, this friend and
his kinsmen become the slayers of the headstrong Agravain and
the other brothers who had rejected his (Gawain’s) advice. Still
other instances of effective characterization in the romance might
be cited; it will suffice, however, to name that of the Maid of


Bruce, pp. 26ff., Sommer, VI, 221ff; This and the two
following motifs are already found in the Agravain (last division of
the Lancelot), in passages, however, which, I believe, are by the author
of the Mort Artu.
**° Bruce, pp. 29ff., 57ff, S86ff., Sommer, VI, 223ff., 244 ff.,
264 ff.
** Bruce, pp. 77f., Sommer, VI, 258f.
me Bruce, pp. 63ff, Sommer, VI, 248 ff.
aes Bruce, p. 107, Sommer, VI, 279. This, to be sure, is imitated
from Lancelot, IV, 59, or Beroul’s Tristan (ed. Muret), pp. 34 ff.
7°? Bruce, pp. 92 t., Sommer, VI, 269 f. :
19° Bruce, pp. 155ff., Sommer, VI, 316 ff.
Fefperia, Ergdinzunosreihe: 8. 28


184


Go ogle


434 | Evolution of Arthurian Romance


Ascalot, whose character is drawn with such a tender pathos and
grace that her story1*! constitutes one of the most memorable pic-
‘tures of unrewarded love in the history of fiction. Especially, the
final scene 1% in this story, already referred to above, in which
Arthur and Gawain discover the dead body of the girl, with the
accusing letter in its hand, in the boat that drifts down to Camelot,
is one of the passages in mediaeval literature that touch the very
acme of romance.

We have already commented on the sparing use of the super-
natural which is-made by our author. Indeed, it is only in the
concluding phase of his story that he draws at all on this source
of romantic interest. He had inherited from his verse-chronicle
original?®5 the age-hallowed legend or myth as to Arthur’s trans-
lation to the Other-world isle, after he has been wounded in his
last battle. Our author has not only adopted this splendid con-
ception, but he has enhanced its grandeur and heightened the
imaginative coloring of the whole final catastrophe by the em-
ployment of still other supernatural motifs, which are in harmony
with it, viz: 1. the dream in which a day or two before the battle
Arthur is warned by the spirit of the dead Gawain to call Lancelot
to his aid,’ 2. Arthur’s vision of the Wheel of Fortune,1® 3.
Merlin’s prophetic inscription in regard to the king’s death in
the impending battle,1% 4. the marvel which attended Gifflet’s
(Girflet’s), return of Excalibur to the lake19? — the arm clad in


*** Bruce, pp. Sff., Sommer, VI, 208 ff.
* 7° Bruce, pp. 74ff., Sommer, VI, 256f.

7°* On this matter see pp. 30f. above.

** Bruce, pp. 218f., Sommer, VI, 860.

°° Brace, pp. 220£, Sommer, VI, 361.

°° Bruce, p. 222, Sommer, VI, 362f.

**? Bruce, pp. 248f, Sommer, VI, 380. On this incident Cp.
Bruce, Mort Artu, pp. 297f. According to Geoffrey, Book IX, ch. 4,
Excalibur (Caliburnus) was made in Avalon. See, too, Wace, 1, 9516.
The account in the Huth-Merlin, I, 195ff., as to how Arthur got
Excalibur from this same lake is evidently a mere invention of the
author, suggested by the present passage. No parallel to the incident
has ever been adduced save one from the Persian Remembrancer o7
The Vulgate Cycle | 435


samite rising from the water, seizing and brandishing the sword
and then drawing it under — an incident which immediately
precedes the king’s embarkation in the ship of his sister, Morgain,
and her fairy companions. Thus we see that, whereas in the earlier
portion of the branch, the story moves within the bounds of the
actual, passing at most at one or two points into the realm of
high romance, in the later portion — that is to say, from the
time that Arthur begins his march to Salisbury Plains,!® which
are to be the scene of his ruin, up to the end — its whole atmo-
sphere is filled with signs and wonders, as befitted the mythical
catastrophe.

The mention of our author’s handling of the ever-memorable
tradition concerning the end of Arthur and all his glory brings
us to a consideration of the sources of his romance. In accordance
with his superior genius, we shall find him combining and reshap-
ing his materials with even greater freedom than his predecessors
had done. Having determined to connect the downfall of Arthur
and the Round Table with the adultery of Lancelot and the queen,
it was necessary for him to develop the story of this affair through
a variety of incidents which would show how the ever-growing
passion of the lovers drew them and with them, Arthur and his’
knights, irresistibly towards the tragical issue. But a story of


the Saints (twelfth century), pointed out by R.A. Nicholson in the |
Athenaeum for April 6, 1901, p. 434. Here the object thrown into
the water (the river Oxus, not a lake) consists of some writings of
“the Shaikh”. An open chest which God sent by a fish to preserve
them appears. The incident is not connected with the hero's death,
and, it is safe to say, stands in no ‘historical relation to the one in
the Mort Artu. The fact that there is no similar story in the extant
Celtic records and that, apparently, the incident was not contained in
our author’s verse-chronicle source for this part of his romance—for it
is not found in Layamon — tells against the theory of Celtic origin,
which generally prevails. I am more inclined to believe that it was
invented by our author and I expect to discuss it in a separate article
from this point of view.

_ *%8 Bruce, p. 218, Sommer, VI, 360. The fact that only Arthur
and two of his knights survive the conflict of the two hosts approaches,
also, the supernatural. This accords, in essentials, with Welsh tra-

28%
436 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


overpowering passion, although its consequences involved no general
disaster, lay ready to the writer’s hand in the Tristan romances,
and his mind would turn for a model all the more naturally to
these romances, inasmuch as the story of Lancelot and Guine-
vere had been, from the beginning, a mere adaptation of that of
Tristan and Iseult. As a matter of fact, the narrative of the
amours of Lancelot and the queen in the Mort Artu down through
the former’s surrender of the latter to her husband after the siege
of Joyous Gard is based primarily on the story of the earlier
lovers. We have the same motifs: 1. of the informer who is an
enemy of the hero and who, despite previous failure, finally brings
about the detection of the guilty couple,? 2. of the hero’s rescue


dition. Cp. Kulhwch and Olwen, Loth’s Mabinogion’, I, 270, and
the triad, ibid. I, 290. Gifflet and Lucan nearly always appear together
in the romances, and they were the last to be with Arthur, no doubt,
because they were officers of his household. For a full discussion of
all these matters cp. Bruce, Mort Artu, pp. 294 ft.

According to W. J. Graftydd, “The Mabinogion”, Transactions of
the Honorable Society of Cymmrodorion, Session, 1912—13, p. 38,
the writer of Kulhwch and Olwen, in declaring that only three men
escaped from Arthur’s last battle, was imitating two earlier Welsh
accounts of battles, viz. Catraeth and Arfderydd, in regard to both
of which a similar statement is made. For Catraeth see Skene, Four
Ancient Books of Wales, I, 382. The triad referred to above is
late, and, although it does not agree entirely with Kulhwch and
Olwen, it may very well have been written under the influence of the
passage in that tale.

*°° Bruce, p. 148, Sommer, VI, 310 f.

#09 Cp. the editions of the romance which we have been cite:
respectively, pp. 4, 96ff., and VI, 205f, 272#f. In his Uber die ver-
schiedenen Redaktionen des Robert von Borron zugeschriebenen
Graal-Lancelot Cyklus, p. 36 (Halle, 1895), E. Wechssler assumes
that our romance, in its original form, began with the second of these
attempts of Agravain to incite the king against Lancelot and the queen,
but he has won no adherents to his hypothesis and it is supported
by no evidence. Cp. on the subject, IV, 461, note 93.

For passages in the Tristan romances corresponding to those in
the Mort Artu, just cited cp. particularly, Thomas’s Tristan, ed.
Bédier, I, 175 ff., where Mariadoc’s réle is like Agravain’s. There are,
of course, differences of details between the romances. The influence
The Vulgate Cycle 437


of the heroine from the penalty of her adultery, viz. burning at
the stake,?°! and the subsequent flight of the lovers, 3. of the
hero’s return of the heroine to her husband on condition that her
offence shall be pardoned and that he himself shall leave the
kingdom, the act of returning the unfaithful wife being accom-
panied in each case by the lover’s denunciations of her accusers
and false asseverations as to her chastity.2°* The author, how-
ever, has interwoven these Tristan motifs inextricably with others
that are drawn from the prose Lancelot *°’ — in a considerable
measure, to be sure, from parts of the Lancelot which were pro-


of Béroul’s Tristan, ed. Muret, pp. 19 ff., seems evident, also, in the
circumstances of the disclosure. |

0) Cp. op. ctt., pp. 108 ff. and VI, 280 ff. Cp. Béroul’s Tristan,
ed. Muret, pp. 34 ff. On burning as the penalty for adultery in women,
which is so common in the romances, cp. Bruce, Mort Artu, pp. 282 f.,
where references to the literature of the subject are also given. In
regard to the usual statements that there was no such custom in the
actual life of the Middle Ages, it is there pointed out that in the
laws of the Christian kingdom of Jerusalem, Assises de Jerusalem
(ed. Bengnot), I, 176, provision was made that, if a knight champions
the cause of a woman in any matter “et se son champion est vencu
elle sera arce et il deit estre pendu, que de quelque carelle que se
seit’. This would come near oovering the case of Guinevere. It
should be observed, moreover, that convicted adulteresses were actually
burned under the old Jewish law — Cp. Genesis, XXXVIII, 24 and
Leviticus, XXI, 9 — so that the romancers may well have derived
the idea from that source.

*°* Cp. op. cit., p. 148 and VI, 310f. with Béroul’s Tristan
(ed. Muret), pp. 89f. Béroul here is undoubtedly the source of our
romance. It is worth observing, however, that already in the Vita
Gildae the monks of Glastonbury induce Arthur to take his wife back,
after Melwas’s abduction.

*°* Especially the episode of the False Guinevere, Sommer, IV,
10 ff., in which, likewise, Lazicelot, pp. 59 ff. rescues the queen. We
have there, also, pp. 72f., an intervention of the Pope in Arthur's
marital affairs. With much plausibility E. Freymond, Zs. f. rom. Ph.,
XVI, 97, note, (1892), argues that this incident was suggested by Pope
Innocent III’s intervention in the matrimonial dissensions of Philip
Augustus and his wife, Ingeborg, during the last years of the twelfth
century. Cp., too, Bruce, Mort Artu, pp. 284f.
438 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


bably of his own. composition.? Moreover, as has been intimat-
ed above, he has enriched the interest of his romance and inten-
sified the impression of the strength of the lovers’ passion by
the insertion of two more episodes, derived from still other sources—
hamely, the episodes, respectively, of the Maid of Ascalot and of
cy poisoned fruit. The suggestion of the immortal Maid came,
it is true, from Iseult of Brittany?® in the Tréstan poems, but
the beautiful conclusion of her story — the boat with the dead
body borne down stream until it reaches Arthur’s palace — is
an indubitable imitation of the similar passage concerning Perce-
val’s sister in the Queste.2°° On the other hand, the incident of
the poisoned fruit has its source in one of two chansons de geste,
Gaydon or Parise la Duchesse, in both of which we find heroines
whose lives are imperilled by mistaken accusations of the same
kind.20?

Just as the Tristan poems constituted the main basis for the
narrative of the Mort Artu down to the point where Lancelot


7° On these passages (in the so-called Agravain) cp. p. 402
note 71, above. , a

*°® Cp. Bruce, Mort Artu, pp. 270£ By an oversight in this
note on the Maid of Ascalot and in the headlines to the text, pp. 7ff.,
I have called the Maid ,,Elaine (Elayne)’. We do not. find that name
given her, however, before Malory. As is remarked in this note, the
character seems to owe something, also, to that of Pelles’ daughter
(Galahad’s mother) in the Lancelot. I was misled by P. Paris, IL,
17 et passim, into supposing that the latter character was, likewise,
called “Helene”, which is, of course, identical with “Elaine”. Sommer,
too, erroneously gives her this name in the Index and marginal notes
to his Vulgate Version. Nevertheless, she did not actually acquire
it until later and through a scribal blunder which I have explained,
MPh., XVI, 340, note 1. ©

*°° Cp. p. 420, note 150, above.

*°? Cp. Bruce, Mort Artu, pp. 274 ff. Miss L. A. Paton, MEN,
for June, 1903, p. 164, note 101, and Brugger, Zs. f. fre. Spr. u.
Intt., XXX", 225, note 114 (1906) regard the poisoned fruit as the
Otherworld apples of folklore in rationalized form. Neither scholar,
however, was aware of these chanson de geste sources. Besides, in
the note just cited, I have called attention to recent actual instances
of poisoning by means of apples.
The Vulgate Cycle — . 439


returns to his own dominions, after surrendering Guinevere to
her husband, so the main framework of his subsequent narrative
was supplied the author by Wace — not the Wace of our manu-
scripts, but the expanded version of that poet’s Brut, which, though
lost in its original French form, has been preserved in Layamon’s
English paraphrase.2* With even greater boldness than in the
first part of his work, however, the writer has here reshaped the
materials of his source, so as to fit them to his new design of con-
necting the adulterous relations of Lancelot and the queen with
the destruction of Arthur and the Round Table. Thus, in his
romance Lancelot usurps the réle of Mordred as Guinevere’s
lover.2°° Furthermore, he fills the place of Frollo,2#° Arthur’s
enemy, before his death, and of Constantine, the same monarch’s
avenger, after his death.?1! This double réle suits the conception
of Lancelot which runs all through the Mort Artu. Having wrong-
ed Arthur through his guilty passion for Guinevere, he becomes,
against his will, the king’s enemy. On the other hand, he has
never faltered in his personal loyalty, and so, being the greatest
of Arthur’s knights, he is the proper avenger of his sovereign.


*°* On this subject cp. pp. 30ff., above.

*°* This and the following four sentences are taken, with some
slight changes of wording, from pp. 452f. of the present writer's
article, “The Development of the Mort Arthur Theme in Mediaeval
Romance”, RR, IV, (1913). In the section of that article, pp. 451 ff.,
entitled “The Verse-Chronicle Source of the Vulgate Mort Artu’”’, there
is a full discussion of the relation of our romance to this lost source.

*1° Cp. Geoffrey's Historia IX, 11, Wace, ll. 10158 ff., Layamon,
ll. 23393 ff. All three represent Frollo (Frolle, etc.) as a Roman, by
birth, who ruled France as a vassal of the Roman emperor and was
slain by Arthur in the latter’s invasion of France. In the Lancelot,
V, 374, and Mort Artu, VI, 346, however, he is a German prince
whom Arthur kills in France. He is an ally, moreover, of the Romans
— hence, according to the Mort Artu, the Roman emperor began his
war against Arthur. Otherwise, Lancelot, in the present romance, has
annexed the part which Frollo plays in the Geoffreyan tradition.

*1* Constantine was the son of Cador, Duke (or Earl) of Cornwall.
Qn embarking for Avalon, Arthur named him as his successor and he
defeated and slew Mordred’s sons. Cp. Geoffrey, XI,-2—4, Wace, ll.
13601 ff., Layamon, ll. 28590ff., 28652 ff.
440 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


With this substitution of Lancelot for the characters just
named, the old narrative of Geoffrey and the metrical chronicles
gains immeasurably in dramatic force, and every incident in it
is given new life. Arthur’s continental war?!? is no longer inspired
by a mere idle lust of conquest. Though ready to condone the
wrongs which he himself has suffered, he is driven, contrary to
his better judgment, into this disastrous conflict ‘with the best
beloved of his followers by Gawain, who, in his eagerness to avenge
his own brothers’ death, pursues unrelentingly his lifelong friend
and companion-in-arms. Again, under the new circumstances,
Gawain’s death is no longer simply one of the ordinary chances
of -war, but the penalty which he pays for his inexorable spirit
of vengeance.*!5 Similarly, in the new form of the story, Arthur’s
avenger is not merely a relative (Constantine), whose chief aim
is to secure his own succession to the throne, but the friend whose
affection for his dead lord remains undiminished, in spite of the
hostilities with which the latter had, in his last days, continued.
to visit him. Even Guinevere profits by these changes; for the
object of the passion which has caused her to violate her marriage
vows is not the false and treacherous Mordred, as in the Geoffreyan
tradition, but a man who was the lodestar of chivalry in his age.
Thus, in the climax of the action, she appears as a fugitive from
the traitor’s embraces, not as his partner in crime.

It should be observed, moreover, that this climax, as, indeed,
the whole story of Arthur’s ruin, is invested with a greater tragic
intensity through the author’s original conception (not inherited


*18 Geoffrey, IX, 11, X, 2, Wace, ll. 10146ff, 11452ff.,
Layamon, ll. 23397ff., 25465 ff., distinguish two expeditions of Arthur
to the continent — the first against Frollo, the ally of Rome, the
second against the Romans, who are led by their emperor: In the
Lancelot, V, 336, 370, the order of the expeditions is reversed and
Arthur does not go with the first. In the Mort Artu we have the
war with the Romans repeated, but Frollo is mentioned only once,
VI, 346, and then as dead.

*** The wound which he received from Lancelot was ultimately
the cause of his death. This was the invention of the author of the
Mort Artu, like the whole story of the conflict between the two
characters. .
The Vulgate Cycle 441


from his predecessors) of the traitor who was the cause of that
ruin as being Arthur’s own son — the child of an unwitting act
of incest which he had committed with his sister. Thus, as: in
the legend of Oedipus, the sin of the father, though unconsciously
perpetrated, brings with it the blind and terrible retribution of
the Fates.?14

We have already discussed above*!® our author’s sources for
the concluding episodes of Arthur’s career and his treatment of
the same — also, his awkward attempt at combining the ancient
tradition as to the fate of the king, after he received his fatal
wound, with the late fabrication of the monks of Glastonbury to


** G. Paris, Huth-Merlin, 1, p. XLI (including note 3), thougth
that the idea of Mordred’s incestuous birth was imitated from the story
(Plutarch’s Brutus, ch. 5) that Caesar was Brutus’s father. He sug-
gests, also, the possible influence of the mediaeval legend of Pope Gre-
gory. On the other hand, Lot, Lancelot, p. 444, believes that the
story of Roland’s being the child of Charlemagne and his sister (Cp.,
for example, G. Paris’s edition of the Vie de Saint Gilles, pp. LXIV ff.,
LXXVf. in the publications of the Société des Anciens Textes Francais)
is the source. The conception is, however, probably derived from the
legend of Pope Gregory, which was much the most widely diffused
of all the numerous tales of incest in the Middle Ages. Moreover,
other Arthurian romances show contamination with this legend, which
is not the case with the Brutus or Roland stories. Such romances
are the Latin romances, De Ortu Waluuanu (thirteenth century) and
its cognates. Cp. my edition of this and the Meriadoc romance,
pp. XXXVff. Still another is the Chevalier ad la Manche. The Middle
English romance, The Awntyrs of Arthur at the Terne Wathelyne,
also, uses a legend concerning Gregory, but not the one which told
of his incestuous birth. |

G. Paris, /oc. cit. states that this conception, as applied to Mordred,
first appeared in the Lancelot, V, 284f. That passage, however, was
certainly written with reference to the Mort Artu, (VI, 325, 349,
377) and I believe was interpolated by the author of the latter. Cp. the
present writer, RR, IX, 382 ff., on this question. The detailed account
of Mordred’s conception in the Vulgate Merlin Il, 128ff., was, of
course, inspired by the passages just cited from the Lancelot and
the Mort Artu.

J. Rhys's contention, Arthurian Legend, pp. 21 ff. that the story
is of Celtic origin is unsupported by any evidence.

"1° Cp. pp. 439£., above.


Go ogle


442 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


the effect that the monarch was entombed in their abbey.?4* There
was an epic grandeur about. the great tradition which the writer
was here handling, but the tradition was not Christian in origin.
On the other hand, to a mediaeval author, however secularly
inclined, it would have seemed unfittimg to end the story of such
high and serious matters on a non-religious note, and so, apart
from the touches of Christianization which he has imparted to
the last scenes of Arthur’s life, he makes the passion-tost Lance-
lot and his surviving kinsmen, like so many other knights of
the Middle Ages, both real and fictitious, seek a final calm in
religious devotion and a hermitage.?!”


16 Cp. p. 431, note 179 above.

*17 As I have ‘already observed, the author was here influenced
especially by the Queste, VI, 198, where Perceval, after the con-
clusion of the Grail. quest, retired to a hermitage, accompanied by
Bohort. Among the heroes of mediaeval romance who have ended
their lives in a similar manner, Guillaume d’Orange, Robert le Diable
and Guy of Warwick are conspicuous. On the whole subject cp.
T. Walker, Die altfranzésischen Dichtungen vom Helden im Kloster.
Tiibingen, 1910.

The main sources of the Mort Artu, as we have seen, are the
Tristan poems, the Lancelot, and Layamon’s lost French original.
I have, also, noted Robert's Merlin, the Queste and the two chan-
sons de geste (one or the other, or possibly both), Gaydon and. Parise
la Duchesse, as minor sources of the branch. T do not think that
it is necessary to assume with Lot, Lancelot, pp. 194, 201, note 2,
that our author drew directly from Geoffrey's Historia or Vita Merlini.
The features of these works in question, I doubt not, reached our
author through his lost verse-chronicle source.

As far as Chrétien (whose works must have been known to him)
is concerned, I agree with Lot, p. 199, that the Lancelot and Per-
ceval of that poet have had no perceptible influence on the Mort Artu.
His Erec, ll. 6865ff., however, suggested, I believe, the crowning of
Bohort and Lionel, VI, 377. Possibly, as Lot suggests, p. 201, note 2,
it may have influenced, too, his conception of Avalon, although, per-
sonally, I question this. The same scholar has also suggested, pp. 199 ff.,
the influence of Pseudo-Wauchier and Wauchier in certain matters —
correctly, I believe, save in respect to the episode of the Maid of Ascalot’s
dead body and the boat, which, according to Lot, he derived from
Pseudo-Wauchier, ll. 20857ff. The immediate original of the Mort
Artu, here, however, seems plainly the Qweste, as I have observed above.


,Go gle


Chapter IV.
Variant Versions of Parts of the Vulgate Cycle.’


We have so far discussed the successive members of the Vul-
gate cycle, as they have descended to us in the numerous MSS.
of what we may call, roughly speaking, the textus receptus of
the five branches. Before we leave the subject, however, it should
be stated that, after the completion of the Vulgate cycle, various
attempts were made to substitute new narratives for different parts
of the cycle. Thus, leaving aside variants of more limited ex-
tent, we have:

1. The so-called Livre d’ Artus? of the unique thirteenth cen-
tury MS. 337 (fonds francais, Bibliothéque Nationale)? — a long
Merlin-continuation which was intended to supplant the usual Vul-
gate version. The marked variation from the Vulgate commences
just after the episode in which Guinevere excites Morgan’s enmity


* As will be seen later on, in the opinion of the present writer,
the whole pseudo-Robert de Boron cycle is derived directly from the
Vulgate, but, inasmuch as that is a separate cycle, which will be
discussed below, I do not include its various branches in the present
list of variants.

* P. Paris, RTR, Il, 392ff., was the first to use the term,
lwre d’ Artus, as an equivalent of “ Merlin-continuation.” Latterly,
however, there has been a tendency to apply it only to the particular
Merlin-continuation which is preserved: in MS. 337. When Sommer
in his edition of Malory I, 176, says that the last three branches of
the Vulgate cycle combined are sometimes called the “ Invre d’ Artus,”
this is an error. He has misled W. H. Schofield, English Laterature
from the Norman Conquest to Chaucer, p. 236. (London and New
York, 1906).

* The MS. is defective at the beginning and at the end. It
belongs to the last quarter of the thirteenth century.
444 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


by disclosing the latter’s intrigue with young Guionmar.* From
that point on, this version constitutes an entirely different ro-
mance—one, too, which, in spite of its enormous length and many
repetitions of well-known motifs, is, on the whole, of very su-


* E. Freymond, Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt. XVII", 21ff., calls the
narrative through this episode (Vulgate Merlin, II, 339, 1. 4), Part I,
and the remainder, Part II. In the Zs. f. rom. Ph., XVI, 103,
moreover, he ascribes (rightly, no doubt) the two parts to different
authors, on the following grounds: (1) they contradict each other in
some points, (2) Part II cites its sources often, as Part I does not,
(3) Part I is pseudo-historical, Part II an Abenteuerroman. These
two articles of Freymond’s “Zum Livre d’Artus,” Zs. f. rom. Ph.,
XVI. 90ff. (1892) and “Beitrige zur Kenntnis der altfranzésischen
Artusromane in Prosa,” Zs. f. fre. Spr. u. Litt., XVII", 1. ff. (1895),
are the best studies of the romance. The second of them contains
a minute analysis of it, which has been rendered superfluous, however,
for Part II (the really important .division of the MS.) by Sommer’s
publication (1913) of the text of that Part as vol. VII of his Vulgate
Version of the Arthurian Romances. (For an elaborate review of
this volume from the textual point of view cp. Miss L. M. Gay, MPh.,
XIV, 430ff.) The first of Freymond’s articles is devoted especiallyto
the sources of the romance, and there ‘are, also, supplementary notes
on this subject in the second one. It appears from these studies that
the author of Part Il knew all the members of the Vulgate cycle.
There is evidence to the same effect with regard to the author of
Part I, save in the case of the Hstoire del Saint Graal. Among
the sources of Part II is, also, Meraugis de Portlesquez. Cp. Fried-
wagner’s edition of the latter, p. LXXXVIUI. The citation of Walter
Map as an authority, pp. 69, 127, et passim is, of course, imitated
from the Vulgate cycle. Freymond, in his second article, p. 116, note 2,
observes that the work shows no knowledge of the prose Tristan.
Nevertheless, one of its two Pellinors — the one who is Perceval’s
father — was probably derived from that romance. Cp. Bruce, MPh.,
XVI, 343ff. (1918), where Sommer’s charge of confusion (p. 243,
note 1) in the romance with regard to the two Pellinors is also shown
to be erroneous. The importance of the Livre d’Artus of MS. 337,
as a source for early Arthurian traditions, is much exaggerated by
Freymond. Its sources are purely literary, and none of them possess
any particular value. Noteworthy are the versions which it contains,
respectively, of the Medusa-saga (Laide Semblance) pp. 150ff., and of
the pseudo-Gospel of Nicodemus, pp. 247ff. .
Variant Versions of Parts of the Vulgate Cycle 445


perior interest to the version which it is intended to supplant. The
former, as we have seen, is a dry pseudo-chronicle — the latter,
whilst retaining some chronicle elements (especially, in the earlier
part), such as narratives of Arthur’s personal prowess and of his
wars against the Saxons, is, in the main, like all the later develop-
ments of Arthurian romance in prose, a veritable maze of duels,
rescues of ladies from violence and of knights from captivity,
lovers’ assignations, related in a most licentious spirit’ — an
illicit love-affair, moreover, being placed in one instance in naive
juxtaposition to a version of the most hallowed of Christian le-
gends, viz. the Harrowing of Hell® — and so on.

2. Just as the Livre d’Artus of MS. 337 was intended to
take the place of the Vulgate Merlén-continuation, pp. 3839—466
(end), so we have variants for considerable stretches of the narra-
tive of the Lancelot, which were intended to supplant the usual
text of that branch. They are as follows: (a) the redaction, still
unprinted, which exists in a number of MSS. and which corre-
sponds to Sommer, IV, 3—204 — i. e. to the part of the Lancelot


° E. g. pp. 67, 109, 191, 197, 276.

In his brochure, The Structure of Le Livre d’Artus and its
Function in the Evolution of the Arthurian Prose Romances
(London and Paris, 1914), Sommer, adopting an erroneous suggestion
of P. Paris. RTR, II, 397, argues that the present romance is derived
from a lost one which was also the source of the Vulgate Merlin
‘continuation) and which even antedated the Lancelot. The argument,
however, is mainly based on differences between the text of the Vulgate
Merlin which he (Sommer) has published (as Vol. 2 of his Vulgate
Version) and that of the Livre d’ Artus of MS. 337. These differences
lead him to the theory af a common source for the two. But the
probabilities are that the author had before him a fuller text of the
Vulgate Merlin than that which Sommer has printed. Moreover,
— and this is the most important point — Sommer is demanding such
a conformity between branches of the cycle as the romancers never
concerned themselves about. On the lateness of the present romance,
as compared with the Vulgate Merlin, see Brugger, Zs. f. frz. Spr.
u. Latt., XXVIII", 57f. There is no ground whatever for Sommer's
hypothesis (prefatory note to his edition and above-mentioned brochure)
that this romance was once part of a lost cycle.

* Cp. pp. 247ff. and 261ff., respectively.
446 -. Bvolution of Arthurian Romance


which extends from the departure of Lancelot and Galehaut for
Sorelois, after the death of the sorceress, Camille, to Lancelot's
arrival in the capital of Gorre to fight Meleagant and deliver
Guinevere.” Since not even an analysis of this redaction has been
published, we have no means of passing judgment on its value or
significance. (b) Another and much briefer account® of the greater
part of the same incidents, corresponding to Sommer, II, 5—185 —
i. e., from the false Guinevere’s appearance in person before Arthur
to the abduction of Gawain by Karados of the Dolorous Tower.
(c) A variant redaction® of the adventures of Bohort, Lionel,
Hector and Gawain in the long quest for Lancelot which begins
Sommer, IV, 321. Both the second and third of these variant
versions are abbreviated and, in the opinion of the present writer,
without importance. (d) A greatly shortened version of Lancelot,
V, 105—409 — 1. e. from Lancelot’s arrival at Corbenic, where
he is destined to beget Galahad, to the end of the branch — whick
is preserved in the MS. of the prose Tristan, Add. 5474 (B. M.).2¢


7 In the prefatory note to his Vol. IV, Sommer speaks of this
redaction, but tells us nothing of its contents. Until it has been
printed and studied, no one can say whether it is earlier or later
than the text of this part of the Lancelot which he has printed.

* Printed as an appendix in Sommer IV, 365—394. It is
found in only three MSS., one of which is fragmentary. One of the
three MSS., however, is MS. 768 (Bibl. Nat.), which is, on the whole,
probably the best single MS. of the Lancelot. Lot, Lancelot,
pp. 359ff., compares it, incident by incident, with the usual text and
concludes that it is an earlier draft by the same author as the latter.
One cannot point, however, to anything similar to this suggested
procedure anywhere else in the Vulgate cycle and Lot’s argument
is unconvincing. The version is, no doubt, one of the numerous later
redactions of the fexrtus receptus. |

° Printed as an appendix by Sommer V, 413—474. It is
preserved only in Harley MS. 6342 (British Museum).

*° It runs from fol. 144a to 162a of that MS. and has been
printed, along with the episodes that immediately precede and follow
it, by Sommer in his articles entitled “Galahad and Perceval”, MPh.,
V, 55ff., 181ff. (1907), 291 ff. (1908). The text begins ibid. p. 60,
1. 18 and ends p. 337, 1. 27. It occupies altogether 58 pages
in MPh., V. For information concerning the occurrence of this
Variant Versions of Parts of the Vulgate Cycle 447


Its author gives us here a variant version of the episodes in the
Lancelot that relate to the two great Grail heroes, Galahad and
Perceval, omitting everything else. This narrative of the lives
of the two characters down to the point where they enter upon
the Grail quest was planned to serve as an introduction to the
Queste, itself, which is here regularly incorporated into the MSS.
of the prose Tristan. The writer does not depart from his original
in any essential’! and the text is, in the opinion of the present
writer, wholly without distinction.'*


intercalation in the 7’ristan MSS., generally, see Wechssler, Uber die
verschiedenen Redaktionen des Robert von Borron zugeschriebenen
Graal-Lancelot-Cyklus, pp. 18 ff. (Halle, 1895). :

** The points of difference noted by Wechssler, op. cit., p. 19,
have manifestly no importance — e. g. the fact that Perceval shares.
in the long quest for Lancelot from the beginning. So, too, with the
inclusion of Tristan among Arthur’s knights in Malory’s Book XI, ch. 7.
His French original was an interpolation in a Tristan MS., 80, it is
not strange, if Tristan should have been added to Arthur’s knights.

** Its greatest interest, perhaps, lies in the fact that it represents.
with some differences and in a somewhat abbreviated form, the original
of Malory’s Books XI and XI. On the subject cp. Sommer’s edition
of Malory, Il, 2/6ff., 286ff., where the variant version, however, is.
given the inappropriate name of Suite de Lancelot. This version is
s0 obviously a mere abstract (with unessential variations) of the Vul-
gate Lancelot, V, 105—409, that we need not discuss Sommer’s
theory, MPh., V, 308ff., about its supposed connection with a purely
hypothetical cycle. One may say somewhat the same thing of the
view expressed by Wechssler, Joc. cit., and by Brugger, Zs. f. frz.
Spr. u. Litt. XXXIV", 109ff. (1909), to the effect that the text is
a fragment of their hypothetical lost Lancelot of the pseudo-Robert
cycle of the prose-romances. But there is no need of evoking an
imaginary source, when we have an extant source (the Vulgate Lancelot)
that fills every requirement. The fact cited by Wechssler, p. 20, viz.,
that the episode of Tristan’s parting with Iseult when he goes to
Arthur’s court for the Grail quest— which precedes the inserted
account of the early lives of the two Grail knights, — merely repeats
something that had already been told, (Liéseth, p. 260), is of no
importance in the premises, for, however we may interpret this repe-
tition, the dependence of the Galahad-Perceval episodes on the Vulgate
Lancelot is manifest. My own suggestion as to the most probable
448 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


3. Variant redactions! of the Vulgate Mort Artu are preserved
in the following works: (a) Malory’s Books, XVIII, XX, and
XXI.14 From this version, which includes the whole romance,
Tennyson drew his knowledge of the last phase of the story of
Arthur. Especially noteworthy in Malory’s version is the fine
episode, Book XXI, Ch. [X, of Lancelot’s last interview with
Guinevere (in her nunnery, after the downfall of Arthur and the
Round Table), in which the two lovers express their resolye to
abjure the world and henceforth lead lives of religious devotion.
(b). The Italian prose compilation, Tavola Ritonda (thirteenth
century) contains inter alia, an inferior adaptation of the com-
prete romance, based, no doubt, on some lost French redaction
of the Vulgate. (c) The Middle English stanzaic Le Morte Ar-
thur,® composed near the end of the fourteenth century, which


explanation of the repetition in question would be that the interpolator
who composed these episodes for the purpose stated in the text above,
wishing to indicate that they belonged just after the episodes of
Tristan’s parting with Iseult and encounter with Palamedes, prefaced
his interpolation with a version of these last-named incidents. His
interpolation was then inserted into the MSS., but owing to the negli-
gence of the scribes, the repetition which the insertion brought about
was left standing. For similar repetitions and unevennesses in the
Vulgate cycle, from similar causes, cp. RR, IV, 465f. (including notes).

** Only versions (b) and (d) show any wide departures from the
narrative of the Vulgate text. Nevertheless, they all differ enough
from the Vulgate to be counted as separate redactions.
; ‘“ For detailed comparisons of these books with the Old French
Vulgate cp. Sommer’s edition of Malory III, 220ff., 249ff., Bruce,
“The Middle English Metrical Romance Le Morte Arthur (Harleian
MS. 2252): Its Sources and Its Relation to Sir Thomas Malory’s Morte
Darthur”, Anglia, XXIII, 67ff. (1900), and “The Development of the
Mort Arthur Theme in Mediaeval Romance’, RR, 1V (1913) — espe-
cially, pp. 407ff. It results from the two last-named studies that
Malory and the Middle English Le Morte Arthur (Harleian MS. 2252),
ll. 1672—3969, go back to a lost common source, which was, in
its turn, a mere redaction of the Vulgate Mort Artu.

'® Edited by F. Polidori (Bologna, 1864—5). The Mort Arthur
section will be found Part I, pp. 524—54od.

** Last edited (with full critical apparatus), in 1903, by Bruce,
for the Early English Text Society, Extra Series, No. 88. The
Variant Versions of Parts of the Vulgate Cycle 449


agrees with Malory in LL. 1672—3969 — 1. e. from the scene
in which Arthur comes upon Agravain and his brothers discussing
Lancelot’s intrigue with Guinevere down to the end,!* but in what
precedes offers a unique version of the incidents in this part of
the story. (d) Lt Chantari di Lancellotto,® an Italian poem (pro-
bably from the first half of the fifteenth century), adapted with
considerable changes from the Vulgate Mort Artu and strongly
contaminated with elements from the prose Tristan. This poem,
which is of very poor quality, gives, also, a complete version of -
the Mort Arthur incidents. :


alliterative Morte Arthure (see p. 27, above) seems to have no
connection with the prose romances.

** Brace, p. 92, Sommer, VI, 269.

*® For the proof of this, see my article in Anglia, XXIII, cited
above — more especially, pp. 75ff., 87 ff.

** The best edition is that of Walter De Gray Birch (London,
1874). It is written in ottava rima. For a detailed analysis and
comparison of its narrative with that of the Vulgate cp. Bruce, RR,
IV, 436ff. It is not unlikely that this poem was based on some
earlior Italian prose version of the Vulgate, rather than directly on
the Vuigate, itself.

*° For foreign versions of the Vulgate Mort Artu which do not
constitute separate redactions cp. my edition of that romance, pp. XXIII ff.


Hefpecia, Ergdnsungsreihe: 8. 29
Chapter V.
Date of the Vulgate Cycle.


We have seen that the ascription of the last three branches
of the Vulgate cycle to Walter Map, which is so common in the
manuscript tradition, is a fabrication, and that, consequently, we
cannot accept it as affording any genuine evidence touching the
date of the cycle. Nevertheless, we have in the well-known pas-
sage of Helinandus’s chronicle, quoted above,! a sufficient indi-
cation with regard to the downward limit of date of at least one
member of the series — viz. the Estoire del Saint Graal (Grand
St. Graal) — and hence, inferentially, of others. Since at the
end of that chronicle the author speaks of King John of England
as still reigning, it is indisputable that this work — and hence
the Estotre, to which it alludes — was composed before 1216,
the year of John’s death.2? But, if the view of the evolution of


" Cp. p. 254, above. |

* That this was the true terminus ad quem for the dating of
Helinandus’s chronicle was first pointed out in the Introduction, p. XXV,
note, to the edition (1905) of that author’s Vers de la Mort by
F. Wulff and E. Walberg (Société des Anciens Textes Francais). In
my article, Arthuriana, RR, III, (1912) — particularly, pp. 185 ff. —
I called attention to the importance of this discovery for the dating
of the Vulgate cycle.

In the passage cited above, Helinandus uses the following words:
‘Hane historiam latine scriptam invenire non potui, sed tantum gallice
scripta habetur a quibusdam proceribus, nec facile, ut aiunt, tota in-
veniri potest.” Now, Brugger, Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt., XXIX', 108
and XXXVI", 208, has interpreted these words as referring not merely
to the Estoire, but to the whole Grail cycle of the pruse-romances.
As will be seen from the next sentence, one may grant the correctness
of this interpretation — only with the restrictions that the Merlin-
continuation was not yet a part of the cycle and that the Lancelot
had not yet attained its full enormous length.

In his elaborate and, in many respects, valuable discussion of the
Date of the Vulgate Cycle 451


the Vulgate cycle which is developed below? is correct, only one
of its branches, the Merlin-continuation, was composed later than
the Estoire. We may, therefore, affirm with certainty that by
1216 the whole cycle, with the exception of this continuation, was


date of the Vulgate cycle, Lancelot, pp. 126ff., Lot unfortunately
overlooked Wulff and Walberg’s discovery, which renders his dating
of the composition of the cycle (p. 140), viz. 1221—1225 (inclusive)
impossible.

It is worth recording that in a private communication, which I
received from Professor Wolfgang Golther early in 1920, he expressed
the conviction that the whole passage about the Grail in Helinandus
is merely .a late thirteenth century interpolation. He acknowledges,
however, that he is unable to produce any “unmittelbare Beweise” in
support of this view, and, so long as that is the case, it seems better
to accept the passage as genuine.

The fact that Manessier and Gerbert in their continuations to
Chrétien’s Perceval use the Vulgate cycle is of no value for fixing
the terminus ad quem ofthe date of the cycle, since the exact dates
of these writers are unknown. Manessier wrote some time between
1211 and 1244. That is all we know. Gerbert wrote probably about
1225. For a fuller consideration of these matters cp. pp. 290ff.,
above. |
The earliest MS. of any part of the cycle — viz. the first division
of MS. 768 (Bibl. Nat.), which contains the first part of the Lancelot —
dates from the middle of the thirteenth century. Cp. Lot, Lancelot,
p. 135. The earliest dated MS. of any part of the cycle, — MS. 342
(Bibl. Nat.), which contains the last part of the Lancelot, Queste and
Mort Artu — belongs to 1274.

Interesting, though of little value for the dating of the cycle, is
the earliest known allusion to the prose Lancelot — first pointed out
by P. Meyer, Romania, VI, 494ff. (1877) — viz. in a thirteenth
century MS. (British Museum, Add. 21212, fol. 4) of the prologue to
a French version (now lost, if it ever existed) of the Philuppis of
Guillaume le Breton. The Lancelot is there referred to as “li
livres Lancelot Ou il n’a de rime un seul mot.” According to this
prologue, the version of the Philippis was executed at the instance
of Gile de Flagi, of whom the last mention we have dates from 1236.
Meyer was inclined to ascribe the allusion to the end of the twenties
of the century, but, obviously, this is pure conjecture. It may have
been penned even after 1236, for no one knows when Gile de Flagi
actually died.

* Cp. p. 455, below.

29*
452 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


in existence. To be sure, the Lancelot of that date was, most likely,
of considerably less bulk than the huge work of our extant MSS.

In determining the upward limit of date for the cycle, we
have, at least, one important fact to guide us — namely, that
the Mort Artu was composed after the pretended exhumation of
Arthur and Guinevere at Glastonbury in 1191, for in this branch
we have obviously combined with the old Celtic tradition of the
wounded Arthur’s journey to Avalon the new invention which
the monks of Glastonbury first put into circulation in that year
to the effect that the great king and his consort were really buried
in the local abbey.‘ It does not, however, seem reasonable to sup-
pose that the author of the Mort Artu would have made so serious
& concession to this invention, unless it had already gained a
pretty widespread credence at the time that he composed his ro-
mance, and for that a period of at least ten years would be re-
quired; indeed, an even longer time would seem more likely. In
view of these circumstances, it appears safe to conjecture that the
composition of the Mort Artu fell somewhere in the neighborhood
of the year 1205. But this romance presupposes the existence of
the Lancelot (in some form or other) and the Queste, so that the
composition of these latter romances would fall in the closing
years of the twelfth century (doubtless, the last decade). On


“ Cp. p. 264, above.

® All sorts of efforts have been made to establish the terminus
a quo of different members of the cycle—especially, by means of the
sources. But in not a single instance can we fix definitely the date
of these sources themselves. In connection with this question, it should
be observed that Lot, Lancelot, p. 134, is wrong in limiting the
beginning of Wauchier’s literary activity to 1206. Brugger, Zs. f.
frz. Spr. u. Litt., XXXVI", 45ff. (1910) had already proved con-
vincingly that this limitation (which originated with P. Meyer, Hist.
litt. de la France, XXXII, 291) was unwarranted and that his
Perceval-continuation, indeed, may possibly have been written as far
back as the eighties of the twelfth century. Moreover, most students
who make a distinetion between Wauchier and Pseudo-Wauchier — and
it is the latter on which the authors of the Lancelot and Queste have
drawn particularly — will agree that whatever may be the date of
Wauchier, Pseudo-Wauchier’s date is still earlier.

It is not necessary to discuss again in this connection such
Date of the Vulgate Cycle 453


the other hand, the Estotre del Saint Graal, which, as we have
seen, was certainly in existence by 1216, contains allusions to
the Mort Artu® — consequently, we may place the composition
of this branch with a considerable degree of confidence between
1205 and 1216. Finally, the Merlin-continuation of the cycle,
which was written to connect the Hstoire and the Lancelot, was,
of course, later than either, and, if we may judge by its allusions
to the Perlesvaus, later even than that romance. The most pro-
bable date, then, for this latest division of the cycle would be a
few years before 1230.


fundamental sources of the Vulgate cycle as Chrétien’s Perceval (not
to mention his other works) or the French original of Ulrich’s Lanzelet,
since the dates of these sources are too indefinite to help us materially
in our present inquiry. If the dates, however, of these romances,
respectively, which we have argued for above are accepted, we should
have the eighties of the twelfth century as the terminus a quo for
the Lancelot — the earliest member of the cycle. The same con-
clusion is fortified with regard to the cycle, in general, by our dating
of Robert’s Joseph (a source of the Estotre and Queste) and Merlin
(used in the Vulgate Merlin and Mort Artu).

The Tristan romances, which are drawn upon so freely in the
Mort Artu, are relatively too early to add anything to the evidence
in the case. The chansons de geste, Gaydon and Parise la Duchesse,
which are apparently sources (one or the other, or both) of the
poisoned fruit incident in this branch were written not later than the
first part of the thirteenth century, but the extant form of Gaydon
is probably not the earliest, and both poems may really be productions
of the latter part of the twelfth. For a detailed examination of the
evidence, cp. Bruce, Mort Artu, pp. XXIXff.

The date of Raoul d’Houdenc’s Meraugis de Portlesguez (a source
of the Lancelot and Merlin) falls in the latter part of the twelfth
or first part of the thirteenth century — no one can say which. Cp.
Friedwagner’s edition, pp. LXII, f. (Halle, 1897).

Lot, Lancelot, p. 165, — observes that the raising of the host
(cp. Queste, VI, 189) is first mentioned in the statutes of Eudes de
Sully, bishop of Paris, 1196—1208. But the practise was certainly
earlier. See the eleventh century example from St. Gall, given by
Karl Young, The Dramatic Associations of the Easter Sepulchre,
pp. 30f. (Madison, Wisconsin, 1920).

Following the authorities on mediaeval armour who state, appar-
ently with one accord, that horse-armour was first introduced in the
454 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


beginning of the thirteenth century, the present writer in his edition
of the Mort Artu, pp. XXXIIf. used this supposed fact as affording
an approximate terminus a quo for the romance. He has since
discovered, however, mention of elaborate horse-armour being worn
as early as 1187 by followers of Count Baldwin of Flanders. Cp.
A. Cartellieri, Philipp IT. August, Kénig von Frankreich, I, 255f.
(3 vols., Leipzig and Paris, 1899—1910).

* One might, of course, query whether these allusions to the
Mort Artu in the Estoire may not be late insertions — especially,
since there are other grounds for suspecting that the original text of
the Hstoire underwent subsequent changes and additions. Cp. p. 371
note 1 above and RR, IX, 380. As long, however, as no cogent
reasons are offered for regarding the allusions in question as late inter-
polations, we may accept them as belonging to the original Estotre.

The Mort Artu plainly presupposes the Queste, but is, itself,
referred to in the Estoire (if the above-mentioned allusions are not
late additions to the EKstoire). This then would confirm the conclusion
which we reached pp. 428ff., above, that the last-named romance was
composed after the Queste.
Chapter VI.
Development of the Vulgate Cycle.


It will be observed from the above discussions that according
to general agreement,' the Lancelot (in a shorter and earlier form)
was the oldest romance in the Vulgate cycle and that the other
branches postulate its existence. The evidence which we have pre-
sented as to the priority of the Quweste over the remaining branches
of the cycle prove that it was composed next to the Lancelot. Then
followed the Mort Arty, which is dependent on the Queste, but
is referred to in the EKstoire — next expansions and extensions
of the original Lancelot that connect it with the Queste and Mort
Artu,? and after that, the Estoire. That the Merlin® was the
last of the branches to be composed has never been disputed.

If the scheme of relative dates which is set forth in this
summary is correct, it is manifest that the cyclic character of the
five great romances with which we are dealing does not spring
from the fact that they were composed in execution of a pre-
conceived design, whether on the part of a single author or of
more than one author, working in collaboration,‘ but rather from


7 Lot constitutes a partial exception to this statement, inasmuch
as he supposes (pp. 122f.) that, after the author of the Lancelot had
written a large part of that romance, he turned aside, in order to
compose the Estotre, and only resumed his work on the Lancelot after
he had completed the Estotre. Cp. p. 378, note 4, above.

* The passages here referred to occur especially in the later
portions of the Lancelot, beginning with Gawain’s visit to the Grail
castle. They are particularly numerous in the so-called Agravain
division of the Lancelot. On these subjects cp. pp. 402, note 71, above.

* Strictly speaking, the Vulgate Merlin-continuation, which its
author combined with the old prose-rendering of Robert’s Merlin to
make up the Vulgate Merlin. On its relative date, cp. p. 395, above.

“ These are the theories of Lot and Brugger, respectively, and
will be discussed below. Brugger propounded his first.
456 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


the romancers’ practise of attaching their inventions concerning:
any particular phase of Arthurian tradition to those of their pre-
decessors concerning some other phase of that tradition.» In a
period, then, when the sense of literary property was non-existent
and the sense of personal authorship not very strong, such a prac-
tise was entirely natural, and the result was the creation of the
vast composite cycle before us. We face, then, virtually, the same
Gonditions that have called into existence the other great cyclic
works of the past — for example, the Greek cyclic poems con-
cerning the siege of Troy or the cycle of Guillaume d’Orange
among the Old French chansons de geste.6 An incitement to the
composition of a connected series of romances on the Arthurian
theme was supplied by Robert de Boron’s Joseph-Merlin and its
proposed sequels, but how little Robert’s series really influenced
the Vulgate cycle as a model is patent from the fact that the
author of the Queste of this cycle threw overboard that poet’s
Grail hero and attached his work to a romance (the Lancelot)
to which there is nothing even remotely corresponding in Robert’s
series. By this act an element that was totally alien to the Joseph-


° The cyclic connection is, largely, of a general kind, and, in the
case of the Lancelot, especially, the connecting episodes are most
often cyclic in effect, not in aim. Cp. Bruce, RR, X, 121.

° Cp. RR, IV, 463f. The interval that separated the composition
of the various members of the Vulgate cycle was not so long as in
the case of the other cyclic works mentioned above. — The romances
that make up the Guillaume d’Orange cycle are also combined in some
cyclic MSS. — e. g. MS. 24369 (fonds francais, Bibl. Nat.), which
contains 17 romances of the total of 24 extant and the Boulogne MS.
which contains 11. The latter MS. ends with the words, Explicit
li Roumans de Guillaume d’Orange, on which Bédier, Legendes

piques*, I, 8, remarks: “cette rubrique nous est temoin que les
hommes du XIII® et du XIV°® siecle, lisant nos chansons, croyaient
lire un seul roman.” The romances in such a collection, however,
were, of course, by different authors. Gréber, Grundriss, I, 997f.
tried to trace the history of the development of the Arthurian Vulgate
cycle by an examination of the grouping of the romances in the extant
MSS, but these MSS. are too late to throw any light on this subject
and Gréber’s effort is a failure.
Development of the Vulgate Cycle 457


Merltn, etc., in every way, became incorporated into the history
of the Grail. Moreover, if Robert’s cycle had, in any strict sense,
furnished the model of a pre-conceived plan for the Vulgate cycle,
the execution of this plan would, of course, have begun with the
composition of the Estoire (which corresponds to Robert’s Jo-
seph), but, to say nothing of the priority of the Lancelot, the
whole weight of evidence goes to show that the Hstoire is later
than the Queste, and even than the Mort Artu.

The cyclic character of the romances, it should be said in
conclusion, was finally still further strengthened by the occasional
cross-references which were inserted in the different branches by
individual scribes or by assembleurs. It was the latter — them-
selves, doubtless, scribes — who started the manuscript tradition
of our extant MSS. by bringing copies of these romances together
and editing them in a very rudimentary fashion.’


* Brief anticipatory cross-references in any one branch to later
members of the cycle must have got into the manuscript tradition in
this manner — occasionally, also, somewhat lenger interpolations of
considerable importance — e. g. the interpolations in the Lancelot
which are based on the Vulgate and MS. 337 Merlin-continuations
and Perlesvaus, respectively. Cp. RR, X, 393f. The passages, re-
marked on above, pp. 402f., which serve to connect the Lancelot with
the Estoire probably belong to a somewhat earlier stage in the
development of the Lancelot. How artless an interpolator could be
is shown by the instance in the Lancelot, III, 117, where King Pelles
is spoken of as dead although his whole share in the story falls later
in the romance. Of course, this interpolator was writing with the
complete romance before him. Another speaks unequivocally, II, 429,
of the Lancelot being “adjusted” to the Grail story. — It seems
likely that the insertions in the Lancelot and Queste of passages
taken virtually verbatim from the Estoire (cp. p. 376, note 3, and
p. 402, note 72, above), was the work of assembleurs. So, too, with
the recapitulation, here and there in the Lancelot, of preceding ad-
ventures. On the general conditions under which our extant manuscript
tradition was established, cp. Bruce, MPh., XVI, 113ff.
Chapter VII.


The Pseudo-Robert de Boron cycle of the Prose
Romances.


The second of the prose cycles, as far as it has been preserved,
is ascribed in the MSS. to Robert de Boron.! This ascription,
however, is unquestionably false,? and we, therefore, retain the
manuscript designation only in the modified form which will be
noted above and which has latterly become general.

The feature of this second cycle which distinguishes it essen-
tially from the Vulgate (Walter Map) cycle is the fact that in
the former the characters of the Tristan story play a part, which
is not the case with the latter. These characters, Tristan, Marc,
Iseult, etc., have evidently been introduced into the cycle from
the prose Tristan.’

Of the Pseudo-Robert cycle mere fragments have survived.
Curiously it seems to have been more popular abroad than in the
country of its origin (France), so that for important portions of
the cycle we have only versions in foreign languages — especially
Portuguese and Spanish — the French originals having been lost.
In fact, the very existence of this cycle was first pointed out by
G. Paris in 1886.4 From indications in the Huth-Merlin — i. e.


* For the passages concerned, cp. G. Paris, Huth-Merlin,
pp. XXVITE.

* Everything shows this — its dependence on the Galahad Queste,
the difference of style, the character of the incidents — secular and
often fantastic, etc. Cp., especially, A. Pauphilet, Romania, XXXVI, 591 ff.

* The prose Tristan, in its earlier forms, is undoubtedly anterior
to the Pseudo-Robert cycle. We treat the latter first, however,
— immediately after the discussion of the Vulgate — because of its
close connection with the Vulgate.

* Cp. his Introduction to the Huth-Merlin — particularly, pp. 1 ff.
This Introduction, although it needs correction in some important


Google |


The Pseudo-Robert de Boron Cycle of the Prose Romances 459


the (somewhat abbreviated) Merlin branch of this cycle — he
was able to infer the existence of other members of the cycle and
to suggest what would probably prove to be their distinctive cha-
racteristics — suggestions that have been amply confirmed by
subsequent discoveries.

Notwithstanding the view to the contrary, held by G. Paris,
Wechssler, and others,’ the Pseudo-Robert cycle is, indisputably,
a mere derivative of the Vulgate cycle — a new attempt to give
vitality to the Arthurian theme in its prose forms, by a recasting
of the older cycle. Originally, no doubt, the cycle was conceived
of as consisting, like the Vulgate, of the following divisions: 1.
Estoire (or Livre) del Saint Graal, 2. Merlin (prose-rendering
of Robert’s Merlin), 3. Merlin-continuation, 4. Lancelot, 5. Queste
adel Saint Graal, 6. Mort Arthur. Not all of the six divisions,
however, were re-written for the new cycle.

1. The first of these branches has not come down to us —
very likely, because it differed so slightly, if at all, from the
Vulgate Hstoire that the few copyists who ever occupied them-
selves with the Pseudo-Robert cycle® rarely considered it worth


points, laid the foundation for all subsequent investigation with regard
to the formation of the prose cycles. Valuable, too, is Edward Wechssler’s
Habilitationschrift, Uber die verschiedenen Redaktionen des Robert
de Boron zugeschriebenen Graal-Lancelot-Cyklus (Halle, 1895).

In his discussion of the Pseudo-Robert cycle, Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt.,
XXIX ', 114ff. (1905), Brugger accepts Wechssler's results, in the
main, but, iter alia, regards the cycle as cast in the form of a
trilogy from the beginning.

At present, much the most informative work on the Pseudo-
Robert cycle is E|lla] Vettermann’s above-mentioned treatise — especially
pp. 89ff., 299ff. We have here an excellent critical exposition of
the various theories concerning the origin and constitution of the cycle.
The author, herself, adopts Wechssler’s theory.

* E. g., Brugger.

* The fact that only fragments of this cycle have survived in
the original French shows that it was never widely diffused.

Wechssler, p. 14, conjectured that the Hstowe of the cycle
might be preserved in the Portuguese form in a certain Torre do
Tombo (Lisbon) MS. (he is referring to MS. Alcobacga 643 of that
library), but it seems from Otto Klob, “Beitraége zur Spanischen
460 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


their while to transcribe for the new series a romance that was
already so widely diffused in the Vulgate form.’ In the-MS.


und Portugiesischen Graal-Litteratur,” Zs. f. rom. Ph., XXVI,
169ff. (1902), that the Portuguese text in question — misleadingly
entitled Liuro de josep abaramatia — is a mere translation of
the Vulgate Estoire, executed in 1313 and preserved here in a
sixteenth century transcription. Klob, pp. 185ff., describes, also,
a Spanish Libro de josep abarimatia in MS. 2. G. 5 of the Royal
Library at Madrid which shows a few variations in the narrative, as
compared with Furnivall’s edition of the Vulgate Estoire, but none
that would warrant the inference that it represents a lost (French)
Pseudo-Robert Estotre. An edition of this Spanish text by Karl Pietsch
and W. A. Nitze, along with a greatly abridged Merlin (La Estoria
de Merlin) and Lancarote (Lancelot) of the same MS., was announced
some years ago by the Gesellschaft fiir Romamische Literatur, but
has not yet appeared. Pietsch, however, in “MS. 2—G—5 of the
Palace Library at Madrid,” MPh., XI, 1ff. (1913), has studied the
relations of the Arthurian texts in this MS. to El Baladro del Sabio
Merlin con sus Profecias (Burgos, 1498) and the Spanish Demandas
of 1515 (Toledo) and 1535 (Sevilla), both editions of the Demanda,
in his opinion (p. 4) being derived from a Merlin y demanda del
Santo Grial (Sevilla, 1500), of which, however, no copy is now known
to be extant. He thinks (p. 14) that the Baladro, the lost text
last-named and the texts contained in MS. 2—G—®5 all go back to
a common hypothetical Spanish source. As regards the Baladro,
Pietsch is undoubtedly wrong, for this text is certainly nothing but
an incomplete Spanish version of the lost Conte del Bratt. For
a criticism of Pietsch cp. Brugger, Archw f. d. Studium der
neueren Spr., Vol. 133, pp. 229, (1920). For a study by Pietsch
of the language, partly non-Castilian, of these texts cp. his “On the
language of the Spanish Grail fragments,” MPh., XIII, 369ff. (1915),
625 ff. (1916). Cp., too, his “Madrid Manuscript of the Spanish Grail
Fragments,” XVIII, 147ff., (1920), 591ff., (1921).

Lastly, C. Michaelis de Vasconcellos, Gréber’s Grundriss, Band IL,
2% Abt., pp. 214f. (1894), seems to regard as the first division of
the Grail cycle to which the Portuguese Demanda belongs — i. e. of
what we call the Pseudo-Robert cycle — the Portuguese Estoria do
Emperador Vespasiano (also called Livro da Destruicdo de Jerusalem).
This book exists both in MS. and in an early print (1496). The
account of the work which she gives, however, does not sustain her
conjecture.

* The explanation here proposed seems more plausible than that
The Pseudo-Robert de Boron Cycle of the Prose Romances 461


(Huth-MS.) which contains a larger proportion, perhaps, of
the original Pseudo-Robert than any other extant, the prose ren-
dering of Robert’s Joseph has been substituted for the original
Estoire,* but from no point of view was the substitution justifi-
able, for not only did it destroy the artificial symmetry in regard
to the length of the branches, which, as we shall see, had been
established in the manuscript tradition by this time, but Robert’s
Joseph does not harmonize at all in its narrative with a Galahad-
Queste, such as constituted the Queste branch of the Pseudo-Ro-
bert cycle.®


2. The Merlen’® is the prose rendering of Robert’s Merlin —
the same that was incorporated into the Vulgate cycle.


3. A large part, although not the whole, of the Merlsn-con-


which is implied in Wechssler’s Habilitationschrift, p. 16, viz., that
the Estoire (Livre del Graal) was too ascetic for the new cycle.
As is well known, the Vulgate Queste is much more ascetic, yet it
was recast for this cycle. Moreover, Robert’s Joseph, which takes
the place of the Estotre in the Huth MS., is likewise more purely
ascetic than the Estoire.


* Heinzel in his Grail treatise (pp. 167f.) first pointed this out.
Allusions in the Queste division of the cycle (Spanish and Portuguese
Demandas), as he observed, are to an &stoire, not to Robert's
Joseph. On this subject cp. also, Wechssler, op. cit., pp. 8f. There
is no evidence that the Estoire which the author of these allusions
had.in mind was anything but the Vulgate version of that branch,
and I do not believe that any other ever existed.


* Besides the prose-rendering of Robert’s Joseph, which did not
really belong to the Pseudo-Robert cycle, the Huth-MS. contains only
Robert's Merlin (the prose version) and the Merlin-continuation of
the cycle just named, though incomplete. According to Wechssler,
the Merlin-continuation of this MS. belongs to the hypothetical form
of Pseudo-Robert which he calls “Kiirzung C”, which, in turn,
rests on his hypothetical ,,Kiirzung B’’. The statement at the end of
the Huth-MS. II, 254, that the Merlin-continuation ends here shows
that the scribe or redactor of the MS. purposely left out the episodes
preserved in MS. 112.


*° It ends at the bottom of p. 146 of. Vol..I in the edition of
the Huth-Merlin by G. Paris and J. Ulrich (2 vols., Paris, 1886).
462 | Evolution of Arthurian Romance


tinuation of the cyele is preserved in the Huth MS." and in the
Spanish Demanda,!* respectively. An additional fragment is pre-
served in MS. 112 (Bibl. Nat.)13 and in Malory’s Morte Darthur.4


-'? Begins Huth-Merlin, 1, 147 (top of page). For a history and
description of this MS., which is now Add. 38117 of the British
Museum, see G. Paris, Huth-Merlin, I, pp. Iff., and Vettermann,
pp. 85 ff.

** La Demanda del Sancto Grial (Toledo, 1515, of which only
a part is preserved — in the British Museum copy -— and Seville, 1535).
This work (edition of 1535) has been reprinted in the Nueva Biblioteca
de Autores Espattoles bajo la direccion des Excmo. Sr. D. Marcelino
Menendez y Pelayo, in the volume entitled Libros de Caballerias,
Primera Parte, Ciclo arturico-ciclo carolingio, por Adolfo Bonilla
y San Martin, Madrid, 1907. In this reprint the editor has given
an unauthorized title, Hl Baladro del Sabio Merlin, to the part of
the book, pp. 3—162, which contains the Spanish version of the
Pseudo-Robert Merlin-continuation. The original sixteenth century
print which he is editing designates it clearly at the beginning as
kl Primero Inbro de la Demanda del Sancto Grial. Hence we
shall speak of this Book as Demanda I and of the Second Book,
which contains the Spanish version of the Pseudo-Robert Quweste and
Mort Arthur, as Demanda II.

Besides the prose-rendering of Robert's Merlin, Demanda I
contains a large part of the Pseudo-Robert Merlin-continuation, interpolated
with fragments of prophecies by Merlin and of the lost Conte del
Brait in Spanish dress. For a table of the correspondences in detail,
cp. Vettermann, pp. 124f. Sommer has described, Romania, XXXVI,
369ff., the early prints of the Spanish Demanda I, and ibid. pp. 383 ff.,
has compared it with the Huth-Merlin. Vettermann’s minute
comparative study of the Balen tale in the two texts (pp. 144ff.),
however, gives a more exact idea of the nature of their relations to
each other.

** According to Wechssler, Habilitationschrift, p. 13, this fragment
supplies the part of the Pseudo-Robert Merlin-continuation which was
missing from the Huth MS. — consequently the two combined give us
this continuation complete, as it stood in his Redaction B. Moreover,
he has compared, pp. 29ff., this fragment with the very condensed
version of the same incidents in Malory, Book IV, ch. 20—28. The
fragment has since been published by Sommer: Die Abenteuer Gawains,
Ywains, und Le Morholts mit den drei Jungfrauen, nach HS. 112:
Betheft 47 zur Zs. f. rom. Ph., (Halle a. S., 1913).

“* Book I ch. 19—28 and Books II, III and IV. Sommer,
The Pseudo-Robert de Boron Cycle of the Prose Romances 463


The divergence between the Vulgate and Pseudo-Robert cycles
is greatest in their Merlin-continuations. From the time of Chré-
tien on, the predominant tendency of Arthurian romance had been
to express itself in forms of purely fanciful adventure. But the
Merlin-continuation of the Vulgate, as we have seen, was a pseudo-
chronicle, and thus accorded very imperfectly with the spirit of the
Lancelot, which came immediately after it in the series. It oc-
curred, therefore, to the author of the corresponding division of
the pseudo-Robert cycle,1® who, in any event, was in search of
novelty, that there was room for a Merlén-continuation which would
be more in harmony with the ultra-romantic character of the
Lancelot, and it was, doubtless, to this feeling that the new Merlen-
continuation owes its existence. Besides, the author of the prose
Tristan, with whose work the author of Pseudo-Robert was thor-
oughly familiar, had already set the example of handling the
characters and incidents of the Vulgate with great freedom.'¢

Like the Vulgate continuation, the corresponding division of


in his edition of Malory, III, 58ff., compares Malory in detail with
the corresponding parts of the Huth-Merlin, throughout. When his
study was published (1891), it was not known (cp. III, 145) that the
(approximate) source of Malory, Book IV, ch. 20—28, had been
preserved in MS. 112.

** Was the author of the Merlin-continuation, also, the author
of the Queste of this cycle? G. Paris, Introduction to the Huth-Merlin,
p. LXII, thought not, but this idea was connected with his theory of
the development of the prose cycles, which, as I have tried to prove
below, Part IV, was unsound. We know that the Pseudo- Robert
Merlin is merely the old prose version of Robert's Merlin, adopted
without change — moreover, that the Pseudo-Robert Mort Arthur,
save in omissions, does not differ greatly from the Vulgate. Now, if,
as I surmise, no substantially new Estoire (Grand St. Graal) or
Lancelot was composed for this cycle, one man could easily have
rewritten the remaining parts-viz. the Merlin-continuation and the Queste.

7° Tt is possible, too, that the Merlin-continuation of the Vulgate,
being a comparatively late composition, did not possess as yet the
authority of the other branches of that cycle. Nevertheless, as a part
of the great Vulgate cycle, it was able to maintain itself against the
other Merlin-continuations — viz. those of the Pseudo-Robert cycle
and MS. 337 — though it is hardly superior to either in literary value.
464 Evolution of Arthurien Romance


Pseudo-Robert was planned to fill out the gap between the coro-
nation of Arthur, with which Robert de Boron’s Merlin had ter-
minated, and the appearance of Lancelot on the stage. Merlin,
however, is even more prominent in the narrative of Pseudo-Robert
than in that of the Vulgate, so that the former is somewhat more
closely connected with Robert’s Merlin than the latter. On the
other hand, references in it to the Lancelot, though fairly numer-
ous, are less so than in the case of the Vulgate.

We shall not invite the reader to follow us through the laby-
rinth of fantastic adventures which make up the Pseudo-Robert
‘Merlin continuation.” They are of the same general kind as the
adventures of the Lancelot, by which they were manifestly in-
spired. The earlier portion of the work, in which Arthur, Merlin,
Loth, Pellinor (Perceval’s father, according to this romance) and
Balaain are the principal characters, is the best; the incidents
of the later portion, such as the adventures of Accalon, Yvain,
Gawain, and Le Morhout, though, also, related with ease and
fluency, are of less significance.!* It is characteristic of the author
that he should begin his continuation 1® with the most sensational,
perhaps, of all the motifs that are to be found in the Vulgate,
namely, the story of Mordred’s incestuous birth. With this he
has combined in a modified form the biblical motif of Herod’s
slaughter of the innocent children; for, warned by Merlin’s pro-
phecy that a child who is to be born on the next May-day will
be the cause of the undoing of Arthur and his kingdom,” the
king has all the children in his dominions who are born at that
time set afloat in a pilot-less vessel.*!


*? There is a good analysis of it in its Huth MS. form in the
edition of the Huth-Merlin, by G. Paris and J. Ulrich, HZ, 285 ff.

‘’ It was in this part of Pseudo-Robert (Sommer’s Beiheft 47,
pp. 25ff.), however, that we first find the story which Tennyson has
made familiar under the name of Pelleas and Kttarre, his source,
of course, being Malory IV, 22—24. Malory, however, uses an altered
version of Pseudo-Robert, which ends differently. Arcade is the
original form of the heroine’s name, Pellias of the hero’s. The latter
name is doubtless a corruption of Pellean(s).

*® Huth-Merlin, I, 147 ff. *° Ibid. I, 158ff.

*. 7, 207ff.
The Pseudo-Robert de Boron Cycle of the Prose Romances 465


This vessel, however, was not destroyed, as Arthur intended,
but drifts to the castle of Amalvi in the land of King Oriant
(father of Le Lait Hardi), and the children are saved. But al-
ready in the assembling of the children, Mordred, the fatal infant
of Merlin’s prophecy — the fruit of Arthur’s own unwitting in-
cest with his sister — had escaped the king’s net; for the ship
which was bearing him to Camelot was wrecked and all on board
perished, save the child, who was picked up on the seashore by
a fisherman and later adopted by the father of Sagremor. —

Just after the account of Mordred’s conception, comes -what
is perhaps the most extravagant of all Arthurian fancies — na-
mely, that of la beste glatessante (the barking beast)? — borrowed
from the prose Tristan.*4 The hideous creature, which has a whole
cry of dogs in its belly, has been pursued in vain by Pellinor for
a year. The achievement of this quest, however, is to be one
of the Grail adventures, and, as Merlin informs Arthur,?* none
but the virgin knight, Perceval (Pellinor’s son), will be able to
tell the king the true story of the strange beast.

We have, still further, in the romance many other folktale
motifs — armor that renders invisible,?? lances thrust by invisible
hands,”* blood-baths to cure leprosy,®® etc. A precious piece of
mediaevalism, especially, is the story*® as to how the goddess,


"2 J, 204ff. The story of the infant Mordred is due to conta-
mination with the legend of Pope Gregory. Cp. Bruce’s edition of
the Historia Meriadoci and De Ortu Waluuani, pp. XXXVILff. (1913).

> I, 1498. |

"* Liseth, pp. 55ff. According to certain Tristan MSS. (cp.
Léseth, pp. 57ff.) the beast has a stag’s feet, the thighs and tail
of a lion, a leopard’s body and a serpent’s head, and its cry was
equal to that of a hundred dogs. In the Huth-Merlin I, 149, 160,
et passim, the term applied to the creature is “diverse”. In Malory,
chapter-headings to ch. 19 and 20 of Book I, it is called “the questing
beest,”’ and at the end of ch. 19 this writer says that Pellinor first, and,
after Pellinor’s death, Palamedes pursued it. This fabulous monster
figures also in Gerbert’s continuation of Chrétien’s Perceval, Potvin VI,
219ff., and in the Perlesvaus, pp. 187 ft.


87 151. “61 160. "711 24. “TQ.
79 TE, 168. *° II, 145ff. NT 195 ft.
Hefperia, Ergdngungsrethe : 8. 30
466 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


Diana, having found a new lover, gets rid of the old one (Faunus )
by enticing him into a sarcophagus, on the plea of giving him
a medicinal bath, and then filling it with boiling lead. As a
complement to the famous incident in the Vulgate Mort Artu of
Gifflet’s casting Excalibur into the lake, at the wounded monarch’s
behest, our author describes,*! from his own invention, how Arthur,
im the first instance, received the sword from this same lake —
only by a cheap effort at originality he imputes to the scabbard
the supernatural excellence that had traditionally belonged to the
weapon, itself.

Much the most felicitous episode of the present romance,
however, 1s that of Balaain and Balaan’? — the two brothers who,


** TI, 47ff. Already from I, 215 (where he acquired an additional
sword that Arthur and his knights had failed to loose from the waist
of a damsel of the Lady of Avalon) on, Balaain had played a prominent
part in the romance as “le chevalier as deus espees” (I, 233 ef
passim) — a title which he owes most likely to the Lancelot, Iv,
323 ff., where this is the epithet of Eliezer (Galahad’s maternal uncle),
although we find it applied to other knights elsewhere in Arthurian
romance, e. g. in the Prose Tristan (Liseth), pp. 21ff., to Palamedes,
p. 395, to Samaliel, in the metrical romance Chevalier as deus Espees
to Meriadenc. Cp., besides, Heinzel’s Grail treatise, p. 17 (inclading
note). Above all, it was he who had given King Pollchan of the
Grail castle the dolorous stroke (II, 27f. — wanting in the Huth MS.,
but supplied by the editors from Malory, Book II, ch. 15—16) with
the marvellous lance, whereby a magical blight descended upon the
kingdom of Listinois (II, 30) or Logres (II, 7), so that it was henceforth
designated “li roiames de terre gastee et li roiames de terre forainne.”’
It was this disastrous stroke that sealed Balaain’s own fate (II, 7f.).
In PMLA, XXV, 42ff. (1910), A.C. L. Brown has tried to establish
a Celtic origin for this episode, by citing supposed Irish parallels to it.
For a refutation of his argument, however, cp. Brugger, Zs. f. frz.
Spr. u. Litt., XXXVI’, 190 (1910) and, especially, Vetterman,
pp. 290 ff. (1918). Gallan, Garlan (name of Balaain's adversary),
which Brown (p. 43, note 8) identifies with Weland (name of the
famous smith of Germanic legend), is, of course, simply a corrupt
form of Varlan (Brulant etc.) of the Vulgate Estotre, 1, 290.
Balaan’s name was, doubtless, taken from that of the British nobleman
who was converted to Christianity by Pharain in the Vulgate Estotre,
I, 268. That personage was named Balaan (Balan), and, like the
The Pseudo-Robert de Boron Cycle of the Prose Romances 467


not recognizing each other, engaged in a combat that proved fatal
to both. Only after both had suffered mortal wounds did mutual
recognition take place. The incident, of course, was not new, but
a variant of a folk-tale motif of immemorial antiquity, best known
in its Persian form of Sohrab and Rustem. The episode, how-
ever, had the good fortune to belong to the part of the Pseudo-
Robert Merlen-continuation which Malory adopted for his Morte
Darthur, and it was in the latter place* that it attracted the at-
tention of two of the greatest English poets of the nineteenth cen-
tury — Tennyson and Swinburne. Both, accordingly, clothed the
old story in new poetical forms.** In neither case, to be sure,
does the result represent the best art of the author.


hero of the present episode, was from North Britain. The name was
very probably chosen by our author for his hero, because in sound it
was similar to that of the old deliverer of the dolorous stroke
— Varlan (Brulant etc.) in the Estoire, I, 290, the heathen king
whom he wishes to supplant. Vetterman, pp. 196ff., has discussed at
length possible original Celtic connections of the name — e. g., with
Belinos, a Celtic god, with Belinus, a British prince in Geoffrey of
Monmouth’s History, Book III, ch. 1—10, who, for a time carried on
a feud with his brother, Brennius, etc. Only Geoffrey (or his trans-
lator, Wace), however, really need be taken into consideration, and
even this connection is doubtful; for one can point easily to parallels
in Arthurian romance for every individual element in Balaain’s story,
and the combination of these elements was, of course, our romancer’s
work. The name of the British nobleman which I mentioned above,
as furnishing the true source of the name of the hero of the present
episode, occurs only once in the Estoire, and the names of persons
and places in MSS. of the mediaeval romances were so subject to
mutilation that no one can possibly affirm that the form, Balaan
(Balan), which we find in this single passage, is not, itself, merely
a scribal corruption. Consequently, all discussion of its origin is,
from the start, pretty well doomed to futility.

The name of the hero’s brother, Balaain, is, of course, merely
an intentional variant of Balaan. In a similar manner, we have
Huth-Merlin I, 120, two sisters made out of Morgan le Fay. Upon
one of them is conferred the nominative form of that enchantress’s
name, viz. Morgue(s), upon the other the objective form, Morgatn.

** Malory, I, 18—19.

** Tennyson’s Balin and Balan (1885), Swinburne’s The Tale
of Balen (1896). ai
468 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


4. There is no reason to believe that a re-cast Lancelot ever
formed a part of the Pseudo-Robert cyole.** This cycle presupposes
merely the Vulgate form of that branch.


*° To be sure, Wechssler, Habilitationschrift, pp. 18 ff. and Brugger,
Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt., XXXIV‘, 109ff., express the contrary opinion,
and, as has been said above, (p. 447, note 12), accept as fragments of a lost
Pseudo-Robert Lancelot certain episodes that are found in some MSS.
of the prose Tristan: 1. the episodes relating to Galahad’s birth and
upbringing which Sommer has edited (along with their prose Tristan
setting) from the early fourteenth century MS. Add. 5474 (British
Museum), under the title of “Galahad and Perceval”. MPh., V, 55ff.,
181 ff. (1907), 291 ff. (1908). 2. the tourney at Louvezerp (analyzed
by Liseth, pp. 271ff.). No. 1 forms, also, the approximate original
of Malory’s Books XI and XII. It is closely dependent on the cor-
responding part of the Vulgate.

Brugger, op. cit., p. 109, note 13, has suggested that an inter-
polation in the Tristan MS. 12599 (B. N.) — end of thirteenth
century — is also drawn from the hypothetical Pseudo-Robert. Cp.
Liseth, pp. 206ff., for this interpolation. The sweeping inference,
however, which the above-named scholars have drawn from these
episodes — viz. that Pseudo-Robert originally comprised a Lancelot —
is obviously unjustified and has already been rejected by Sommer, the
discoverer of the main one (No.1). See Beihefét 47, pp. XIXf. For
a refutation of this view, cp. p. 447 note 12, above. Besides, there are no
allusions in that cycle that require such a supposition, and it is evident
from the words of the Huth-Merlin I, 57, although they are probably due
to a redactor and not to the original author, that the unexampled
length of the Lancelot prevented the rewriting of that branch. There
it 1s said; “et cel anelet li [= Lancelot] avoit doune la damoisele
del lac, si coume la grant hystore de Lancelot le devise [cp. Sommer,
III, 123], cele meisme ystoire qui doit estre departie de mon livre, ne
mie pour chou qu il [error for qu’ele] n'i apartiegne et que elle n’en
soit traite, mais pour chou qu il couvient que les trois parties de mon
livre soient ingaus, l’une aussi grant coume l'autre, et se je ajoustaisse
cele grant ystore, la moilene] partie de mon livre fust au tresble plus
grant que les autres deus. Pour chou me couvient il laissier celle
grant ystoire qui devise les oevres de Lancelot et la naissance [Gala-
had] et voel deviser les neuf lignies des nascions [error for de Nascien,
Cp. Sommer I, 203], tout ensi coume il apartient a la haute escriture
del saint graal, ne n’i conterai ja chose que je ne doie, ains dirai
mains asses que je ne truis escrit en l’ystoire dou latin.”

(G. Paris, Huth-M., p. LIV, suggested the necessary emendations,
The Pseudo-Robert de Boron Cycle of the Prose Romances 469


5. Only fragments of the Queste of the present cycle in the
original French have come down to us.*% The whole branch, how-
ever, has been preserved in a pretty close translation in the Portu-
guese Demanda*’ and, much more condensed, in the Spanish De-


which I have inserted in brackets in this quotation. — Furthermore,
the pretence here that the cycle was translated from the Latin is simply
the common fiction of mediaeval romancers, and, in this case, is borrowed
from the Vulgate. — Note, too, that, when the author of the passage
speaks of the Lancelot as being drawn from “mon livre,” he merely
refers to the fact that the Lancelot is the natural immediate sequel
of the Merlin-continuation in the series.)

Finally, with regard to the question at issue — it is impossible
to maintain that an author or redactor could not interpolate or recast
individual episodes in any one branch of a cycle, unless he was re-
dacting the whole cycle. We know positively that arbitrary variants
of episodes in the Lancelot, ranging from a few lines up to 204 quarto
pages (cp. pp. 443 ff., above), were composed, without any thought on the
part of their authors of recasting the whole cycle. Now, similar
variants to the Lancelot, doubtless, continued to be written after
Pseudo-Robert was composed, in which case they might well show the
influence of the new cycle. Then, too, it is quite possible that inter-
polators of the Tristan MSS. may have, themselves, composed such
episodes under the influence of this same cycle.

*° Namely, 1. in MS. 343 (Bibl. Nat.) fols. 614a—104, col. d.
For this MS., cp., especially, Sommer, Romania, XXXVI, 563, note 1,
and extracts from it, ibid. pp. 570, 573ff. — likewise, tbid., 591 ff.,
A. Pauphilet’s article, “La Queste du Saint Graal du MS. Bibl. Nat.
Fr. 343.” 2. in MS. 112 (Bibl. Nat.) fols. 84d—128b, 146d—152c,
179d—180c. Cp. Wechssler’s Habilitationschrift, p.55. 3. in certain
MSS. of the prose 7'ristan (version commune). Cp. Liseth, Preface,
Sections VI and IX.

** Preserved in the unique fifteenth century MS. 2594 of what
was formerly the Imperial Library at Vienna. Karl von Reinhardt-
stoettner edited about one fourth of it (Cp. Wechssler, p. 13, note 2),
under the title: A Historia dos Cavalleiros da Mesa Redonda e da
Demanda do Santo Graall (Berlin, 1887). The remainder is still
(March, 1921) unedited, although an edition of the complete text by
E. Wechssler and A. Klein has figured now for some years in the list
of prospective publications of the Gesellschaft fiir Romanische Literatur
(Dresden). At present the best information available concerning the
contents of the unpublished portion of the Portuguese Demanda is to
be found in Romania, XXXVI, 543ff. (1907), where Sommer gives
470 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


manda.**

The rambling and fantastic adventures of the Lancelot, as
we have seen above,®® embodied the ideal of romance for the author
of the Pseudo-Robert cycle, and it was this fact that prompted
him to substitute his new Merlin-continuation for that of the
Vulgate. Inasmuch as the latter was a mediocre composition and the
new continuation was superior to it in fluency and liveliness of
style, there was, in some respects, a profit to the reader in the sub-
stitution. It was a different matter, however, when, under the
influence of this ideal the same writer undertook to transform a
work of high seriousness and, despite all drawbacks, of unmistak-
able power, like the Queste, into a romance of commonplace ad-
venture. It betrays the shallowness of the author’s own nature
that he should have ever conceived of such an enterprise. The
result is the debased version of this branch which we have in the
above-mentioned forms.‘


us the results of his systematic comparison of this text with the Spanish
Demanda (pp. 163ff., of Bonilla’s edition) and the Vulgate. In general,
the Portuguese text represents the original French more fully and ac-
curately than the Spanish does, but the latter preserves some passages
omitted in the former. It has not yet been determined whether the
two translations were derived independently from the French.

That the Portuguese Demanda represents the Pseudo-Robert
Queste is indisputable, although Heinzel, p. 164, has pointed out some
matters in which it contradicts the Merlin-continuation of that cycle.
(Huth-Merlin.) Pauphilet, pp. 594f. — very properly, no doubt —
lays such inconsistencies to the account of the literary activities of
the scribes. Not infrequently, however, in such cases in mediaeval
romance the author is, himself, to blame.

** See p. 462, note 12, above. Either because of injudicious
condensation or because the translator had before him a defective MS.
of the original, there are serious omissions in both the Queste and Mort
Arthur of the Spanish Demanda — so serious, indeed, as to obscure
some times the real meaning of the narrative. For the former ep.,
for example, Sommer, Romania, XXXVI, 557f., 563 and for the latter,
Bruce. RR, IV, 429f.

** Cp. p. 463.

“° For an excellent criticism of the Pseudo-Robert Queste, cp.
A. Pauphilet, Romania, XXXVI, 598ft.
The Pseudo-Robert de Boron Cycle of the Prose Romances 471


In this redaction of the Queste, indeed, except for the be-
ginning and the latter part of the story, where the author fol-
lows, in the main, his original, the Vulgate Queste — in the
episodes of Galahad’s arrival at court‘! and occupation of the
Perilous Seat, of his obtaining his sword and shield for the Grail
quest, and, again, near the end, in the mystical healing of Pellan,*
the banquet in the Perilous Palace, and the other incidents that
mark the conclusion of that quest — the Grail theme disappears
almost entirely from view, and Galahad, as already in the prose
Tristan, differs from the other knights merely in being the hardest
hitter of them all. Only once or twice in the intervening narrative
are we reminded of the Grail and the Grajl castle, and, even in
these instances, the “Spiritual Palace”’ of the Vulgate has lost
all genuine title to its name; as, for instance, when Galahad arrives
there, as he might armve at any other hospitable abode, and,
after a brief entertainment by his grandfather, Pelles, passes on.**
Lancelot’s visit, to be sure, is more elaborately described,‘ but
it, too, lacks the solemnity of the Vulgate Queste. The romancer
has still further cheapened the conception of the Grail and its
castle by establishing in the latter a sorcerer — whose power,
however, is in abeyance, as long as Galahad is present.“ For the
rest, the episodes with which he has made up the bulk of the work
are of the same type as the most threadbare and extravagant ones
that we encounter in the Lancelot — quests, combats, rapes, etc.
For the sake of novelty, and with the example of the prose Tristan,


*. Portuguese Demanda, pp. 10£f., Spanish, pp. 168ff.

“* Printed by Sommer from MS. 343, in its original French form
in Romama, XXXVI, 573ff. For the remainder of the text see
Sommer’s analysis tbid., pp. 579 ff. |

“* Cp. Spanish Demanda, pp. 238f. It is true that he does not
enter the castle itself at this time.

** Cp. op. cit., pp. 280 ff.

*° Op. cit., 238f., 290ff. The sorcerer, called Atanabos in
the Spanish text and Thanabus in MS. 343 (cp. Romania, XXXVI,
604), is, of course, the Nectanabus of the Alexander legend. The in-


cident is, doubtless, borrowed from the similar one in the prose 7'ristan,
p. 356.
472 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


doubtless, also, in mind, he adds to the Grail questers Arthurian
knights who had never figured in that réle before. e. g. Erec*é
and Meraugis de Portlesguez.*”? Above all, he introduces Tristan
betimes “* into the company of the Grail questers, — Tristan whose
life was inseparable from his illicit amours — and, somewhat later,
other characters of the prose Tristan — Marc*® (Mark) and Pala-
medes.°° The latter — at first, a pagan, but afterwards baptized
— has succeeded Pellinor as the pursuer of the barking (or quest-
ing) beast.5!

The profoundly religious spirit of the Vulgate Queste, we
observe, then, has vanished from this imitation, and we find our-
selves confronted with what is essentially a romance of secular
adventure. The inferiority of the new production is mitigated only
by the author’s gusto in his own work and by a certain vivacity
which results therefrom.

6. For reasons which will be stated later on, the Mort Arthur
of this cycle was hardly treated as a separate branch, but rather
as a mere epilogue to the Queste. Only a fragment of it is preserved
in the original French — viz., in MS. 340 (Bibl. Nat. ).5?

The Portuguese®* and Spanish™* Demandas, however, contain
it virtually entire in translation.


** Portuguese Demanda, pp. 9ff., Spanish, 167f., 210ff, 228.

“7 Spanish Demanda, pp. 210ft.

** Ibid., p. 168. This had already been done in the prose Tristan.

“° Ibid., p. 248.

°° Tbid., pp. 296 ff. (where he is killed by Lancelot), p. 301 (where
he, not Pellinor — as in the Huth-Merlin — is said to have slain the
bestia ladradora or beste glatissante).

*? Cp. previous note and the Portuguese Demanda, pp. 83f., 86.

** Cp. Léseth, p. 409. .

** In his “Dois episodios da Demanda do Santo Graal,” Rivista
Lusitana, VI, 332 ff. (1910), Otto Klob has printed a small portion
of the Portuguese Mort Arthur (corresponding to the Spanish Demanda
ch. 421— 437), beginning with Arthur’s victory over the Romans.
Otherwise, the text still remains unpublished. For a collation with the
Spanish see Sommer, Romama, XXXVI, 584 ff. (1907).

°* This text is printed in Bonilla’s edition of the Spanish Demanda,
pp. 313ff. It begins in the middle of ch. 391 of that work with the
The Pseudo-Robert de Boron Cycle of the Prose Romances 473


As compared with its original, the Vulgate, this version shows
great condensation, but otherwise no striking differences, save at
the end. At this point, however, we have a curious addition —
evidently written under the influence of the prose Tristan — as
follows:®

After Lancelot has been buried and Bohort has settled in
the hermitage (where Lancelot had ended his days) along with
the archbishop and Blioberis, Meraugis de Portlesgeuz joins them
there. By this time Tristan and Iseult had been dead for some
years and Marc is very old. Nevertheless, having heard of Lance-
lot’s death, he hopes to conquer Logres. Accordingly, he invades
it, lays everything waste, including Joyous Gard*¢ and Lancelot’s
tomb, and burns the bones of Lancelot and Galehaut. He, also,
destroys most of Camelot and with it the Round Table. Next
he goes to the hermitage in order to kill the four companions there.
He does kill the archbishop, but is, himself, killed by Paulart,
a knight of Ban’s lineage. Marc’s men dare not put his body in
consecrated ground, so they inter him before the hermitage. Few
of them, in fact, knew how he had died.

There is something terrible about this conception of the end
of the glory of Arthur and his knights. It is as if a beast were
trampling under foot some of the fairest creations of the human
imagination.


It is not likely that the Pseudo-Robert cycle, from its in-


words: “Dize el cuento que un dia se apartaron los. v. hermanos en
una camara del rey”’ (Bruce’s edition of the Mort Artu, p. 92 1. 13,
Sommer’s, VI, 269, 1. 15). Agravain is about to stir up Arthur against
- Lancelot a second time on account of the latter’s intrigue with the
queen. In the Spanish text the beginning of the Mort Arthur is not
indicated by a new chapter to show that a new division of the story
has commenced. For a detailed comparison of the Spanish with the
French original, cp. Bruce, RR, IV, 429ff.

°® I follow here Liseth’s analysis (p. 409) of this conclusion as
it is preserved in the original French in MS. 340. The Spanish version
shows some insignificant differences. Cp. Bruce, loc. cit.

** Already in Arthur’s life-time, Spanish Demanda, pp. 248ff.
{Queste seetion), Marc had invaded Logres and ravaged Joyous Gard.
AT4 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


ception, was cast in the form of a trilogy,®” yet in all the extant


*? This is explicitly stated in the Huth-Merlin, I, 280 and II,
287, with reference to the form of the cycle which that MS. represents.

The Portuguese Demanda, likewise, refers more than once to the
tripartite division. Cp. Heinzel, pp. 163f. and Sommer, Romania, XXXVI,
570. So, too, the fragment of the original French text preserved in
MS. 343. Cp. Wechssler, p. 60. .

The passages in the Huth-Merlin were, of course, observed by
4}. Paris, when he edited that text, and on the basis of the indications
which they contained he pointed out (Introduction, p. LXI) that the
third member of the trilogy, which at that time was not known to
exist, must have embraced not merely a Queste, but a Mort Arthur
with Tristan contaminations. The publication of a part of the Portu-
guese Demanda by von Reinhardstoettner in the following year (1887)
confirmed Paris’s conjecture and he himself fully recognized this fact
in his review of the work just named, Romama, XVI, 582ff. (1887).
There followed, however, much discussion as to the original form of
the trilogy and how its individual members were constituted. First,
Heinzel, Grail treatise, pp. 162ff. (1892), proved that in its original
form the Pseudo-Robert cycle began with an Kstoire (Grand
St. Graal), not a Joseph. Moreover, he surmised — erroneonsly, no
-doubt, — that it contained the Conte del Brait, besides all the branches
represented in the Vulgate. Next came Wechssler with his Habilitation-
schrift (1895) in which he regards Pseudo-Robert as made up originally
-of six branches, like the Vulgate (counting the prose Merlin and its
continuation as separate). He tries to prove, however, that subsequently
the cycle underwent two successive redactions in each of which it was
shortened. These redactions — both cast in the form of trilogies —
he calls respectively “Kirzung B” and “Kiirzung C”. In the first
the Lancelot, according to his theory, was left out, in the latter the
Estowre, also. The Huth-Merlin, according to Wechssler, represents
the Merlin continuation of both these redactions — except that it omits
the episodes at the end (preserved in MS. 112), which belonged to
Redaction B — and the Portuguese Demanda the Queste-Mort
Arthur (last third) of B. If the Queste-Mort Arthur of C was ever
actually written, as Wechssler, p. 9, supposes, this division must have
been condensed to half its original bulk, for, being the last third of
the trilogy, it could only have had one half the length of the first
two thirds (Merlin continuation of the Huth MS.) and that would have
been only one half the length of the last third of B (the Portuguese
Demanda). There is no extant text, however, even of a fragmentary
kind, that corresponds to this description, and we are, therefore, com-
The Pseudo-Robert de Boron Cycle of the: Prose Romances 475


fragments of the cycle, such is assumed to be its structure. Now,
in endeavoring to account for this particular form which the work
eventually received in the manuscript tradition, it is to be ob-
served, first of all, that its author plainly designed to make the
new cycle shorter than the old (the Vulgate). On this account,
although accepting the Lencelot, in a general way, as belonging
to the same cycle of romances,®* he did not actually include it in
his series. Furthermore, in carrying out his plan of shortening
the whole, his own predilections evidently suggested to him that
he could best sacrifice the Mort Artu.5® The Grail branches proper


pletely in the dark as to whether any such was ever composed.

Since the publication of Wechssler’s Habilitationschrift Sommer
has, in different places, argued that there was only one redaction of
the Pseudo-Robert trilogy and that this was made up as follows:
1. Estoire, Merlin, (where the Merlin, however, was not the usual
prose version of Robert’s poem, but the modification of that version in
the Spanish Demanda, I, described above, p. 462, note 12). 2. Merlin-
continuation. 3. Queste-Mort Arthur. For Sommer’s (very confused)
expositions of this theory, see his “The Queste of the Holy Grail,
forming the Third Part of the Trilogy indicated in the Suite du Merlin
Huth-MS.” Romania, XXXVI, 369ff., 543ff. (1907), “Galahad and
Perceval” MPh. V, 291ff. (1908), “Zur Kritik der altfranzisischen
Artus-Romane in Prosa,” Zs. f. rom. Ph., XXXII, 327 ff. (1908), and,
most completely, in Beiheft 47 to the last-named journal, pp. XIVff.
(1913). The grouping for 1 and 2 suggested by Sommer is impro-
bable in itself, and has been well refuted by Vetterman, pp. 135f.
For a criticism to the same effect of Sommer’s first articles on the
subject see Brugger, Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt., XXXIV’, 99ff. (1909).

Wechssler’s theory concerning the development of the Pseudo-
Robert cycle seems nearest the truth — only the following restriction
is to be observed: He bases his hypothesis that his Redaction B re-
presented a shortening of an earlier original form (A) of the cycle on
the idea that certain prose TJristan MSS. preserve fragments of
a Pseudo-Robert Lancelot and that such MSS. and Malory preserve,
also, some episodes of the Pseudo-Robert Merlin in an earlier form.
But we have pointed out above that there is nothing that compels
conviction in these suppositions. Nevertheless, there do seem to have
‘been two successive abridgments of the original cycle. See, pp. 476ff.
below. These abridgments involved, however, merely condensation and
omissions but substantially no rewriting of the parts.

°* Cp. the passage from the Huth-Merlin, Il, 57, quoted, above,
p. 468, note 35.
476 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


of the cycle, viz. Estoire and Queste, of course, had to be represented.
in the new cycle; so these two branches were retained — only the
latter was thoroughly recast. Similarly, the writer decided to
retain the Merlin branch with ite continuation, but supplanted
the continuation of the Vulgate with a new version that accorded
with his own taste for combats and extravagant adventures in
the style of the Lencelot.

Next, as regards the Mort Artu, this branch, likewise, was
essential to the cycle, yet, in its Vulgate form, 1t was too close
to actual life to lend itself to modifications in the same fantastic
sense as the Merlen-continuation. Consequently, when the writer
rewrote this branch, in order to adapt it to the new cycle, he
chose to abridge it to a greater extent than any of the other parts
that were rewritten. Moreover, he treated it as if it were virtu-
ally a part of the Queste — a mere epilogue to it. The cycle, as
thus developed, fell naturally into three divisions of approximately
equal lengths: 1. Estoire, 2. Merlin + continuation, 3. Queste +-
Mort Artu.© Doubtless, not long after the completion of the cycle
in its original form, however, the Conte del Brait®*! was composed.
Now, this work was, in a large measure, a compilation from the
Merlin-continuation of Pseudo-Robert — consequently, it oc-
curred to some scribe, who was preparing a somewhat abbreviated
transcription® of the cycle that, in executing his plan of abridg-
ment, he could leave out of his copy of the above-mentioned con-
tinuation passages that had already been taken up into the Conte
del Bratt and simply refer the reader to that work for these epi-


°* Besides, this text was easy to shorten; for the situation at
VI, 269 (Sommer’s edition of the Vulgate), was virtually the same as
at the beginning of the romance: In both Agravain was instilling
suspicions into the king’s mind as to his wife’s relations with Lancelot.
Hence Pseudo-Robert omitted everything down to VI, 269.

*° The present writer, as stated above, does not believe that the
Lancelot ever constituted an integral part of the Pseudo-Robert cycle;
hence, this conception of the original grouping of its members differs
from the conceptions of Wechssler and Brugger, respectively.

** With regard to this work, ep. pp. 480ff., below.

** Wechasler’s Redaktion B.


Google __


The Pseudo-Robert de Boron Cycle of the Prose Romances 477


sodes.*3 It occurred to him, also, as it would seem, that by such
omissions and, no doubt, by other abbreviations here and there
of less significance, he could make the three groups into which,
as stated above, the cycle naturally fell, not merely approximately
equal in length, but strictly so. Thus, under the influence of
a whim, he established an artificial symmetry between the three
parts of the cycle.®

We have, it is true, no definite statements in the extant frag-
ments of this first abbreviating redaction of Pseudo-Robert as to
the exact constitution of the three separate divisions of which
it consisted. Such statements we possess only in the case of a se-
cond shortened redaction ® of the cycle which is represented in
a fragmentary form by the Huth MS. But the lines of division
between the members of the cycle there indicated® are indubitably


** See, especially, the statements Huth-M., Il, 57f.*, 172f, 198
and in MS. 112, U, f. 49b. (Wechssler, p. 43, note). On the first of
these statements cp. Wechssler, pp. 39f. and on the relations of Pseudo-
Robert to the Conte del Brait, ibid. pp. 37ff. His refusal, however
— implied, also, in this passage — to accept Pseudo-Robert as a deri-
vative of the Vulgate is futile. — In the Huth-M. passages the writer
first (pp. 57f.) appeals to Helie to write up the adventures which he
himself, omits, — then (pp. 172f.) pretends that Helie is doing it. —
next (p. 198) that he has done it. All this is plainly mere fiction.

** Cp. the passages in the Portuguese Demanda and MS, 343
mentioned p. 474, note 57, above.

There was doubtless, after all, the difference of a few pages
between the length of the several parts.

*° The number, three, as the number of the Christian Trinity, is, of
course, a sort of obsession throughout the Grail romances. It hardly
seems probable, however, that the same idea is responsible for the
threefold division of Pseudo-Robert.

°° Wechssler’s Redaction C. It was based upon Redaction B.

*” Huth-M., 1, 280, with which II, 254 (last sentence) should,
also, be compared. In the first of these passages, after the statement
that “mon signeur de Borron’’ divided the history into three equal
parts, it is said: “Et la premiere partie fenist il au commenchement
de ceste queste (i. e. the quest which an unknown knight, just slain
by an invisible foe had pursued, and which Balaain at this point, I, 280,
takes up), et la seconde el commenchement dou graal (i. e. at the
beginning of the Queste branch), et la tierche fenist il apries Ja mort
478 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


different from the true original ones; for allusions in the frag-
ments of the original cycle that have survived prove, beyond ques-
tion, as has been stated, that in its unaltered form this cycle began
with an Estotre. For the same reason, however, that, in the first
instance, prompted the omission of the Lancelot from the new
series — namely, its bulk — in this second redaction (archetype
of the Huth MS.), the Estoire was also discarded: Moreover, the
redactor amputates, so to speak, a whole series of episodes at the
end of the Merlén-continuation which he found in the first abridg-
ed redaction of the cycle. Notwithstanding these omissions, he
still retained the principle of a tripartite division for the shortened
cycle, although such a division was now wholly without justi-
fication and its adoption had the awkward result of making the
first of the three parts end in the middle of the Merlin-con-
tinuation.®

From the specific statement in the Huth MS. as to the equal
lengths of the three parts and the bounds of each, it is clear,
furthermore, that the prose Joseph which we find in that MS.
did not figure in the reckoning of the originator of this new
tripartite division, and we must attribute its addition to the series
to the scribe of the Huth MS., itself, who not unnaturally missed
an account of the early history of the Holy Grail, but, in trying
to make good this deficiency, unluckily chose a version of that
history which did not agree with the narrative of the other members
of the new cycle.7°


de Lanscelot, a chelui point meisme quil devise de la mort le roi
March (i. e. at the end of the Mort Arthur branch).

The writer, whoever he was, goes on to say that he makes this
statement at the end of the first of the three divisions, in order to
prevent the corruption of “lestoire dou graal” by any future “trans-
latours’’.

We find, also, tbid., II, 57 (quoted above), a general reference
to the fact that the work is divided into three equal parts.

** At p. 280 of the Huth-Merlin, Vol. I.

** Cp. p. 474, note 57, above.

*° There is really no reason why one should not call the Huth
MS. “Redaktion D” — for, by introducing the Joseph into the cycle,
The Pseudo-Robert de Boron Cycle of the Prose Romances 4/9


he, too, gives it a new form — an inconsistent one, to be sure.

The main sources of the Pseudo-Robert cycle, it should be said,
in conclusion, are the Vulgate cycle and the prose 7'ristan. Minor
sources, probably, are Chrétien’s Perceval and its continuations,
Meraugis de Portlesqguez, and Li Chevaliers as Deus Esprees. Cp.
Brugger, Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt., XXXVI*, 190, and Vettermann,
pp. 255ff., 259ff., 278 ff.

We have no clue to the identity of the author of the cycle. It
was obviously the first redactor of the shortened cycle, not the author
of this cycle in its original form, that speaks, Huth-Merlin, Il, 57,
of the author of the Conte del Brait as “mon signeur Helye, qui
a este mes compains a armes et en joveneche et en viellece.”” Besides,
one cannot even feel certain that this statement is not a fiction. —
G. Paris, op. cit., p. LXIX, dates the work from 1225 or 1230, whick
is, surely, too early. Being dependent on the prose 7'nistan, it was,
of course, later than that work in its earlier form — i.e. later than
1230, say. On the other hand, it is itself used in the cyclic form
of the prose Tristan. Consequently, its date lies somewhere (approx-
imately) between the early thirties of the thirteenth century and 1250,
most likely, in the second half of this period.
Chapter VIII.
Li Contes del Brait Merlin.


A work of the above name, as we have seen, is repeatedly
referred to in the fragmentary manuscript tradition of the Pseudo-
Robert cycle,! and its author is called maistre,? or (more properly,
no doubt), messire,? Helies (Helyes). It would seem to have con-
sisted largely of the usual prose-renderings of Robert’s Merlin.
plus excerpts from the Pseudo-Robert Merlzn-continuation in its
original form‘ — namely, those portions that related specifically
to Merlin and to Baudemagus (the oldest of Arthur’s knights).
The work takes its title from the shriek which Merlin uttered (it
was his last) when he discovered that by the deception of Vivien
he was imprisoned foreover in his tomb. This cry was so loud
and so horrible that it was heard through the length and breadth
of Logres and gave rise to many marvels. Although no fragments,
even, of this romance are known to exist in the original French,


* Cp. Huth-Merlin, Il, 57f., 1721, 198 and Wechasler, pp. 42f.,
notes, (from MS. 112) and p. 60 (from MS. 343). So, too, in the
Portuguese and Spanish Demandas, fol. 179 and ch. 355 (Queste
section), respectively, (quoted by Sommer, Romama, XXXVI, 570).
For its relation to Pseudo-Robert, cp. p. 476. In references to the
work, Brait is often misspelt Bret. Through some error, the prose
Tristan is called “li livres dou Bret.” Cp. Léseth, p. 405.

* Huth-Merlin, U, 198. .

* MS. 112. Cp. Wechssler p. 51. Maistre would imply that the
author was a professional scholar, messir that he was a knight. G. Paris,
Huth-Merlin, I, pp. XXXIf., has offered various suggestions as to the
identity of Helio, but none of them are certain.

Cp. G. Paris, Huth-M., pp. LXXIIff. The best discussion of the
subject is Wechssler’ S, pp. 37 ff. See, too, a good summary, Vetter-
mann, p . 97.

5 Huth- Merlin, II, 198, and I, p. LXXXV (from the Spanish
Baladro).
Conte del Brait Merlin 481


the major part of it has been, doubtless, preserved in a Spanish
version entitled El Baladro del Sabio Merlin,® and an examination
of such information concerning the contents of the Spanish work
as is now available seems to show that the author of the Conte del
Brait, although he compiled his romance, in the main, from the
sources mentioned above, in the case of the Pseudo-Robert Merla-.
continuation did not confine himself merely to reproducing the
text of his original—rather he redacted, apparently, the excerpts
which he made from that continuation and added inventions of


__ © Printed at Burgos in 1498. It was composed, probably, early
in the fifteenth century. A copy in the possession of the Marquis of
Pidal at Madrid — ep. G. Paris, Huth-M., p. LXXII, — is the only one
extant, as far as is known. G. Paris, op. cit., pp. LXXXIff. has printed
a few extracts from it — also, the chapter headings. Our knowledge
of its contents is still limited to these meagre materials, since the book
has never been reprinted. Portions of the Conte del Brait appear
also to have been preserved in the Spanish DemandaI. For a list
of the specific passages involved cp. Vettermann, pp. 124f. In the Zs.
f. fre. Spr. u. Litt., XXIX’, pp. 121ff., Brugger has discussed the
fragmentary Spanish forms of the Conte del Brait.

G. Paris, op. cat., I, pp. LXXIIff., did not regard the Spanish
Baladro as a translation of the Conte del Brait, but as a compilation
from the Pseudo-Robert Merlin-continuation and the Conte Del Brait
combined to which the name of the latter was given. Apart from the
arguments for a contrary view which Wechssler, pp. 37ff., has ad-
vanced, it is to be observed that there is every reason to believe that
the Conte del Brait was subsequent to the Merlin-continuation, just
mentioned, in its original form, and dependent on it. One can under-
stand why the redactor of the new cycle, who was giving such a form
to his Merlin-continuation as to bring it into close conformity with
the spirit of the Lancelot, should take over the character of Baude-
magus from the latter into his own work and associate him closely
with Merlin, but in the case of an independent romance, such as Paris
supposes the Conte del Brait to have been, no such reason would
have existed. Baudemagus played such a large réle in the lost French
romance that in the Pseudo-Robert Merlin — continuation of MS. 112
(Cp. Wechssler. p. 43, note) the redactor declares that a certain in-
cident is omitted from his own work and told in the Conte del Bratt
“por ce quelle appartient a la vie Baudemagus.” This accords entirely
with what we know of the Spanish Baladro.


Fefperta, Ergdngungsreihe: 8. 31
482 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


his own, as in the case of the wonders that attended Merlin’s last
cry of despair. Until the Spanish Baladro, however, has been
published, it is impossible to characterize more fully, even at se-
cond hand, the Conte del Brait. In the meanwhile, there 1s no
reason to believe that this romance differed materially either in
the nature of its contents or in literary quality from the Pseudo-
Robert cycle.’


"In referring the reader to the Conte del Brait for matters
which he himself omits, the redactor of the shortened form of the
cycle represented by the Huth-Merlin speaks ibid., I, 58, of that
work as “une petite branke qui apartient a mon livre’ and declares
that he only omits it (i.e. from his redaction of Pseudo-Robert), be-
cause it would make his “livre” too large. Similarly, op. cit. I, 172f.
It is obvious, however, that the Conte del Brait was, in reality, com-
posed as a separate work.
Chapter IX.
The Prose Tristan.


Superior even to the prose Lancelot in popularity, in the
Middle Ages, if we may judge by the number of MSS. in which
it has been preserved, was the prose Tristan! — a romance of


* The prose 7J'ristan has not been reprinted since the sixteenth
century. MSS. of the romance are very numerous, the earliest dated
one (and probably as early as any), viz., 750, Bibl. Nat., bearing the
date, 1278. In the Bibliothéque Nationale alone there are twenty-
four that contain the whole romance or parts of it; in the British
Museum, six. For the enumeration and description of all prose
Tristan MSS. — and of the early prints of the romance, also, —
cp. E. Liseth’s Le roman en prose de Tristan, le roman de Palaméde,
et la compilation de Rusticien de Pise: analyse critique d' apres
les manuscrits de Paris, pp. Ilff., Paris, 1890 (no. 82 in the
Bibliothéque de l’Ecole des Hautes Etudes: Section des Sciences
historiques et philologiques), and his Le Tristan et le Palaméde des
manuscrits francais du British Museum, Christiania 1905 (Viden-
skabs-Selskabets Skrifter. II, Hist.-Filos. Klasse, 1905, No. 4). In
my discussion of the romance I shall refer to the first of these publi-
cations — which is the leading authority on everything pertaining to
the prose Tristan — simply as “Liseth”.

Following are the early prints of the romance: 2 vols. Rouen
(Jehan le Bourgoys) 1489; 2 vols. Paris (A. Verard) in two undated
editions, which probably belong to 1496 and 1603, respectively;
2 vols. Paris (Michel Le Noir) 1514 and 1520; Paris (Denis Janot),
undated, but probably 1533. There were, moreover, three (Paris)
editions of Jean Maugin’s modernisation of the romance, entitled Le
Premier Livre du Nouveau Tristan. They are dated, respectively,
1554, 1567, 1586, and the successive publishers were veuve Maurice
de la Porte, Gabriel Buon and Nicolas Bonfons. On these early
prints, besides Léseth’s preface, cp. Ernst Schiirhoff: Uber den Tristan-
Roman des Jean Maugin, Halle diss. 1909.

For Danish, Russian, Italian, German and Spanish translations
and derivatives of the prose Tristan, cp. Teel, pp. IVf. and Golther’s

31*
484 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


similar design as the former and of equal prolixity. We have
seen that the Lancelot-Guinevere romance was, in origin, merely
a re-adaptation by Chrétien of the legend of Tristan and Iseult,
to which he himself had already devoted a poem. In their prose
forms, however, the relations of the romances of these famous
couples, respectively, are exactly reversed, for the prose Tristan
in plainly modelled after the prose Lancelot.2 This means that
the old Celtic story of lawless and irresistible passion, with all
the primitive elements, both of poetry and of barbarism, which
had continued to cling to it even in the hands of the French metri-


Tristan und Isolde, pp. 127ff., 133ff. For the Spanish derivatives
see, especially, Part IV, below. The prose 7'ristan constitutes the main
basis of the (prose) La Tavola Ritonda o L’Istoria di Tristano,
_ edited by F. L. Polidori, 2 vols. (Bologna, 1864— 1865), which belongs
probably to the end of the thirteenth century.

The German “volksbuch”, Die Histori von herren Tristan und
der schoenen Isalden von. Irlande, Augsburg (Anton Sorg), 1484,
has been edited latterly (Jena, 1912) by R. Benz. He has taken
into consideration, also, the later fifteenth century issues of this book.

There are no MSS. or early prints of the prose 7’ristan on this
side of the ocean, so that the ‘present writer, althongh he has read
through the 1520 print, uses for reference Liéseth’s admirable
analysis of the romance. The only portions of it that are generally
accessible. in the original text are those which Bédier has printed
in his edition of Thomas’s Tristan, II, 321—395. A brief,
but good, analysis of the romance -— with especial reference
to those elements of the narrative that connect it with the earlier
metrical versions is given by W. Golther, Zristan und Isolde,
pp. 114—126 (Leipzig, 1907). Cp., too, Dunlop-Wilson, History of
Fiction, I, 196ff.

* Brugger’s assertion, Zs. f. frz. Spr. u. Litt., XXIX', 135,
that the prose Tristan and the Vulgate cycle (or his hypothetical
earlier redactions of the latter) were originally independent of each
other is erroneous. Even in its simpler form the 7'ristan shows the
influence of the latter — especially, the Lancelot branch — throughout.
Gréber, Grundriss, Band II, Abt. I, p. 1007, fully recognizes this.
Cp., too, the second of Léseth’s publications cited in the previous note,
pp. 34ff. Lancelot’s prominence in the Tristan is, of course, entirely
due to the prose Lancelot, and the former has, also, borrowed from
the latter many of its subordinate characters.
The Prose Tristan — 485


cal romancers, was now to be diluted with innumerable episodes
that reflected the occupations, tastes, and ideals of French lords
and ladies in the first half of the thirteenth century — endless
descriptions of jousts and tournaments, knight-errant adventures,
love-affairs conducted in the fashion of a highly organized so-
ciety, with letters and poems (lais) addressed by the lover to his
mistress > — and so on.

As with the prose Lancelot, so with the prose Tristan — the
romance in its original form has not come down to modern times.‘
The extant MSS. often differ greatly from each other, but two
versions, especially, of the. original are distinguishable among
them:*® 1. an earlier and better version, which is relatively short
and simple, 2. a longer and later one, which is sometimes called
“the common version’’, since it exists in much the largest number
of MSS., and sometimes “‘the cyclic version”, since the MSS.
of this version regularly connect the romance with the Vulgate
by a reference to the Mort Artu or even (in some MSS.) by the
incorporation of that romance® and, still further, by the incor-
poration of the greater part of the Queste branch, in a mixture
of its Vulgate and Pseudo-Robert forms.? The first of these ver-


* Such letters and poems are wanting in the Lancelot.

“ Cp. Léseth, p. XXIV.

° Op. cit., pp. XIIff. Léseth here describes the Tristan of the
extant MSS. as consisting merely of “des fragments juxtaposés de
rédactions differentes.”’ These MSS. make no division within the
romance, itself, but, for convenience’ sake, scholars have been accustomed
to divide it into two parts. In the better version, according to Léseth,
Part I ends with Daras’s liberation of his prisoners, Tristan, Palamede
and Dinadan (§ 183), in the common version with the Cornishmen's 8
defeat of the Saxons (§ 279). Cp. op. cit., p. V, note 1.

° Cp. Section XVI of Liseth’s pretane. The reference to the
Mort Artu occurs pp. 110f. The romancer there remarks that
Mordred will be the cause of Arthur’s death, “comme nous deviserons
vers la fin de nostre livre.”

* Cp. Liseth’s preface, p. XII, note 1, and p. XVI — also,
sections 383a — 394 a and 398 a of his analysis. Influenced, most
likely, by G. Paris, who regarded the Pseudo-Robert Queste as earlier
than the Vulgate, Léseth, p. XVI, observes that the former was, no
doubt, the first to be intercalated in the 7ristan MSS. But Paris’s
486 | Evolution of Arthurien Romance


sions is attributed to a missire Luce, knight and lord of the castle
of Gaut® (Gant, Gat, Gast, etc.) near Salisbury, the second to a
missire Helie (Helyes, Helys, etc.) de Boron (Berron, etc.), who
claims to be a friend and relative of Robert de Boron.? In both
versions we have the usual fraudulent declaration that the ro-
mance is translated from a Latin original.

Besides, Luce, in a prologue, apologizes, as a native of Eng-
land, for the quality of his French, whilst Helie pretends to be


view is certainly erroneous — so the reverse of Léseth’s remark is
probably true. Cp., still further, on this subject Wechssler’s Habilitations-
schrift, pp. 16ff., 60ff.

According to Léseth, p. XII, only Part II of the earlier version
is preserved in our MSS.

* In all modern discussions of the prose Tristan, this name
appears as ,,Luce(s) de Gast” — presumably, because Count Tressan’s
(eighteenth century) analysis first gave this form of the name cur-
rency. But, to judge by Liéseth’s two publications, mentioned above,
and by the description of the 7ristan MSS: in the British Museum
in Ward’s Catalogue, I, 356ff., the form, Gast, does not occur a
single time in all the MSS. of the Bibliothéque Nationale and British
Museum. Under these circumstances, I do not believe that we are
justified in clinging to the traditional form of the name just mentioned.
Of the great variety of forms (Gant, Cant, Gail, Cal, etc.) in which
the name is found in our MSS., Gaut seems most likely to have been
the original form. Except Gant (doubtless, a corruption of Gat), it
occurs oftener than any other, and from it and its equivalent, Galt —
both of which are common in Old French, as representatives of
Germanic wald = wood — the other variant forms are easily explained.
I have, consequently, adopted it in the text above.

For the ascription of the Tristan, in its original form, to this
Luce, cp. the passages listed in Liéseth’s Index under Luce de Gast —
also, Ward’s Catalogue, I, 357f., 363, 365 .

* For this claim and the other details concerning the pretended
Helie de Boron (Borron) which I am here giving, see the Epilogue
to the prose Tristan in Liseth, pp. 402ff. Cp. ibid. p. 402, note 4,
for earlier modern works in which this epilogue had been printed.
This epilogue is plainly connected with the prologue to Palamedes
and doubtless, derived from it. One can easily study the two together
in Hucher, Le Saint Graal, I, where they are printed, respectively,
pp. 35ff. (note), and pp. 156ff. Cp. too, G. Paris, Huth-Merlin, I,
pp. XXXIITff.
The Prose Tristan 487


a member of the distinguished family of Barres in Northern
France’? — “lords of Outres in Romenie, which is now called
France”. The latter asserts, moreover, that his king (of what
country he does not specify ),!! being much pleased with his pre-
sent work (the T'ristan), had commanded him to write another
book “which would contain all the matter that was wanting in
this book.”’ This task, he avers, he will take up “as soon as the
great cold of the present winter is past and we are in the sweet
season called spring’’, when he will have become rested from his
five years’ arduous labors on the Tristan. The new book, too,
is to be translated from the Latin, but the author intends also
to draw upon Master Walter Map’s Lancelot, the great books
of Robert de Boron (doubtless, the Pseudo-Robert cycle) and the
book of Luce de Gaut (i. e. the prose Tristan in its earlier form).
The name of this second author, or, rather redactor — Helice de
Boron — is certainly fictitious,!® and the same thing is doubtless
true of “Luce de (du) Gaut (Gast, etc.)’’ — the pretended name
of the author of the first version. We know, therefore, nothing
with regard to the real author of either version of the romance;
with regard to its date, however, we can hardly go wrong in ac-
cepting the decade, 1226-1235, as the period in which it —


© On this family see Hucher, Le Saint Graal, I, 37ff. This
author’s attempt to connect himself with it, like all other evidence,
tends to prove that he was a Frenchman. |


** Some MSS. (cp. Liseth, p. 405) call the king, Henry (one
even Henry d’Engleterre), but this is very likely imitated from the
Vulgate cycle (end of the Queste or beginning of the Mort Artu).


* G. Paris, Huth-Merlin, I, pp. XXXIIIff., had given good reasons
for believing that the attribution of the second version of the 7'ristan
to this pretended Helie de Boron was imitated from the prologue to
Palamedes (Guiron le Courtois), which was anterior to this version,
although posterior to the first. The name, in the first instance, no
doubt, was attached to the Conte del Brait (Bret). Cp. p. 480, note 1,
above. Pseudo-Helie confounded this last-named work, it seems, with
the earlier version of the Zristan, and hence refers to the latter
wrongly as “li Bret” or ,,le livre du Bret’. Cp. Liseth, p. 1 and
p. 405, respectively.
488 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


in its original form — was composed.!% 7

The great innovation which the author of dia prose Tristan
introduces into the tradition of his hero is that he completes the
Arthurization of the latter’s story and makes him, in the course
of the romance, a knight of the Round Table, like Gawain, Lance-
lot, and the rest. In the hands of this new author, Tristan re-
tains from the earlier tradition his especial skill in music and
song and his old astuteness in evading detection in his secret in-
trigue with Iseult, but, otherwise, he is hardly distinguished either


**-The earliest dated MS. of the romance (MS. 750, Bibl. Nat.)
bears the date, 1278, as we have stated, and since that MS. (MS. 750,
Bibl. Nat.) happens to belong to the second version, we know that
even this later version was in existence by the aforesaid date. As regards
the original romance, we know that it was composed before 1240, for
Palamedes, which is dependent on it, was in existence by that year.
See chapter XI. The T'ristan, itself, then, could hardly have been
composed later than 1235. On the other hand, the Vulgate Merlin-
continuation appears to be one of its sources.

An interesting early borrowing from our romance will be found
in Brunetto Latini’s 7'resor, p. 488 (Chabaille’s edition, 1863) —
composed between, 1260 and 1269. The author here adopts a de-
scription of Iseult in the prose Tristan as a model of style.

The only evidence in regard to the terminus a quo of our
romance is that which is supplied by the fact of its dependence on
the Vulgate cycle. Except for its Merlin-continuation, as we have
seen (p. 458), the Vulgate was completed-in all likelihood, early in
the second decade of the thirteenth century. Hence the Tristan, in
its original form, must have been subsequent, say, to 1215. Indeed,
if the character of Pellinor in the J’ristan is taken from the Merlin-
continuation of the Vulgate, as seems certain (cp. Bruce, MPh., XVI,
337 ff.), we should have to advance the composition of the former to
1230 or somewhat later, for the continuation in question, as said
above, can hardly be earlier than 1225.

On the basis of its falling between the Lancelot and Palamedes,
Léseth, p. XXIV, dates our romance between 1215 and 1230. Bédier,
similarly, in his edition of Thomas’s 7'iristan, II, 309, dates it about
1230. I should, myself, be inclined to date it in the early thirties
of the thirteenth century.

** Liseth, p.149. He had already, however, been associated
with Arthur’s knights in various ways.
The Prose Tristan | 489


in character or accomplishments from his companion-in-arms,
Lancelot. Like the latter, he spends his time largely in going
from tournament to tournament — whether in Cornwall or Logres
— and, in all the situations of life, he displays the usual knightly
qualities of courtesy and generosity, to say nothing of valor. Simi-
larly, he excels in fencing and chess-playing and in the other ac-
complishments that were prized most highly in aristocratic circles
of the thirteenth century. In one respect, doubtless, he resembles
the actual members of those circles more closely than was the
case with Lancelot: as a lover, his fidelity was not above reproach.
Finally, ike the other knights who were preeminent at Arthur's
court, he is made a participant in the Grail quest,!¢ although his
disqualifications for success in an enterprise to achieve which
chastity was an indispensable condition, were even more obvious
than Lancelot’s.

The prose Tristan follows the tradition of the primitive (lost)
metrical romance?” concerning its hero, and it derives from this
tradition, of course, the primary conception of the adulterous pas-
sion of Tristan and Iseult, including even the parts that are played
by the minor characters in the drama, Bringvain and Andret
(Audret); but the individual episodes which our author inherited
from his source are so lost in the flood of new and, for the most
part, inferior inventjons, that they hardly constitute any longer
the most prominent element in the story. They occur naturally
in those portions of the romance in which Cornwall is the scene


‘* Cp., especially, his intrigue with Segurade’s wife, Liseth, p. 25.
In the romance Iseult, too, has other lovers, besides Tristan, viz.
Palamedes and Kahedin, but she grants her favors only to Tristan.

*® Loseth, pp. 283¢f.

"7 Cp. Bédier’s stemma in his edition of Thomas's Tristan, I, 309.
He takes the primitive romance as the immediate source of the prose.
It was formerly customary to assume that the prose 7'ristan was based
on Chrétien’s lost Tristan poem. Cp. G. Paris, Manuel, p. 101,
Liseth, p. XXV, and G. Griéber, Grundriss, Band II, Abt. I, p. 1007.
At a later period, however, Paris, as we have seen (p. 155, note 5, above),
denied that Chrétien ever wrote a 7J'ristan romance in any proper
sense. On this question see loc. cit. above and Foerster’s Chrétien


Weorterbuch, Introduction, pp. 47 ff.
490 Evolution of Arthurian Romance


of action, and they cover more especially the period of the hero's
youth up to the point where the narrative of the lovers is linked
up with that of Lancelot and Guinevere.1® At this point these
episodes are dropped and only resumed, when Tristan returns from
Logres to Marc’s court for a while!® and again runs the gauntlet
of detection in his continued amours with the queen. After this
the influence of the source ceases, for in the prose romance even
the death of the hero is differently managed, Tristan being here
the victim of Marc’s treachery, who, in a fit of jealousy, thrusts
& poisoned spear through his nephew, as the latter was singing
a lay to Iseult in her apartment.2° The character of Marc, we
may observe, is blackened throughout the prose romance. Herc
he is false and treacherous, a tyrant and a coward. The author's
object, of course, in this degradation of the wronged husband
was to lessen the opprobrium of his hero’s adultery, but the tragic
situation was, surely, much finer in the old story, where even
the nephew committing the wrong could not dispute the essentially
noble and generous character of the king and could plead no excuse
for dishonoring him, save the force of a passion which was as ir-
resistible as Fate.

It was not only, however, with respect to the character of
Marc that our author exercises the usual privilege of the roman-
cers in altering or modifying his originals. Thus the birth of
the hero, as well as his death, is differently related in the prose
romance,®! as compared with the Tristan poems. In the former,
the hero’s father, Meliadus, King of Leonois, is held captive by
a fairy mistress in her tower, in the midst of a forest, and, through
his captor’s magical powers, loses all memory of his wife. This
wife, however, who is pregnant, goes in search of him in this
same forest, and, having learned there from Merlin,?? who is dis-
guised as a forester, that she will never see her husband again,


*® Loseth, p. 46. ° Ibid., pp. 172 ff. *° Pp. 383ft.

*! Pp. 16f.

** Merlin here plays somewhat the same part towards the child,
Tristan, that he does towards young Arthur in Robert de Boron’s
Merlin. Our author is, of course, imitating Robert.
The Prose Tristan 491


she gives birth to a son in the forest and dies, after having con-
ferred the name of Tréstan on the child, because of the sorrowful
circumstances under which he was born. Two kinsmen of Melhiadus,
who now arrive on the scene, are about to kill the infant, in order
that they, themselves, may get possession of the kingdom, but
a damsel of the dead queen persuades them to renounce the pro-
ject on the condition that she will hide the child so effectively
that he will never be heard of again. Merlin, however, is the
means of saving the child from this fate and of the liberation of
Meliadus. Moreover, it is on his advice that Tristan is committed
to the tutelage of Gouvernal.

Space fails us to note the romancer’s numerous alterations
of his source — some of them even more audacious than the one
which I have just cited. We can only remark that he is especially
fond of changing the traditional order of incidents and of giving
the old motifs new connections in the story. For example, the
incident of the evening rendezvous at which Tristan and Iseult,
having detected Marc in the tree above them, give their conver-
sation such a turn as to deceive him, is postponed to a later point
in the narrative,?? and the motif of the tell-tale blood-stains from
Tristan’s wound on the bed-clothing of his mistress is no longer
connected with Iseult of Cornwall, but with the wife of Segurade.*
Moreover, the rationalizing tendency is even stronger in this ro-
mance than in the Lancelot. Consequently, the fairy-tale voyages
of the hero in the poetical tradition are stripped of their marvellous
quality and even the philtre becomes virtually superfluous in the
development of the lovers’ passion.®

Among the noteworthy additions to the story are to be num-
bered many new episodes and many new characters. The latter
are drawn mainly from the Vulgate cycle — especially, the Lancelot
and the Queste — e. g. Lancelot, Hector, Perceval, Galahad —
who here, however, is thoroughly secularized and does not differ
in any essential from the other knights — Sagremor, etc. Never-
theless, two of the new characters, who fill rdles of considerable
importance in the romance — viz. Lamorat, Perceval’s brother,


** Pp. 186ff. ** Pp. 25. *° Pp. 29f.


Go ogle


492 Evolution of Arthurian’ Romance


and Palamedes — were invented by its author. The second of these
characters sprang, doubtless, in the first instance from that of the
lying seneschal in the old poem, who endeavored to deprive Tristan
of his credit for the slaying of the dragon near Dublin, but our
author, though still representing him as a lover of Iseult’s, has
converted him into a model of generosity and courtesy, even towards
his successful rival (Tristan), so that he is one of the most sym-
pathetic figures in the romance. The creation of Lamorat was,
doubtless, due to the writer’s desire to interweave his hero’s story
more closely with that of Perceval.

In the way of incident the most original additions are the
series of episodes at the beginning of the romance that make up
the history of Tristan’s ancestors. Like Lancelot, Tristan here
is represented as of the lineage of King David and Joseph of
Arimathea.?¢ Especially striking in this preliminary narrative is
the story of the hero’s grandmother, Chelinde, with its strange
medley of motifs, drawn from widely separated sources?? — Athés
and Prophilias (the mediaeval romance of ideal friendship), the
legend of Oedipus (the great tragic tale of incest), some fairy-
tale of a giant who proposes riddles to his captives with life as
the stake, the oriental conte of the much-married princess. It is
the last-named element, in particular, that constitutes the back-
bone of Chelinde’s weirdly scandalous history, and we have here in
its earliest preserved form the tale which Boccaccio has im-


*° On the subject of Lancelot’s ancestry see Bruce, RR, IX, 250 ff.
The name of Tristan’s grandfather, Sadoc, — here represented as a great-
nephew of Joseph of Arimathea’s — is, as I have pointed out, Historia
Meriadoct and De Ortu Waluuant, p. XXIIf., note 1 (Géttingen
and Baltimore, 1913), taken from the genealogy of Christ, St. Matthew,
I, 14. The author confounds Joseph, husband of the Virgin Mary,
with Joseph of Arimathea, as happens elsewhere, also, in the romances.

*7 For an analysis of the story of Chelinde and a discussion of
its sources cp., especially, Bruce, “A Boccaccio Analogue in the Old
French Prose Tristan,’ RR, I, 384ff. (1910).

*° Decameron, Il, 7. The heroine is here named Alatiel. The
Tristan and Boccaccio, as I have shown in the article just cited, go
back to a common source of oriental origin.
The Prose Tristan — 493


niortalized by his inimitable vivacity and cynical humor, con-
cerning the daughter of the Sultan of Babylon who is betrothed
to a pagan monarch, but on the voyage to his country, where the
wedding is to be celebrated, through a series of misadventures, falls
successively into the possession of a number of different men, with
each of whom she is compelled to cohabit. According to the Tristan,
she never reaches her original destination, but in Bocaccio she
finally turns up there, after having passed through the hands
of nine lovers, one after the other, and is able to satisfy her cre-
dulous husband with respect to the delay in her arrival by the
assertion that she had been spending the time in a nunnery.

Genuine mediaeval traits of these Chelinde episodes are the
following, viz. that some of the heroine’s lovers get their names
from the Latin Bible*®® and that St. Augustine, the missionary,
here takes the place of Tiresias in the Oedipus legend as the pro-
phet who discloses the terrible truth with regard to the incestuous
union of the mother (Chelinde) and her son (Apollo).

It is not always easy to establish what portions of the Tristan,
as it is preserved in our MSS., belonged to the romance in its
original form. There is no question, however, that from the be-
ginning its author aimed at enhancing the appeal of his work by
interweaving the fortunes of his hero and heroine with those of
the specifically Arthurian characters from whom they had hither-
to stood apart. The first connection of this nature which he creates
is the one with Lancelot and Guinevere, when Iseult of Cornwall,
at the time of her lover's marriage to Iseult of Brittany, wrote
in despair to Guinevere, asking her advice (p. 46), and received
a consolatory answer. Naturally, Lancelot, the ideal exemplar of
the amour courtois, disapproved of this act of infidelity on the


*® Sadoc, as we have just seen, from St. Matthew, I, 14; his
brother, Nabusardan (Nabuzardan) from IV Liber Regum, XXV, 8,
11, 20 (Nebuchadnezzar’s captain of the guard) and elsewhere in the
Old Testament. Cp. Bruce, MLN, XXXIII, 136 (1918). Gonosor,
name of the king of Ireland in the story (Liseth, p. 13), is, probably,
also, a mere corruption of Nabugodonosor, the name of Nebuchadnezzar
in the Latin Bible.

— *° -‘Loseth, pp. 11f.
494 Evolution of Arthurian Romence


part of Tristan, and his censure on the subject was reported to the
latter. They are on opposite sides in the tournament at the Chateau
des Pucelles (p. 107), but they do not come into conflict with
one another until their subsequent combat at the Perron Merlin
(p. 147). On this latter occasion, however, each inspires his ad-
versary with such an admiration for his valor that they cease
fighting and begin a contest in courtesy with one another which
leads to the cementing of a firm friendship between them. Lance-
lot, accordingly, introduces Tristan at Arthur’s court (p. 148),
and later, when Tristan and Iseult have fled from Cornwall to-
gether, he puts Joyous Gard at their disposal as a refuge (p. 258).
Strange to say, however, the two queens do not meet in the ro-
mance.*!

In a similar spirit, the author of our romance draws Perce-
val into the story of Tristan, by making the former duplicate
Lancelot’s feat*? of freeing the latter from captivity (p. 245).
All three, of course, are, subsequently, participants in the Grail
quest, through which, still further, as we have seen, Tristan is
brought into relations with Galahad.

Like the Lancelot, on which it is modelled, the Tristan has
no plot such as we require in a modern work of fiction. Its form
is simply that of a rambling biographical romance of the type
which Chrétien had made popular — expanded, however, to an
enormous extent, as we have seen, after the fashion of the prose
romances. On the other hand, the style of the Tristan has been
highly commended by the best judges both of the Middle Ages*
and of Modern Times,* and, in this respect, it stands, doubtless,
in the front rank of the mediaeval prose romances.*


*! P. 260, Guinevere expresses a desire to visit her at Joyous
Gard, but that is all.

“8 Pp. 217.

** Cp. the passage from Brunetto Latini’s T'resor, cited, p. 488,
note 13, above.

** Cp. G. Paris, Manuel, p. 111. It was this quality, doubtless,
that rendered the romance such a favorite with Ariosto, if we may
judge by the frequent use of it which he made in the Orlando F'urioso.

*° The main sources of the prose T'ristan, as we have seen, are
The Prose Tristan 495


the lost primitive poem, from which all extant Tristan romances are
descended, and the Vulgate cycle. The influence of the Lancelot, in
particular, is manifest on nearly every page. In the later Pseudo-
Helie redaction we have noted, also, the influence of the Pseudo-Robert
eycle. For the sources of the opening episodes of the romance see,
still farther, p. 492 and note, above. The author of the earliest redaction
knew, also, Chrétien’s Yvain and Erec — cp. Liseth, pp. 83ff. and
292ff., respectively — although he alters materially the story of Erec
and Enide. We have observed, too, p. 490, note 22, a trace of the
influence of Robert de Boron’s Merlin. He probably knew the
Meraugis de Portlesguez, the hero of which is here (p. 13) repre-
sented as Marc’s son by his niece. On the other hand, he may have
adopted the character merely from the Lancelot.

It would be useless to try to determine the specific sources from
which our romancer drew a number of threadbare folk-tale motifs,
exploited in his work: e. g. the magic drinking-horn as a chastity test
(p. 39), the combat of father and son (p. 82), etc.
