TOLL LT
00102650

WVU NNUYU NUTT AMY TM a
00102650

Digitized with financial assistance from
Shri Brihad Bhartiya Samaj
on 20 February, 2020

PART II

THE STATE GOVERNMENTS

CONTENTS

PART II—Tue Stare GovERNMENTS

CHAPTER XXXVI

NATURE OF THE AMERICAN STATE . 3 : 1

CHAPTER XXXVII

STATE CONSTITUTIONS , . ‘ . . 29

CHAPTER XXXVIII

THE DEVELOPMENT OF STATE CONSTITUTIONS . ‘ 51

CHAPTER XXxXIX

DIRECT LEGISLATION BY THE PEOPLE . ; : 67

CHAPTER XL

STATE LEGISLATURES . : ‘ , 83

CHAPTER XLI

glHE STaTE EXECUTIVE F : : : 103

CHAPTER XLII

Tue STATE JUDICIARY. é ; - 3 112

vi CONTENTS

CHAPTER XLII

STATE FINANCE

© CHAPTER XLIV

Tue WORKING OF STATE GOVERNMENTS

CHAPTER XLV

REMEDIES FOR THE Fauuts of State GOVERNMENTS .

CHAPTER XLVI

StaTE Po.itics

CHAPTER XLVII

THE TERRITORIES

CHAPTER XLVIII

Locat GOVERNMENT

CHAPTER XLIX

OBSERVATIONS ON RurRAL LocaL GOVERNMENT

CHAPTER L

THE GOVERNMENT OF CITIES .

CHAPTER LI

THE WORKING OF CiTy GOVERNMENTS

CHAPTER LII

AN AMERICAN VIEW OF MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT IN

THE UNITED STATES

PaGE

125

145

172

208

248

bo
for)
to

296

CONTENTS

PART IJ]—Tue Party System

CHAPTER LIII

POLITICAL PARTIES AND THEIR HISTORY

CHAPTER LIV

THE Parties oF To-DAY

CHAPTER LV

CoMPOSITION OF THE PARTIES .

CHAPTER LVI

FURTHER OBSERVATIONS ON THE PARTIES

CHAPTER LVII

THE POLITICIANS

° CHAPTER LVI

Way THE Best MEN pO NOT GO INTO POLITICS

CHAPTER LIX

Party ORGANIZATIONS .

CHAPTER LX

THE MACHINE .

CHAPTER LXI

Wrat THE MACHINE HAS TO DO

vii

PAGE

321

344

355

367

386

403

419

viii CONTENTS

CHAPTER LXII

How THE MACHINE WORKS

CHAPTER LXIII

RINGS AND Bosses

CHAPTER LXIV

LocaL EXTENSION OF RINGS AND Bosses

CHAPTER LXV

SPOILS .

CHAPTER LXVI

ELECTIONS AND THEIR MACHINERY

CHAPTER LXVII

CoRRUPTION

4

CHAPTER LXVIII

THE WAR AGAINST Bosspom .
|

CHAPTER LXIX

NoMINATING CONVENTIONS

CHAPTER LXX

THe NoMINATING CONVENTION AT Work

CHAPTER LXXI

THE PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN .

PAGE

438

450

467

479

509

537

549

CONTENTS

CHAPTER LXXII

*Tue IssuES IN PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS

CHAPTER LXXIII
FURTHER OBSERVATIONS ON NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS

CHAPTER LXXIV

Types OF AMERICAN STATESMEN

CHAPTER LXXV
WHAT THE PEOPLE THINK OF IT

APPENDIX

Specimens oF Provisions iv State ConstiruTions LIMITING
Taxina AND Borrowina PowErs

Expbanation (By Mr. G. BraDrorD) oF THE NoMINATING
MacHINERY AND ITS PROCEDURE IN THE STATE OF
MASSACHUSETTS

A Newspaper Account OF THE REPUBLICAN NATIONAL
Nominating CoNVENTION OF 1884 .

Constitution oF THE State OF CALIFORNIA

595

606

633
643

CHAPTER XXXVI
NATURE OF THE AMERICAN STATE

From the study of the National Government, we may go
on to examine that of the several States which make up
the Union. This is the part of the American political
system which has received least attention both from
foreign and from native writers. Finding in the
Federal president, cabinet, and Congress a government
superficially resembling those of their own countries,
and seeing the Federal authority alone active in inter-
national relations, Europeans have forgotten and practi-
cally ignored the Sate Governments to which their own
experience supplies few parallels, and on whose workings
the intelligence published -on their side of the ocean
seldom throws light. Even the European traveller who
makes the six or seven days’ run across the American
continent, from New York via Philadelphia and Chicago
to San Francisco, though he passes in this journey of
2100 miles over the territories of eleven self-governing
commonwealths, hardly notices the fact. He uses
one coinage and one post-office; he is stopped by no
custom-houses ; he sees no officials in a state livery ; he
thinks no more of the difference of jurisdictions than the
passenger from London to Liverpool does of the counties
VOL. II B

2 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

traversed by the line of the North-Western Railway.
So, too, our best informed English writers on the
science of politics, while discussing copiously the
relation of the American States to the central authority,
have failed to draw on the fund of instruction which
lies in the study of State Governments themselves.
Mill in his Representative Government scarcely refers
to them. Mr. Freeman in his learned essays, Sir H.
Maine in his ingenious book on Popular Government,
pass by phenomena which would have admirably illus-
trated some of their reasonings.*

American publicists, on the other hand, have been
too much absorbed in the study of the Federal system
to bestow much thought on the State governments.
The latter seem to them the most simple and obvious
things in the world, while the former, which has been
the battle-ground of their political parties for a century,
excites the keenest interest, and is indeed regarded as
a sort of mystery, on which all the resources of their
metaphysical subtlety and legal knowledge may well
be expended. Thus while the dogmas of State sover-
eignty and State rights, made practical by the great
struggle over slavery, have been discussed with extra-
ordinary zeal and acumen by three generations of men,
the character power and working of the States as
separate self-governing bodies have received little atten-
tion or illustration. Yet they are full of interest ; and
he who would understand the changes that have passed
on the American democracy will find far more instruction
in a study of the State governments than of the Federal
Constitution. The materials for this study are unfor-

1 The first authors known to me who have in Europe insisted with
adequate force on their value, are M. Boutmy of the Parisian Ecole Libre
des Sciences Politiques, and Dr, von Holst, the constitutional histurian of
America,

CHAP. XXXVI NATURE OF THE STATE 3

tunately, at least to a European, either inaccessible or
unmanageable. They consist of constitutions, statutes,
the records of the debates and proceedings of constitu-
tional conventions and legislatures, the reports of
oflicials and commissioners, together -with that con-
tinuous transcript and picture of current public opinion
which the files of newspapers supply. Of these sources
only one, the constitutions, is practically available to a
person writing on this side the Atlantic. To be able
to use the rest one must go to the State and devote
one’s self there to these original authorities, correcting
them, where possible, by the recollections of living men.
It might have been expected that in most of the States,
or at least of the older States, persons would have been
found to write political, and not merely antiquarian or
genealogical, State histories, describing the political
career of their respective communities, and discussing
the questions on which political contests have turned.
But this has been done in comparatively few instances, so
that the European inquirer finds a scanty measure of the
assistance which he would naturally have expected from
previous labourers in this field.? I call it a field: it is
rather’ a primeval forest, where the vegetation is rank,
and through which scarcely a trail has yet been cut.
The new historical school which is growing up at the
leading American universities, and has already done
excellent work on the earlier history of the Eastern
States, will doubtless ultimately grapple with this task;
in the meantime, the difficulties I have stated must be
my excuse for treating this branch of my subject with

1 Since these lines were written, such a series of State histories has
been begun under the title of American Commonvealths. Of the volumes
that have already appeared some possess high merit; but they do not

always bring the narrative down to those very recent times which are most
instructive to the student of existing institutions,

4 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

a brevity out of proportion to its real interest and
importance. It is better to endeavour to bring into
relief a few leading features, little understood in
Europe, than to attempt a detailed account which would
rvn to inordinate length.

The American State is a peculiar organism, unlike
anything in modern Europe, or in the ancient world.
The only parallel is to be found in the cantons of Switz-
erland, the Switzerland of our own day, for until 1815,
if one ought not rather to say until 1848, Switzerland
was not so much a nation or a state as a league of
neighbour commonwealths. But Europe, and particu-
larly England, so persistently ignores the history of
Switzerland, that most instructive patent museum of
politics, apparently only because she is a small country,
and because people go there to see lakes and to climb
mountains, that I should perplex instead of enlightening
the reader by attempting to illustrate American from
Swiss phenomena.

Let me attempt to sketch the American States as
separate political entities, forgetting for the moment
that they are also parts of a Fedetation.

There are thirty-eight States in the American Union,
varying in size from Texas, with an area of 265,780
square miles! to Rhode Island, with an area of 1250
square miles; and in population from New York, with
5,082,871 inhabitants, to Nevada, with 62,266.! That
is to say, the largest State is much larger than either
France or the Germanic Empire; the most populous
much more populous than Sweden, or Portugal, or
Denmark, while the smallest is smaller than War-

1 The population of Nevada has declined since the census of 1880,
and is now probably little over 40,000, while that of New York is now
nearly 6,000,000.

CHAP, XXXVI NATURE OF THE STATE 5

wickshire or Corsica, and the least populous less
populous than the parish of Clerkenwell in London
(69,076), or the town of Greenock in Scotland (65,884).
Considering not only these differences of size, but the
differences in the density of population {which in Nevada
is “6, and in Oregon 1°8 to the square mile, while in
Rhode Island it is 254°9 and in Massachusetts 221°8 to
the square mile); in its character (in South Carolina
the blacks are 604,332 against 391,105 whites, in Missis-
sippi 650,291 against 479,398 whites) ; in its birthplace
(in North Carolina the foreign-born persons are less than
345 of the population, in California more than 4); in
the occupations of the people, in the amount of accumu-
lated wealth, in the proportion of educated persons to the
rest of the community,—it is plain that immense differ-
ences might be looked for between the aspects of politics
and conduct of government in one State and in another.

Be it also remembered that the older colonies had
different historical origins. Virginia and North Carolina
were unlike Massachusetts and Connecticut ; New York,
Pennsylvania, and Maryland different from both ; while
in recent times thé stream of European immigration has
filled some States with Irishmen, others with Germans,
others with Scandinavians, and has left most of the
Southern States wholly untouched.

Nevertheless, the form of government is in its main
outlines, and to a large extent even in its actual working,
the same in all these thirty-eight republics, and the dif-
ferences, instructive as they are, relate to points of
secondary consequence.

The States fall naturally into five groups :—

The New England States—Massachusetts, Connecti-

cut, Rhode Island, New Hampshire, Vermont,
Maine.

6 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART IT

The Middle States—New York, New Jersey, Penn-
sylvania, Delaware,’ Maryland, Ohio, Indiana.?

The Southern, or old Slave States—Virginia, Wést -

Virginia (separated from Virginia during the
war), North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia,
Alabama, Florida, Kentucky, Tennessee, Missis-
sippi, Louisiana, Arkansas, Missouri, Texas.

The North-Western States—Michigan, Illinois, Wis-

consin, Minnesota, Iowa, Nebraska, Kansas,
Colorado.

The Pacific States—California, Nevada, Oregon.

Each of these groups has something distinctive in
the character of its inhabitants, which is reflected, though
more faintly now than formerly, in the character of its
government and politics.

New England is the old home of Puritanism, the
traces whereof, though waning under the influence of
Irish and French Canadian immigration, are by no
means yet extinct. The Southern States will long
retain the imprint of slavery, not merely in the presence
of a host of negroes, but in the degradation of the poor
white population, and in certain attributes, laudable as
well as regrettable, of the ruling class. The North-West
is the land of hopefulness, and consequently of bold
experiments iy legislation: its rural inhabitants have
the honesty and the narrow- mindedness of agricul-
turists. The Pacific West, or rather California and
Nevada, for Oregon belongs in political character to the
Upper Mississippi or North-western group, tinges the

1 Delaware and Maryland were Slave States, but did not secede, and
are in many respects to be classed rather with the Middle than with the
Southern group.

2 Ohio and perhaps Indiana seem rather Middle than Western,
hecause their affinities are now somewhat closer with New York or the

East than with the newer States to the North-west, but of course no sharp
line can be drawn, and most people would still call them Western.

CHAP. XXXVI NATURE OF THE STATE 7
a re

energy and sanguine good nature of the Westerns
with a speculative recklessness natural to mining
communities, where great fortunes have rapidly grown
and vanished, and into which elements, have been
suddenly swept together from every part of the workl,
as a Rocky Mountain rainstorm fills the bottom of a
valley with sand and pebbles from all the surrounding
heights.

As the dissimilarity of population and of external
conditions seems to make for a diversity of constitu-
tional and political arrangements between the States, so
also does the large measure of legal independence which
each of them enjoys under the Federal Constitution.
No State can, as a commonwealth, politically deal with
or act upon any other State. No diplomatic rela-
tions can exist nor treaties be made between States, no
coercion can be exercised by one upon another. And
although the government of the Union can act on a
State, it rarely does act, and then only in certain strictly
limited directions, which do not touch the inner political
life of the commonwealth.

Let us pass &n to consider the circumstances which
work for uniformity among the States, and work more
powerfully as time goes on.

He who looks at a map of the Union will be struck
by the fact that so many of the boundary lines of the
States are straight lines. Those lines tell the same tale
as the geometrical plans of cities like St. Petersburg or
Washington, where every street runs at the same angle
to every other. The States are not natural growths.
Their boundaries are for the most part not natural
boundaries fixed by mountain ranges, nor even historical
boundaries due to a series of events, but purely arti-
ficial boundaries, determined by an authority which

8 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

carved the national territory into strips of convenient
size, as a building company lays out its suburban lots. Of
the States subsequent to the original thirteen, California
is the only one with a genuine natural boundary, finding
it in the chain ‘of the Sierra Nevada pa the east and
the Pacific ocean on the west. No one of these later
States can be regarded as a naturally developed _politi-
cal organism. They are trees planted by the forester,
not self-sown with the help of the seed-scattering wind.
This absence of physical lines of demarcation has tended
and must tend to prevent the growth of local distinc-
tions. Nature herself seems to have designed the
Mississippi basin, as she has designed the unbroken
levels of Russia, to be the dwelling-place of one people.
Each State makes its own Constitution ; that is, the
people agree on their form of government for themselves,
with no interference from the other ea from the
Union. This form is subject to one tonWNtion only:
it must be republican.’ But in each State the people
who make the constitution have lately come from other
States, where they have lived under and worked constitu-
tions which are to their eyes the natural and almost
necessary model for their new State to follow; and in
the absence of an inventive spirit among the citizens, it
was the obvious course for the newer States to copy the
organizations of the older States, especially as these
agreed with certain familiar features of the Federal Con-
stitution, Hence.the outlines, and even the phrases of the
elder constitutions reappear in those of the more recently
formed States. The precedents set by Virginia, for
instance, had much influence on Tennessee, Alabama,

1 The case of Kansas immediately before the War of Secession, and
the cases of the rebel States, which were not readmitted after the war
till they had accepted the constitutional amendments forbidding slavery
and protecting the freedmen, are quite exceptional cases.

CHAP, XXXVI NATURE OF THE STATE 9

Mississippi, and Florida, when they were engaged in
making or amending their constitutions during the
early part of this century.

Nowhere is population in such constant movement
as in America. In some of the newer States only one?
fourth or one-fifth of the inhabitants are natives of the
United States. Many of the townsfolk, not a few even
of the farmers, have been till lately citizens of some other
State,and will, perhaps, soon move on farther west. These
Western States are like a chain of lakes through which
there flows a stream which mingles the waters of the
higher with those of the lower. In such a constant
flux of population local peculiarities are not readily
developed, or if they have grown up when the district
was still isolated, they disappear as the country becomes
filled. Each State takes from its neighbours and gives
to its neighbours, so that the process of assimilation. is
always going on over the whole wide area.

Still more important is the influence of railway com-
munication, of newspapers, of the telegraph. A Greek
city like Samos or Mitylene, holding her own island,
preserved a distinctive character in spite of commercial
intercourse and the sway of Athens. A Swiss canton like
Uri or Appenzell, entrenched behind its mountain ram-
parts, remains, even now under the strengthened central
government of the Swiss nation, unlike its neighbours
of the lower country. But an American State traversed
by great trunk lines of railway, and depending on the
markets of the Atlantic cities and of Europe for the sale
of its grain, cattle, bacon, and minerals, is attached by a
dyindred always tightening ties to other States, and
touched by their weal or woe as nearly as by what
befalls within its own limits. The leading newspapers
are read over a vast area. The inhabitants of each

10 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

State know every morning the events of yesterday over
the whole Union.

Finally the political parties are the same in all ‘the
States. The tenets (if any) of each party are the same
‘everywhere, their methods the same, their leaders the
same, although of course a prominent man enjoys
especial influence in his own State. Hence, State politics
are largely swayed by forces and motives external to the
particular State, and common to the whole country, or
‘to great sections of it; and the growth of local parties,
the emergence of local issues and development of local
political schemes, are correspondingly restrained.

These considerations explain why the States, notwith-
standing the original diversities between some of them,
and the wide scope for political divergence which they all
enjoy under the Federal Constitution, are so much less
dissimilar and less peculiar than might have been
expected. European statesmen have of late years been
accustomed to think of federalism and local autonomy
as convenient methods either for recognizing and giving
free scope to the sentiment of nationality which may
exist in any part of an empire, or for meeting the need
for local institutions and distinct legislation which may
arise from differences between such a part and the
rest of the empire. It is one or other or both of these
reasons that have moved statesmen in such cases as
those of Finland in her relations to Russia, Hungary in
her relations to German-Austria, Iceland in her rela-
tions to Denmark, Bulgaria in her relations to the
Turkish Sultan, Ireland in her relations to the United
Kingdom. But the final causes, so to speak, of the
recognition of the States of the American Union as
autonomous commonwealths, have been different. Their
self-covernment is not the consequence of differences

CHAP. XXXVI NATURE OF THE STATE I

which can be made harmless to the whole body politic
only by being allowed free course. It has been due
primarily to the historical fact that they existed as
commonwealths before the Union came into being;
secondarily, to the belief that localized’ government i8
the best guarantee for civic freedom, and to a sense of
the difficulty of administering a vast territory and popu-
lation from one centre and by one government.

I return to indicate the points in which the legal
independence and right of self-government of the several
States appears. Each of the thirty-eight has its own—

Constitution (whereof more anon).

Executive, consisting of a governor, and various

other officials.

Legislature of two Houses.

System of local government in counties, cities, town-
ships, and school districts.

System of State and local taxation.

Debts, which it may (and sometimes does) repudiate
at its own pleasure.

Body of private law, including the whole law of real
and personal property, “of contracts, of torts,
and of family relations.

Courts, from which no appeal lies (except in cases
touching Federal legislation or the Federal
constitution) to any Federal court.

System of procedure, civil and criminal.

Citizenship, which may admit persons (e.g. recent
immigrants) to be citizens at times, or on con-
ditions, wholly different from those prescribed
by other States.

Three points deserve to be noted as illustrating

what these attributes include.

I. A man gains active citizenship of the United

12 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

States (¢.e. a share in the government of the Union) only
by becoming a citizen of some particular State. Being
such citizen, he is forthwith entitled to the natidnal.
franchise. That is to say, voting power in the State
‘carries voting power in Federal elections, and however
lax a State may be in its grant of such power, e.g. to
foreigners just landed or to persons convicted of crime,
these State voters will have the right of voting in
congressional and presidential elections.1 The only
restriction on the States in this matter is that of the
fuurteenth and fifteenth Constitutional amendments,
which have already been discussed. They were intended
to secure equal treatment to the negroes, and incident-
ally they declare the protection given to all citizens of
the United States? Whether they really enlarge it,
that is to say, whether it did not exist by implication
before, is a legal question, which I need not discuss.

1 Congress has power to pass a uniform rule of naturalization (Const.
Art. i. § 8).

Under the present naturalization laws a foreigner must have resided
in the United States for five years, and for one year in the State or
Territory where he seeks admission to United States citizenship, and
must declare two years before he is admitted tht he rertounces allegiance
to any foreign prince or state. Naturalization makes him a citizen not
only of the United States, but of the State or Territory where he is
admitted, but does not necessarily confer the electoral franchise, for that
depends on State Jaws.

In more than 4 third of the States the electoral franchise is now enjoyed
by persons not naturalized as United States citizens.

2 “The line of distinction between the privileges and immunities of
citizens of the United States, and those of citizens of the several States, must
be traced along the boundary of their respective spheres of action, and the
two classes must be as different in their nature as are the functions of their
Tespective governments. <A citizen of the United States as such has a right
to participate in foreign and inter-state commerce, to have the benefit of the
postal laws, to make use in common with others of the navigable waters of
the United States, and to pass from State to State, and into foreign countries,
because over all these subjects the jurisdiction of the United States extends,
and they are covered by its laws, The privileges sugyest the immunities.
Wherever it is the duty of the United States to give protection to a citizen
against any harm, inconvenience, or deprivation, the citizen is entitled to an

CHAP. XXXVI NATURE OF THE STATE 13
i

IJ. The power of a State over all communities
within its limits is absolute. It may grant or refuse local
government as it pleases. The population of the city
of Providence is more than one-third of that of the
State of Rhode Island, the population ‘of New Yorke
city more than one-fifth that of the State of New
York. But the State might in either case extinguish
the municipality, and govern the city by a single State
commissioner appointed for the purpose, or leave it with-
out any government whatever. The city would have no
right of complaint to the Federal President or Congress
against such a measure. Massachusetts has lately re-
modelled the city government of Boston just as the
British Parliament might remodel that of Birmingham.
Let an Englishman imagine a county council for War-
wickshire suppressing the municipality of Birmingham,
or a Frenchman imagine the department of the
Rhone extinguishing the municipality of Lyons, with
no possibility of intervention by the central autho-
rity, and he will measure the difference between the
American States and the local governments of Western
Europe.

immunity which pertains to Federal citizenship. One very plain immunity
is exemption from any tax, burden, or imposition under State laws as a
condition to the enjoyment of any right or privilege under the laws of the
United States, . . . Whatever one may claim as of right under the Con-
stitution and laws of the United States by virtue of his citizenship, is a
privilege of a citizen of the United States. Whatever the Constitution
and laws of the United States entitle him tu exemption from, he may claim
an exemption in respect to. And such a right or privilege is abridged
whenever the State law interferes with any legitimate operation of Federal
authority which concerns his interest, whether it be an authority actively
exerted, or resting only in the express or implied command or assurance of
the Federal Constitution or law. But the United States can neither grant
nor secure to its citizens rights or privileges which are not expressly or by
reasonable implication placed under its jurisdiction, and all not so placed
are left to the_exclusive protection of the States.”—Cooley, Principles, pp.
245-247,

14 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART It

III. A State commands the ailegiance of its
citizens, and may punish them for treason against it.
The power has rarely been exercised, but its undoubted
legal existence had much to do with inducing the citizens
‘of the Southern States to follow their governments into
secession in 1861. They conceived themselves to owe
allegiance to the State as well as to the Union, and when
it became impossible to preserve both, because the State
had declared its secession from the Union, they might
hold the earlier and nearer authority to be paramount.
Allegiance to the State must now, since the war, be
taken to be subordinate to allegiance to the Union.
But allegiance to the State still exists; treason against
the State is still possible. One cannot think of
treason against Warwickshire or the department of the
Rhone.

These are illustrations of the doctrine which Euro-
peans often fail to grasp, that the American States
were originally in a certain sense, and still for certain
purposes remain, sovereign States. Each of the original
thirteen became sovereign when it revolted from the
mother country in 1776. By enterifig the Confederation
of 1781-88 it parted with one or two of the attributes
of sovereignty, by accepting the Federal Constitution in
1788 it subjected itself for certain specified purposes to a
central government, but claimed to retain its sovereignty
for all other purposes. That is to say, the authority of
a State is an inherent, not a delegated, authority. It
has all the powers which any independent government
can have, except such as it can be aflirmatively shown
to have stripped itself of, while the Federal Govern-
ment has only such powers as it can be affirmatively
shown to have received. To use the legal expression,
the presumption is always for a State, and the burden

CHAP. XXXVI NATURE OF THE STATE 15
vr v'r 0 0C 0”
of proof lies upon any one who denies its authority in
a particular matter.’

/What State sovereignty means and includes is a
question which incessantly engaged the most active
legal and political minds of the nation, from 1789 downy
to 1870. Some thought it paramount to the rights of
the Union. Some considered it as held in suspense by the
Constitution, but capable of reviving as soon as a State
should desire to separate from the Union. Some main-
tained that each State had in accepting the Constitu-
tion finally renounced its sovereignty, which thereafter
existed only in the sense of such an undefined domestic
legislative and administrative authority as had not been
conferred upon Congress. The conflict of these views,
which became acute in 1830 when South Carolina
claimed the right of nullification, produced Secession
and the war of 1861-65. Since the defeat of the
Secessionists, the last of these views may be deemed to
have been established, and the term “ State sovereignty ”
is now but seldom heard. Even ‘States rights” have
a different meaning from that which they had thirty
years ago.?

1 It may of course be said that as the colonies associated themselves
into a league, at the very time at which they revolted from the British
Crown, and as their foreign relations were always managed by the
authority and organs of this league, no one of them ever was for inter-
national purposes a free and independent sovereign State. This is true,
and Abraham Lincoln was in this sense justified in saying that the
Union was older than the States. But what are we to say of North
Carolina and Rhode Island, after the acceptance’of the Constitution of
1787-89 by the other eleven States? They were out of the old Con-
federation, for it had expired. They were not in the new Union, for
they refused during many months to enter it. What else can they have
been during those months except sovereign commonwealths ?

‘@ 2 States Rights was a watchword in the South for many years, In
1851 there was a student at Harvard Colleze from South Carolina who
bore the name of States Rights Gist, baptized, so to speak, into Calhoun-

ism. He rose to be a brigadier-general in the Confederate army, and fell
in the Civil War.

16 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

A European who now looks calmly back on this
tremendous controversy of tongue, pen, and sword, will
be apt to express his ideas of it in the following way.
He will remark that much of the obscurity and perplexity
arose frora confounding the sovereignty of the American
nation with the sovereignty of the Federal Government.’
The Federal Government clearly was sovereign only for
certain purposes, z.e. only in so far as it had received
specified powers from the Constitution. These powers
did not, and in a strict legal construction do not now,
abrogate the supremacy of the States. A State still
possesses one important attribute of sovereignty—im-
munity from being sued except by another State. But
the American nation which had made the Constitution,
had done so in respect of its own sovereignty, and
might well be deemed to retain that sovereignty as para-
mount to any rights of the States. The feeling of this
ultimate supremacy of the nation was what swayed
the minds of those who resisted Secession, just as the
equally well-grounded persuasion of the limited character
of the central Federal Government satisfied the conscience
of the seceding South.

The Constitution of 1789 was a compromise, and a
compromise arrived at by allowing contradictory propo-
sitions to be represented as both true. It has been
compared to the declarations made with so much energy
and precision of language in the ancient hymn Quicunque
Vult, where, however, the apparent contradiction has
always been held to seem a contradiction only because
the human intellect is unequal to the comprehension
of such profound mysteries. To every one who urged
that there were thirteen States, and therefore thirteen

1 OF course I do not mean that lawyers fell into this confusion, but
that it affected the view of the world at large.

CHAP, XXXVI NATURE OF THE STATE 17
a nt

governments, it was answered, and truly, that there was
one government, because the people were one. To every
one who declared that there was one government, it was
answered with no less truth that there were thirteen.
Thus counsel was darkened by words without knowledge 3
the question went off into metaphysics, and found no
end, in wandering mazes lost.

There was, in fact, a divergence between the technical
and the practical aspects of the question. Technically,
the seceding States had an arguable case; and if the
point had been one to be decided on the construction of
the Constitution as a court decides on the construction
of a commercial contract, they were possibly entitled to
judgment. * Practically, the defenders of the Union
stood on firmer ground, because circumstances had
changed since 1789 so as to make the nation more com-
pletely one nation than it then was, and had so involved
the fortunes of the majority which held to the Union
with those of the minority seeking to depart that the
majority might feel justified in forbidding their depar-
ture. Stripped of legal technicalities, the dispute
resolved itself intd the problem often proposed but
capable of no general solution: When is a majority
entitled to use force for the sake of retaining a
minority in the same political body with itself? To
this question, when it appears in a concrete shape,
as to the similar question when an insurrection is justi-
fiable, an answer can seldom be given beforehand. The
result decides. When treason prospers, none dare call
it treason.

The Constitution, which had rendered many ser-
vices to the American people, did them an inevitable
dis-service when it fixed their minds on the legal aspects
of the question. Law was meant to be the servant of

VOL. Il Cc

18 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART IT

politics, and must not be suffered to become the master.
A case had arisen which its formule were unfit to deal
with, a case which had to be settled on large moral and
historical grounds. It was not merely the superior
physical force of the North that prevailed ; it was the
moral forces which rule the world, forces which had
long worked against slavery, and were ordained to
save North America from the curse of hostile nations
established side by side.

The word “sovereignty,” which has in many ways
clouded the domain of public law and jurisprudence,
confused men’s minds by making them assume that there
must in every country exist, and be discoverable by legal
inquiry, either one body invested legally with supreme
power over all minor bodies, or several bodies which,
though they had consented to form part of a larger body,
were each in the last resort independent of it, and
responsible to none but themselves." They forgot that
a Constitution may not have determined where legal
supremacy shall dwell. Where the Constitution of
the United States placed it was at any rate doubtful,
so doubtful that it would have been better to drop
technicalities, and recognize the broad fact that the
legal claims of the States had become incompatible with
the historigal as well as legal claims of the nation.
In the uncertainty as to where legal right resided, it
would have been prudent to consider where physical force

1 A further confusion arises from the fact that men are apt in talking
of sovereignty to mix up legal supremacy with practical predominance.
They ought to go together, and law seeks to make them go together. But
it may happen that the person or body in whom law vests supreme
authority is unable to enforce that authority: so the legal sovereign and
the actual sovereign—that is to say, the force which will prevail in
physical conflict—are different. There is always a strongest force ; but
the force recognized by law may not be really the strongest; and of

several forces it may be impossible to tell, till they have come into
actual physical conflict, which is the strongest.

CHAP, XXXV NATURE OF THE STATE 19

resided. The South however thought herself able to
resist any physical force which the rest of the nation
might bring against her. Thus encouraged, she took
her stand on the doctrine of States Rights: and then
followed a pouring out of blood and treasure such as was
never spent on determining a point of law before, not
even when Edward III. and his successors waged war for
a hundred years to establish the claim of females to
inherit the crown of France.

What, then, do the rights of a State now include ?
Every right or power of a Government except :—

The right of secession (not abrogated in terms,
but admitted since the war to be no longer
claimable. It is expressly negatived in the
recent Constitutions of several Southern States).

Powers which the Constitution withholds from the
States (including that of intercourse with foreign
governments).

Powers which the Constitution expressly confers on
the Federal Government.

As respects some powers of the last class, however,
the States may act -concurrently with, or in default of
action by, the Federal Government. It is only from
contravention of its action that they must abstain.
And where contravention is alleged to exist, whether
legislative or executive, it is by a court of law, and, in
case the decision is in the first instance favourable to the
pretensions of the State, ultimately by a Federal court,
that the question falls to be decided."

A reference to the preceding list of what each
State may create in the way of distinct institutions
will show that these rights practically cover nearly
all the ordinary relations of citizens to one another and

1 See Chapter XXII. in Vol, 1.

20 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

to their Government." An American may, through a
long life, never be reminded of the Federal Government,
except when he votes at presidential and congressional
elections, lodges a complaint against the post-office, and
opens his trunks for a custom-house officer on the pier
at New York when he returns from a tour in Europe.
His direct taxes are paid to officials acting under
State laws. The State, or a local authority constituted
by State statutes, registers his birth, appoints his guar-
dian, pays for his schooling, gives him a share in the
estate of his father deceased, licenses him when he enters
a trade (if it be one needing a licence), marries him,
divorces him, entertains civil actions against him, de-
clares him a bankrupt, hangs him for murder. The
police that guard his house, the local boards which look
after the poor, control highways, impose water rates,
manage schools—all these derive their legal powers
from his State alone. Looking at this immense
compass of State functions, Jefferson would seem to
have been not far wrong when he said that the Federal
government was nothing more than the American de-
partment of foreign affairs. Butalthough the National
government touches the direct interests of the citizen
less than does the State government, it touches his
sentiment more. Hence the strength of his attach-
ment to the former and his interest in it must not be
measured by the frequency of his dealings with it. In
the partitionment of governmental functions between
nation and State, the State gets the most but the nation
the highest, so the balance between the two is preserved.

1 A recent American writer well observes that nearly all the grené
questions which have agitated England during the last sixty years would,
had they arisen in America, have fallen within the sphere of State legis-

lation. — Jameson, “Introduction to the Constitutional and Political
History of the States,” in Johns Hopkins University Studves,

CHAP. XXXVI NATURE OF THE STATE 21

Thus every American citizen lives in a duality of
which Europeans, always excepting the Swiss, and to
‘some extent the Germans, have no experience. He
lives under two governments and two sets of laws; he
is animated by two patriotisms and owes two allegiances”
That these should both be strong and rarely be in
conflict is most fortunate. It is the result of skilful
adjustment and long habit, of the fact that those
whose votes control the two sets of governments are the
same persons, but above all of that harmony of each set
of institutions with the other set, a harmony due to the
identity of the principles whereon both are founded,
which makes each appear necessary to the stability of
the other, the States to the nation as its basis, the
National Government to the States as their protector.

CHAPTER XXXVII
STATE CONSTITUTIONS

THE government of each of the thirty-eight States is
determined by and set forth in its Constitution, a com-
prehensive fundamental law, or rather group of laws in-
cluded in one instrument, which has been directly enacted
by the people of the State, and is capable of being re-
pealed or altered, not by their representatives, but by
themselves alone. As the Constitution of the United
States stands above Congress and out of its reach,
so the Constitution of each State stands above the
legislature of that State, cannot be, varied in any par-
ticular by Acts of the State legislature, and involves
the invalidity of any statute passed by the legislature
which a court of law may find to be inconsistent
with it.

The State Constitutions are the oldest things ‘in the
political history of America, for they are the continu-
ations and representatives of the royal colonial charters,
whereby the earliest English settlements in America
were created, and under which their several local
governments were established, subject to the authority
of the English Crown and ultimately of the British Par-:
liament. But, like most of the institutions under which
English-speaking peoples now live, they have a pedigree

CHAP, XXXVII STATE CONSTITUTIONS 23
ee a eS

which goes back to a time anterior to the discovery
of America itself. It begins with the English Trade
Guild of the middle ages, itself the child of still more
ancient corporations, dating back to the days of imperial
Rome, and formed under her imperishable law. Charters
were granted to merchant guilds in England as far back
as the days of King Henry I. Edward IV. gave an
elaborate one to the Merchant Adventurers trading
with Flanders in 1463.1 In it we may already dis-
cern the arrangements which are more fully set forth
in two later charters of greater historical interest, the
charter of Queen Elizabeth to the East India Company
in 1599, and the charter of Charles I. to the ‘“‘ Governor
and Company of the Mattachusetts Bay in Newe-
England” in 1628. Both these instruments establish
and incorporate trading companies, with power to im-
plead and be impleaded, to use a common seal, to
possess and acquire lands tenements and _heredita-
ments, with provisions for the making of ordinances
for the welfare of the company. The Massachusetts
Charter creates a frame of government consisting of a
governor, deputy-governor, and eighteen assistants (the
term still in use in many of the London city guilds), and
directs them to hold four times a year a general meeting
of the company, to be called the “ greate and generall
Court,” in which general court “ the Governor or deputie
Governor, and such of the assistants and Freemen of the
Company as shall be present, shall have full power and
authority to choose other persons ‘to be free of the
Company, and to elect and constitute such officers as
they shall thinke fitt for managing the affaires of the
saide Governor and Company, and to make Lawes and

1 See upon this subject an interesting article by Mr. Brooks Adams
in the Atlantic Monthly magazine for November 1884.

24 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

Ordinances for the Good and Welfare of the saide Com-
pany, and for the Government and Ordering of the saide
Landes and Plantasion, and the People inhabiting and
to inhabite the same, soe as such Lawes and Ordinances
be not contrary or repugnant to the Lawes and Statuts
of this our realme of England.” In 1691, the charter of
1628 having been declared forfeited in 1684, a new
one was granted by King William and Queen Mary, and
this instrument, while it retains much of the language
and some of the character of the trade guild charter,
is really a political frame of government for a colony.
The assistants receive the additional title of councillors ;
their number is raised to twenty-eight; they are to be
chosen by the general court, and the general court itself
is to consist, together with the governor and assistants,
of freeholders elected by towns or places within the
colony, the electors being persons with a forty shilling
freehold or other property worth £40. The governor is
directed to appoint judges, commissioners of oyer and
terminer, etc.; the general court receives power to
establish judicatories and courts of record, to pass laws
(being not repugnant to the laws of England), and to
provide for all necessary civil offices. An appeal from
the courts shall always be to the King in his privy
council, This is a true political Constitution.’ Under
it the colony was governed, and in the main well and
wisely governed, till 1780. Much of it, not merely its
terms, such as the name General Court, but its solid
framework, was transferred bodily to the Massachusetts

1 The oldest truly political Constitution in America is the instrument
called the Fundamental Orders of Connecticut, framed by the inhabitant®
of Windsor, Hartford, and Wethersfield in 1638, memorable year, when
the ecclesiastical revolt of Scotland saved the liberties of England. Con-
necticut was afterwards regularized by Charles II.’s charter of 1662 to
“the Governor and Company of the English colony of Connecticut.”

CHAP, XXXVII STATE CONSTITUTIONS 25

Constitution of 1780, which is now in force, and which
profoundly influenced the Convention that prepared
the Federal Constitution in 1787. Yet the charter
of 1691 is nothing but an extension and develop-
ment of the trading charter of 1628,°in which theré
already appears, as there had appeared in Edward IV.’s
charter of 1463,’ and in the East India Company’s
charter of 1599, the provision that the power of law-
giving, otherwise unlimited, should be restricted by the
terms of the charter itself, which required that every law
for the colony should be agreeable to the laws of England.
We have therefore in the three charters which I have
named, those of 1463, 1599, and 1628, as well as in that
of 1691, the essential and capital characteristic of a rigid
or supreme Constitution—viz. a frame of government
established by a superior authority, creating a subordinate
law-making body, which can do everything except violate
the terms and transcend the powers of the instrument to
which it owes its own existence. So long as the colony
remained under the British Crown, the superior authority,
which could amend or remake the frame of government,
was the British Crdéwn or Parliament. When the con-
nection with Britain was severed, that authority passed
over, not to the State legislature, which remained limited,
as it always had been, but to the people of the now
independent commonwealth, whose will speaks through
what is now the State Constitution, just as the will
of the Crown or of Parliament had spoken through the
charters of 1628 and 1691.

T have taken the case of Massachusetts as the best ex-
ample of the way in which the trading Company grows
into a colony, and the colony into a State. But some

1 The charter to the Flanders Company of 1463 forbids the making
of any law contrary to the intent of the charter, and provides that any
such law shall be null.

26 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

of the other colonies furnish illustrations scarcely less
apposite. The oldest of them all, the acorn whence the
oak of English dominion in America has sprung, the
colony of Virginia, was, by the second charter, of 1609,
tstablished undér the title of “The Treasurer and Com-
pany of Adventurers and Planters of the City of London
for the first colony in Virginia.”?

Within the period of ten years, under the last of
the Tudors and the first of the Stuarts, two trading
charters were issued to two Companies of English adven-
turers. One of these charters is the root of English
title to the East and the other to the West. One of
these Companies has grown into the Empire of India;
the other into the United States of North America. If
England had done nothing else in history, she might
trust for her fame to the work which these charters began.
And the foundations of both dominions were laid in the
age which was adorned by the greatest of all her creative
minds, and gave birth to the men who set on a solid
basis a frame of representative government which all
the free nations of the modern world have copied.

When, in 1776, the thirteen colchies threw off their
allegiance to King George III., and declared themselves
independent States, the colonial charter naturally be-
came the State Constitution.” In most cases it was

1 The phrase First colony distinguishes what afterwards became the
State of Virginia from the more northerly parts of Virginia, afterwards
called New England. The Second colony was to be Plymouth, one of the
two settlements which became Massachusetts.

2 Even in declaring herself independent, New Jersey clung to the
hope that the mother country would return to wiser counsels, and avert
the departure of her children. She added at the end of her Constitution
of 2d July 1776 the following proviso—* Provided always, and it is th
true intent and meaning of this Congress, that if a reconciliation between
Great Britain and these colonies should take place, and the latter be taken
again under the protection and government of the Crown of Britain, this
charter shall be null and void, otherwise remain firm and inviolable.”
The truth is that the colonists, till alienated by the behaviour of England,

CHAP, XXXVII STATE CONSTITUTIONS 27

remodelled, with large alterations, by the revolting
colony. But in three States it was maintained un-
changed, except, of course, so far as Crown authority
was concerned, viz. in Massachusetts till 1780, in
Connecticut till 1818, and in Rhode Island till 18423
The other twenty-five States admitted to the Union
in addition to the original thirteen, have all entered it
as organized self-governing communities, with their
Constitutions already made by their respective peoples.
Each Act of Congress which admits a new State admits
it as a subsisting commonwealth, recognizing rather than
affecting to sanction its Constitution. Congress may
impose conditions which the State Constitution must
fulfil. But the authority of the State Constitutions
does not flow from Congress, but from acceptance by the-
citizens of the States for which they are made. Of
these instruments, therefore, no less than of the Constitu-
tions of the thirteen original States, we may say that
although subsequent in date to the Federal Constitution,

had far more kindly feelings towards her than she had towards them. To
them she was the old home, to her they were simply customers. Some
interesting illustrations $f the views then entertained as to the use of
colonies may be found in the famous discussion in the fourth book of
Adam Smith’s Wealth of Nations, which appeared in 1776.

1 Rhode Island simply passed a statute by her legislature in May
1776, substituting allegiance to the colony for allegiance to the King.
Connecticut passed the following statute :—“ Be it enacted by the
Governor and Council and House of Representatives, in general court
assembled, that the ancient fourm of civil government contained in the
charter from Charles II., King of England, and adopted by the people of
this State, shall be and remain the civil Constitution of this State, under
the sole authority of the people thereof, independent of any king or prince
whatever ; and that this republic is, @nd shall for ever be and remain, a
free, sovereign, and independent State, by the name of the State of Con-

apecticut.” (Three paragraphs follow containing a short “ Bill of Rights,”
and securing to the inhabitants of any other of the United States the
same law and justice as natives of the State enjoyed.) This is all that
Connecticut thought necessary. She had possessed, as did Rhode Island
also, the right of appointing her own governor, and therefore did not need
to substitute any new authority for a royal governor.

28 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

they are, so far as each State is concerned, de jure prior
toit. Their authority over their own citizens is nowise
derived from it.’ Nor is this a mere piece of technical law.
The antiquity of the older States as separate common-
Wealths, running back into the heroic ages of the first
colonization of America and the days of the Revolutionary
War, is a potent source of the local patriotism of their
inhabitants, and gives these States a sense of historic
growth and indwelling corporate life which they could
not have possessed had they been the mere creatures of
the Federal Government.

The State Constitutions of America well deserve to
be compared with those of the self-governing British
colonies. But one remarkable difference must be noted
here. The constitutions of British colonies have all
proceeded from the Imperial Parliament of the United
Kingdom, which retains its full legal power of legislating
for every part of the British dominions. In many cases
a colonial constitution provides that it may be itself
altered by the colonial legislature, of course with the
assent of the Crown; but inasmuch as in its origin it is
a statutory constitution, not self-grown, but planted as
a shoot by the Imperial Parliament at home, Parliament

. ? Of course in practice it is possible for Congress to influence the

character of d State Constitution, because a State whose Constitution

contains provisions which Congress disapproves may he refused admission.

But since the extinction of slavery and completion of the process of
reconstruction, occasions for the exercise of such a power rarely arise.

It was used to compel the seceding States to modify their Constitutions

so as to get rid of all taint of slavery before their senators and representa-

tives were readmitted to Congress after the war. Of course Congress

is not bound to admit a community desiring to be recognized as a State.

Utah has been kept knocking at the door of the Union for many years,.
because the majority of her inhabitants lie under suspicion, aud the nation
wishes to retain for the purpose of preventing polygamy that full
control which can be exercised over a Territory but not over a State.

And sometimes a dominant party postpones the admission of a State likely

to strengthen by its vote the opposite party.

CHAP, XXXVII STATE CONSTITUTIONS 29
RE A

may always alter or abolish it. Congress, on the other
hand, has no power to alter a State constitution. And
whatever power of alteration has been granted to a
British colony is exercisable by the legislature of the
colony, not, as in America, by the citizens at large.

The original Constitutions of the States, whether of
the old thirteen or of the newer twenty-five, have been in
nearly every case subsequently recast, in some instances
five, six, or even seven times, as well as amended in par-
ticular points. Thus Constitutions of all dates are now
in force in different States, from that of Massachusetts,
enacted in 1780, but largely amended since, to that of
Florida enacted in 1886.

Every existing Constitution is the work of the
people, not of the legislature of the State. The Con-
stitutions of the revolutionary period were in a few
instances enacted by the State legislature, acting as a
body with plenary powers, but more usually by the
people acting through a Convention, t.e. a body espe-
cially chosen by the voters at large for the purpose, and
invested with full powers, not only of drafting, but of
adopting the instrfiment of government.’ But since
1792, when Kentucky framed her Constitution, the
invariable practice has been for the Convention, elected
by the voters, to submit, in accordance with the pre-

? In Rhode Island and Connecticut, as already stated, the legislature
continued the colonial Constitution as a State Constitution. In South
Carolina a body calling itself the “ Provincial Congress” claimed to be
the “General Assembly,” or legislature of the colony, and as such enacted
the Constitution, In the other revolting colonies, except Massachusetts,
Conventions or Congresses enacted the Constitution on behalf of the
people, not submitting it to the voters for ratification. In Massachusetts
‘mae Convention submitted its draft to the voters in 1780, and the voters
adopted it, a previous draft submitted by the legislature in 1778 having
been rejected. In no State would the idea of allowing a Convention to
enact a constitution as a sovereign body be now entertained.—See
Judge Jameson’s valuable book The Constitutional Convention.

30 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

cedent set by Massachusetts in 1780, the draft Con-
stitution framed by it to the citizens of the State at
large, who vote upon it Yes or No, They usually vete
on it as a whole, and adopt or reject it en bloc, but
sometimes provfsion is made for voting separately on
some particular point or points.

The people of a State retain for ever in their hands,
altogether independent of the National government, the
power of altering their Constitution. When a new
Constitution is to be prepared, or the existing one
amended, the initiative usually comes from the legislature,
which (either by a simple majority, or by a two-
thirds majority, or by a majority in two successive
legislatures, as the Constitution may in each instance
provide) submits the matter to the voters in one
of two ways. It may either propose to the people
certain specific amendments,! or it may ask the people
to decide by a direct popular vote on the propriety of
calling a constitutional Convention to revise the whole
existing Constitution. In the former case the amend-
ments suggested by the legislature are directly voted on
by the citizens; in the latter the lefislature, so soon as
the citizens have voted for the holding of a convention,
provides for the election by the people of this convention.
When elected, the Convention meets, sets to work, goes
through the old Constitution, and prepares a new one,
which is then presented to the people for ratification or
rejection at the polls. Only in the little State of Dela-
ware is the function of amending the Constitution still
left to the legislature without the subsequent ratifica-
tion of a popular vote, subject, however, to the pro,

1 In Kentucky and New Hampshire the legislature has no power to
propose amendments, In some States it can do so only after stated in-
tervals, e.g. of five years.

CHAP, XXXVII STATE CONSTITUTIONS 31

vision that changes must be passed by two successive
legislatures, and must have been put before the people
at*the election of members for the second. Some States
provide for the submission to the people at fixed in-
tervals, of seven, ten, sixteen, or twenty years, of thé
propriety of calling a convention to revise the Con-
stitution, so as to secure that the attention of the
people shall be drawn to the question whether their
scheme of government ought or ought not to be changed.
Be it observed, however, that whereas the Federal Con-
stitution can be amended only by a vote of three-fourths
of the States, a Constitution can in nearly every State
be changed by a bare majority of the citizens voting
at the polls. Hence we may expect, and shall find,
that these instruments are altered more frequently and
materially than the Federal Constitution has been.

A State Constitution is not only independent of the
central national government (save in certain points
already specified), it is also the fundamental organic
law of the State itself. The State exists as a common-
wealth by virtue of its Constitution, and all State

eae . e. . . os
authorities, legislative, executive, and judicial, are
the creatures of, and subject to, the State Constitution.’

1 Sometimes, however, an absolute majority of all the qualified voters
is required. In Rhode Island (where the voting is in town and ward
meetings) a three-fifths majority is needed, and in South Carolina the
ratification of the next elected legislature by a two-thirds majority in each
House is necessary. In Kentucky and Delaware the proposal to calla
convention must be approved by a majority of all the voters. Delaware
having during several years failed in the attempt to amend her Constitution
(of 1831) by the legislature, fell back, in 1887, on the proposal to hold a
constitutional convention, but could not secure a sufficiently large vote.

2 Some details as to the provisions of State Constitutiuns, and obser-
ations on a few of them, may be found in the following works :—Stimson’s
American Statute Law, Hitchcock’s American State Constitutions (in Messrs,
Putnam’s “ Useful Questions of the Day ” Series) ; Davis’s ‘‘ American Con-

stitutions,” in Johns Hopkins University Studies ; and the article “States”
in the American Cyclopedia of Political Science. Of course the great

32 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

Just as the President and Congress are placed beneath
the Federal Constitution, so the Governor and Houses of
a State are subject to its Constitution, and any act*of
theirs done either in contravention of its provisions, or
tn excess of the*powers it confers on them, is absolutely
void. All that has been said in preceding chapters
regarding the functions of the courts of law where an
Act of Congress is alleged to be inconsistent with the
Federal Constitution, applies equally where a statute
passed by a State legislature is alleged to transgress the
Constitution of the State, and of course such validity may
be contested in any court, whether a State court or a
Federal court, because the question is an ordinary
question of law, and is to be solved by determining
whether or no a law of inferior authority is inconsistent
with a law of superior authority. Whenever in any legal
proceeding before any tribunal, either party relies on a
State statute, and the other party alleges that this statute
is ultra vires of the State legislature, and therefore void,
the tribunal must determine the question just as it
would determine whether a bye- law made by a muni-
cipal council or a railway company was in excess of
the law-making power which the muncipality or the
company had received from the higher authority which
incorporated it and gave it such lepialative power as
it possesses. But although Federal courts are fully
competent to entertain a question arising on the con-

authority is the collection of the State Constitutions, embracing all that
have been duly enacted since 1776, in the two thick quarto volumes
entitled Federal and State Constitutions, published under the authority of
Congress by Ben. Perley Poore, 2 vols., Washington, 1878. It is much
to be wished that an annual or biennial supplement to Poore’s collectingp
should be officially published, containing all the new constitutions and
constitutional amendments, At present it is very difficult, especially for
a resident in Europe, to ascertain exactly how the constitution of each
State stands ; and I ask indulgence for any errors into which I may, owing
to this difficulty, have fallen.

CHAP, XXXVII STATE CONSTITUTIONS 33
a a i a SS

struction of a State Constitution, their practice is to
fullow the precedents set by any decision of a court of
the State in question, just as they would follow the
‘decision of an English court in determining a point of
purely English law. They hold not only that each,
State must be assumed to know its own law better than
a stranger can, but also that the supreme court of a State
is the authorized exponent of the mind of the people
who enacted its Constitution.

A State Constitution is really nothing but a law
made directly by the people voting at the polls upon
a draft submitted to them. The people of a State
when they so vote act as a primary and constituent
assembly, just as if they were all summoned to meet
in one place like the folkmoots of our Teutonic fore-
fathers. It is only their numbers that prevent them
from so meeting in one place, and oblige the vote to
be taken at a variety of polling places. Hence the
enactment of a Constitution is an exercise of direct
popular sovereignty to which we find few parallels in
modern Europe, though it was familiar enough to the
republics of antiquity, and has lasted till now in some
of the cantons of Switzerland.’

The importance of this character of a State Con-
stitution as a popularly-enacted law, overriding every
minor State law, becomes all the greater when the con-
tents of these Constitutions are examined. Europeans
conceive of a constitution as an instrument, usually a
short instrument, which creates a frame of government,
defines its departments and powers, and declares the

1 See the interesting remarks on the Swiss Landesgemeinde in Mr.
Freeman’s Comparative Politics. Nowadays, however, the Landesgemeinde
(which survive only in Uri, Unterwalden, Glarus, and Appenzell) do not

act as constituent or constitution-enacting hodies, though they still directly
legislate.

VOL. If D

34 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

“primordial rights” of the subject or citizen as against
the rulers. An American State Constitution does this,
but does more; and in most cases, infinitely more.
It deals with a variety of topics which in Europe
«vould be left to the ordinary action of the legislature,
or of administrative authorities; and it pursues these
topics into a minute detail hardly to be looked for in a
fundamental instrument. Some of these details will be
mentioned presently. Meantime I will sketch in outline
the frame and contents of the more recent constitutions,
reserving for next chapter remarks on the differences of
type between those of the older and those of the newer
States.

A normal Constitution consists of five parts :—

I. The definition of the boundaries of the State.
(This does not occur in the case of the older States.)

II. The so-called Bill of Rights—an enumeration
(whereof more anon) of the citizens’ primordial rights
to liberty of person and security of property. This
usually stands at the beginning of the Constitution, but
occasionally at the end.

III. The frame of governmefit—z.e. the names
functions and powers of the executive officers, the
legislative bodies, and the courts of justice. This
occupies several articles.

IV. Miscellaneous provisions relating to administra-
tion and law, including articles treating of schools, of
the militia, of taxation and revenue, of the public debts,
of local government, of State prisons and hospitals, of
agriculture, of labour, of impeachment, and of the
method of amending the Constitution, besides othgr
matters, to be mentioned presently, still less political in
their character. The order in which these occur differs
in different instruments, and there are some in which

CHAP, XXXVII STATE CONSTITUTIONS 35

some of the above topics are not mentioned at all. The
more recent Constitutions and those of the newer States
are much fuller on these points.

V. The Schedule, which contains provisions relating
to the method of submitting the Constitution to the vote
of the people, and arrangements for the transition from
the previous Constitution to the new one which is to
be enacted by that vote. Being of a temporary nature,
the schedule is not strictly a part of the Constitution.

The Bill of Rights is historically the most interesting
part of these Constitutions, for it is the legitimate child
and representative of Magna Charta, and of those other
declarations and enactments, down to the Bill of Rights
of the Act of 1 William and Mary, session 2, by which
the liberties of Englishmen have been secured. Most of
the thirteen colonies when they asserted their independ-
ence and framed their Constitutions inserted a declaration
of the fundamental rights of the people, and the example
then set has been followed by the newer States, and,
indeed, by the States generally in their most recent Con-
stitutions. Considering that all danger from the exercise
of despotic power- upon the people of the States by
the executive has long since vanished, their executive
authorities being the creatures of popular vote and now-
adays rather too weak than too strong, it may excite
surprise that these assertions of the rights and immuni-
ties of the individual citizen as against the government
should continue to be repeated in the instruments of
to-day. A reason may be found in the remarkable con-
stitutional conservatism of the Americans, and in their
fondness for the enunciation of the general maxims of
political freedom. But it is also argued that these
declarations of principle have a practieal value, as
asserting the rights of individuals and of minorities

36 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

against arbitrary conduct by a majority in the legislature,
which might, in the absence of such provisions, be tempted
at moments of excitement to suspend the ordinary law
and arm the magistrates with excessive powers. They
are therefore, it is held, still safeguards against tyranny ;
and they serve the purpose of solemnly reminding a
State legislature and its officers of those fundamental
principles which they ought never to overstep.1 Al-
though such provisions certainly do restrain a State
legislature in ways which the British Parliament would
find inconvenient, few complaints of practical evils
thence arising are heard.

A general notion of these Bills of Rights may be
gathered from the Constitution of the State of Cali-
fornia (1879), printed in the Appendix to this volume.
I may mention, in addition, a few curious provisions
which occur in some of them.

All provide for full freedom of religious opinion and
worship, and for the equality before the law of all
religious denominations and their members; and many
forbid the establishment of any particular church or sect,
and declare that no public money ouSht to be applied in
aid of any religious body or sectarian institution. But
Delaware holds it to be “the duty of all men frequently
to assemble for public worship;” and Vermont adds
that “every sect or denomination of Christians ought
to observe the Sabbath or Lord’s Day.” And thirteen
States declare that the provisions for freedom of con-
science are not to be taken to excuse acts of licentious-
ness, or justify practices inconsistent with the peace
and safety of the State.’

1 The influence of the Declaration of Independence of 1776 is of
course perceptible in them all.

2 In Arkansas, Maryland, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina,
and Texas, a man is declared ineligible for office if he denies the existence

CHAP, XXXVII STATE CONSTITUTIONS 37

Louisiana (Constitution of 1879) declares that “all
government of right originates with the people, is founded
on their will alone, and is institutéd solely for the good of
the whole, deriving its just powers from the consent of the
governed. Its only legitimate end is to ptotect the citizerf
in the enjoyment of life, liberty, and property. When it
assumes other functions, it is usurpation and oppression.”

Twenty-six States declare that “all men have a
natural, inherent, and inalienable right to enjoy and
defend life and liberty;” and all of these, except the
melancholy Missouri, add, the ‘‘ natural right to pursue
happiness.”

Eighteen declare that all men have “a natural right
to acquire, possess, and protect property.”

Mississippi (Constitution of 1868) provides that
“the right of all citizens to travel upon public convey-
ances shall not be infringed upon nor in any manner
abridged.” A similar provision occurs in the Constitution
of Louisiana of 1868."

Kentucky (Constitution of 1850, which is still in
force) lays down “that absolute arbitrary power over
the lives, liberty,” and property of freemen exists
nowhere in a republic, not even in the largest majority.
The right of property is before and higher than any
constitutional sanction; and the right of the owner
of a slave to such slave and its increase is the
same and as inviolable as the right of the owner of
any property whatever.” All power is inherent in the

of God; in Pennsylvania and Tennessee he is ineligible if he does not
believe in God, and in the existence of future rewards and punishments.
In Arkansas and Maryland such a person is also incompetent as a witness
@ juror.

1 These provisions were inserted shortly after the Civil War in
order to protect the negroes.

2 This proposition has of course been annulled, in effect, by the
latest amendments (xiii. xiv. xv.) to the Federal Constitution.

38 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

people, and all free governments are founded on their
authority, and instituted for their peace, safety, happi-
ness, and security, and the protection of property.”

All in one form or another secure the freedom of
‘writing and speaking opinions; and some add that the
truth of a libel may be given in evidence.

Nearly all secure the freedom of public meeting
and petition. Considering that these are the last rights
likely to be infringed by a State government, it is odd
to find Florida in her Constitution of 1886 providing
that “the pedple shall have the right to assemble
together to consult for the common good, to instruct
their representatives, and to petition the legislature for
redress of grievances.”

Many provide that no ex post facto law, nor law im-
pairing the obligation of a contract, shall be passed by
the State legislature; and that private property shall
not be taken by the State without just compensation.

Many forbid the creation of any title of nobility.

Many declare that the right of citizens to bear
arms shall never be denied, a provision which might
be expected to prove inconvenient where it was
desired to check the habit of carrying revolvers.
Tennessee therefore (Constitution of 1870) prudently
adds that “the legislature shall have power to regulate
the wearing of arms, with a view to prevent crime.” So
also Texas, where such a provision is certainly not
superfluous. And five others’ allow the legislature to
forbid the carrying of concealed weapons.

Some declare that the estates of suicides shall descend
in the ordinary course of law.

1 North Carolina, Kentucky, Missouri, Louisiana, and Colorado, all
States in which daily experience shows that the action of the legislature
has not proved successful.

CHAP, XXXVII STATE CONSTITUTIONS 39

Most provide that conviction for treason shall not
work corruption of blood nor forfeiture of estate.

Seven forbid white and coloured children to be
taught in the same public schools.

Many declare the right of trial by jury to be inviolate
even while permitting the parties to waive it.

Some forbid imprisonment for debt, except in case
of fraud, and secure the acceptance of reasonable bail,
except for the gravest charges.

Several declare that ‘“ perpetuities and monopolies
are contrary to the genius of a free State, and ought not
to be allowed.”

Some declare that aliens or foreigners shall have
the same rights of holding property as citizens.

Many forbid the granting of any hereditary honours,
privileges, or emoluments.

North Carolina declares that ‘as political rights and
privileges are not dependent upon or modified by pro-
perty, therefore no property qualification ought to affect
the right to vote or hold office;” and also, “secret
political societies are dangerous to the liberties of a free
people, and should “not be tolerated.”

Massachusetts sets forth, as befits a Puritan State,
high moral views: “A frequent recurrence to the funda-
mental principles of the Constitution, and a constant
adherence to those of piety, justice, moderation, temper-
ance, industry, and frugality, are absolutely necessary to
preserve the advantages of liberty and to maintain a free
government. The people ought consequently to have
a particular attention to all those principles in the choice
of their officers and representatives, and they have a
right to require of their law-givers and magistrates an
exact and constant observance of them.”

New York (Constitution of 1846) provides: “All

40 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

lands within this State are declared to be allodial, so
that, subject only to the liability to escheat, the entire
and absolute property is vested in the owners, according
to the nature of their respective estates.”

Maryland (Constitution of 1867) declares that “a
long continuance in the executive departments of power
or trust is dangerous to liberty; a rotation, therefore,
in those departments is one of the best securities of per-
manent freedom.” She also pronounces all gifts for any
religious purpose (except of a piece of land not exceeding
five acres for a place of worship, parsonage, or burying-
ground) to be void unless sanctioned by the legislature.

These instances, a few out of many, may suffice to
show how remote from the common idea of a Bill of
Rights, are some of the enactments which find a place
under that heading. The constitution makers seem to
have inserted here such doctrines or legal reforms as
seemed to them matters of high import or of wide
application, especially when they could find no suit-
able place for them elsewhere in the instrument.

Of the articles of each State Constitution which
contain the frame of State government it will be
more convenient to speak in the chapters which
describe the mechanism and character of the govern-
ments and administrative systems of the several States.
I pass on therefore to what have been classed as
the Miscellaneous Provisions. These are of great
interest as revealing the spirit and tendencies of
popular government in America, the economic and
social condition of the country, the mischiefs that have
arisen, the remedies applied to these mischiefs, the,
ideas and beliefs of the people in matters of legislation.

Among such provisions we find a great deal of
matter which is in no distinctive sense constitutional

CHAP, XXXVII STATE CONSTITUTIONS 4!

—!

law, but general law, e.g. administrative law, the law of
judicial procedure, the ordinary private law of family,
inheritance, contract, and so forth; matter therefore
which seems out of place in a constitution because fit
to be dealt with in ordinary statutes. We find minuté
provisions regarding the management and _ liabilities
of banking companies, of railways, or of corporations
generally ; regulations as to the salaries of officials, the
quorum of courts sitting in banco, the length of time
for appealing, the method of changing the venue, the
publication of judicial reports; detailed arrangements
for school boards and school taxation (with rules
regarding the separation of white and black children in
schools), for a department of agriculture, a canal board,
or a labour bureau; we find a prohibition of lotteries,
of bribery, of the granting of liquor licences, of
usurious interest on money, an abolition of the distinc-
tion between sealed and unsealed instruments, a declara-
tion of the extent of a mechanic’s lien for work done.
We even find the method prescribed in which stationery
and coals for the use of the legislature shall be con-
tracted for, and provisions for fixing the rates which
may be charged for the storage of corn in warehouses.
The framers of these more recent constitutions have
in fact neither wished nor cared to draw a line of
distinction between what is proper for a constitution
and what ought to be left to be dealt with by the
State legislature. And, in the case of three-fourths at
least of the States, no such distinction now, in fact,
exists.

How is this confusion to be explained? Four
reasons may be suggested.

The Aievions like the English, have no love
for scientific arrangement. Although the Constitutions

42 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

have been drafted by lawyers, and sometimes by the
best lawyers of each State, logical classification and dis-
crimination have not been sought after.

The people found the enactment of a new Constitu-
tion a convenient opportunity for enunciating doctrines
they valued and carrying through reforms they desired.
It was a simpler and quicker method than waiting for
legislative action, so, when there was a popular demand
for the establishment of an institution, or for some
legal change, this was shovelled into the new Constitu-
tion and enactéd accordingly.

The peoples of the States have come to distrust
their respective legislatures. Hence they desire not only
to do a thing forthwith and in their own way rather
than leave it to the chance of legislative action, but
to narrow as far as they conveniently can (and sometimes
farther) the sphere of the legislature.

There is an unmistakable wish in the minds of the
people to act directly rather than through their repre-
sentatives in legislation. This sentiment is characteristic
of democracies everywhere. The same conscious relish
for power which leads some democracies to make their
representatives mere delegates, finds a further develop-
ment in passing by the representatives, and setting the
people itself;to make and repeal laws.

Those who have read the chapters describing the
growth and expansion of the Federal Constitution, will
naturally ask how far the remarks there made apply to
the Constitutions of the several States.

These instruments have less capacity for develop-
ment, whether by interpretation or by usage, than the
Constitution of the United States: firstly, because they
are more easily, and therefore more frequently, amended
or recast ; secondly, because they are far longer, and go

CHAP, XXXVII STATE CONSTITUTIONS 43

into much more minute detail. The Federal Constitution
is so brief and general that custom must fill up what it
has left untouched, and judicial construction evolve the
application of its terms to cases they do not expressly deal
with. But the later State Constitutioxis are so full ang
precise that they need little in the way of expansive
construction, and leave comparatively little room for the
action of custom.

The rules of interpretation are in the main the same
as those applied to the Federal Constitution. One im-
portant difference must, however, be noted, springing
from the different character of the two governments.
The National Government is an artificial creation, with
no powers except those conferred by the instrument
which created it. A State Government is a natural
growth, which prima facie possesses all the powers
incident to any government whatever. Hence, if the
question arises whether a State legislature can pass
a law on a given subject, the presumption is that it
can do so: and positive grounds must be adduced
to prove that it cannot. It may be restrained by
some inhibition either in the Federal Constitution, or in
the Constitution of its own State. But such inhibition
must be affirmatively shown to have been imposed, or, to
put the same point in other words, a State Constitution is
held to be, not a document conferring defined and speci-
fied powers on the legislature, but one regulating and
limiting that general authority which the represen-
tatives of the people enjoy ipso jure by their organization
into a legislative body.

“Tt has never been questioned that the American
legislatures have the same unlimited power in regard to
legislation which resides in the British Parliament,
except where they are restrained by written Constitu-

44 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

tions. That must be conceded to be a fundamental
principle in the political organization of the American
States. We cannot well comprehend how, upon prin-
ciple, it could be otherwise. The people must, of course,
possess all legislative power originally. They have
committed this in the most general and unlimited
manner to the several State legislatures, saving only
such restrictions as are imposed by the Constitu-
tion of the United States or of the particular State in
question.”

“The people, in framing the Constitution, committed
to the legislature the whole law-making powers of
the State which they did not expressly or impliedly
withhold. Plenary power in the legislature, for all
purposes of civil government, is the rule. A pro-
hibition to exercise a particular power is an excep-
tion.”?

It must not, however, be supposed from these dicta
that even if the States were independent common-
wealths, the Federal Government having disappeared,
their legislatures would enjoy anything approaching the
omnipotence of the British Parliament, “whose power
and jurisdiction is,” says Sir Edward Coke, “so trans-
cendent and absolute that it cannot be confined, either
for persons or ;causes, within any bounds.” “All mis-
chiefs and grievances,” adds Blackstone, “ operations and
remedies that transcend the ordinary course of the laws
are within the reach of this extraordinary tribunal.”
Parliament being absolutely sovereign, can command,
or extinguish and swallow up the executive and the
judiciary, appropriating to itself their functions. But

1 Redfield, C.-J., in 27 Vermont Reports, p. 142, quoted by Cooley,
Constit. Limit., p. 108.

2 Denio, C.-J., in 15 N. Y. Reports, p. 543, quoted by Cooley, ibid.
p. 107.

CHAP. XXXVII STATE CONSTITUTIONS 45

in America, a legislature is a legislature and nothing
more. The same instrument which creates it creates
.alse the executive governor and the judges. They hold
by a title as good as its own. If the legislature should
pass a law depriving the governor of an*executive func~
tion conferred by the Constitution, that law would be
void. If the legislature attempted to interfere with the
jurisdiction of the courts, their action would be even
more palpably illegal and ineffectual.’

The executive and legislative departments of a State
government have of course the right and duty of acting
in the first instance on their view of the meaning of the
Constitution. But the ultimate expounder of that
meaning is the judiciary; and when the courts of a
State have solemnly declared the true construction of
any provision of the Constitution, all persons are bound
to regulate their conduct accordingly. As was observed
in considering the functions of the Federal judiciary
(Chapter XXIII.), this authority of the American courts
ig not in the nature of a political or discretionary
power vested in them; it is a legitimate and necessary
consequence of the® existence of a fundamental law
superior to any statute which the legislature may enact,’
or to any right which a governor may conceive him-

1 Jt has, for instance, been held that a State legislature cannot em-
power election boards to decide whether a person has by duelling forfeited
his right to vote or hold office, this inquiry being judicial and proper
only for the regular tribunals of the State.—Cooley, Constit, Limit., p. 112.
Acts passed by leyislatures affecting some judicial decision already given,
have repeatedly been held void by the Courts They would be doubly void
as also transgressing the Federal Constitution.

2 In Switzerland, however, the cantonal courts have not, except
perhaps in Uri, the right to declare invalid a law made by a cantonal
legislature, the legislature being apparently deemed the judge of its own
powers. A cantonal law may, however, be quashed, in some cases, by the
Federal Council, or pronounced invalid by the Federal Court, See an
interesting discussion of the question in Dubs, Das oeffentliche Recht der
Schweizerischen Eidyenossenschaft, Part I. p. 113.

46 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

self to possess, To quote the words of an American
decision :—

“In exercising this high authority the judges claim.
no judicial supremacy ; they are only the administrators
‘of the public will. If an Act of the legislature i is held
void, it is not because the judges have any control over
the legislative power, but because the Act is forbidden by
the Constitution, and because the will of the people,
which is therein declared, is paramount to that of their
representatives expressed in any law.”?

It is a well-established rule that the judges will
always lean in favour of the validity of a legislative
Act; that if there be a reasonable doubt as to the con-
stitutionality of a statute they will solve that doubt in
favour of the statute; that where the legislature has
been left a discretion they will assume the discretion to
have been wisely exercised ; that where the construction
of a statute is doubtful, they will adopt such con-
struction as will harmonize with the Constitution, and
enable it to take effect. So it has been well observed
that a man might with perfect consistency argue as a
member of a legislature against 2 bill on the ground
that it is unconstitutional, and after having been ap-
pointed a judge, might in his judicial capacity sustain
its constitutionality. Judges must not inquire into
the motives of the legislature, nor refuse to apply an Act
because they may suspect that it was obtained by
fraud or corruption, still less because they hold it to be
opposed to justice and sound policy.? “But when a

1 Quoted by Cooley, Constit. Limit, p. 195, from 2 Bay, 61.

2 “A court cannot declare a statute unconstitutional and void sol-ly
on the ground of unjust and oppressive provisions, or because it is
supposed to violate the natural, social, or political rivlts of the citizen,
unless it can Le shown that such injustice is prohibited, or such rights
guaranteed or protected, by the Constitution. . . . In a case decided in

CHAP, XXXVII STATE CONSTITUTIONS 47

statute 1s adjudged to be unconstitutional, it is as if
it had never been. Rights cannot be built up under
its contracts which depend upon it for their considera-
tion are void; it constitutes a protection to no one
who has acted under it; and no one tan be punished
for having refused obedience to it before the decision was
made. And what is true of an Act void in toto, is true
also as to any part of an Act which is found to be un-
constitutional, and which consequently is to be regarded
as having never at any time been possessed of legal
force.” ?

It may be thought, and the impression will be

the supreme court of New York, one of the judges said, ‘The in-
habitants of New York have a vested right in the City Hall, markets,
water-works, ferries, and other public property, which cannot be taken
from them any more than their individual dwellings. Their rights
rest not merely upon the Constitution, but upon the great principles of
eternal justice which lie at the foundation of all free governments.’ The
great principles of eternal justice which affected the particular case had
been incorporated in the Constitution, and it therefore became unnecessary
to consider what would otherwise have been the rule; nor do we under-
-stand the court as intimating any opinion upon that subject. It was
sufficient for the case to find that the principles of right and justice had
been recognized and protected by the Constitution.”—Cvoley, pp. 200, 202.
Mr. Theodore Bacon of Rochester, New York, writes to me: “In the
case of Gardner v. The Village of Newburg (Johnson’s Chanery Reports,
N. Y. 162), the New York legislature had authorized the village to supply
itself with water from a stream, but had made no provision for indemni-
fying the owners of lands through which the stream flowed for the injury
they must suffer from the diversion of the water. The Constitution of
New York at that time contained no provision prohibiting the taking of
private property for public use without compensation ; notwithstanding this,
Chancellor Kent restrained the village from proceeding upon the broad
general principle which he found in Magna Charta, in a statutory Bill of
Rights, which of course could not control the legislature, and in Grotius
Putfendorf and Bynkershoek. He referred also to a like provision in
the Constitution of the United States, which, however, although expres-
sive of the sentiment of the nation, was intended to apply only to the
¥ederal Government. I believe, however, that this case is quite excep-
tional ; and notwithstanding the very great authority of Chancellor Kent,
I apprehend that Judge Cooley’s statement would probably now be gener-
ally accepted.”
1 Cooley, Constit, Limit., p. 227.

48 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

confirmed when we consider as well the minuteness of
the State Constitutions as the profusion of State legisla-
tion and the inconsiderate haste with which it is passed,
that as the risk of a conflict between the Constitution
und statytes is great, so the inconveniences of a system
under which the citizens cannot tell whether their
obedience is or is not due to a statute must be serious.
How is a man to know whether he has really acquired
a right under a statute? how is he to learn whether to
conform his conduct to it or not? How is an investor
to judge if he may safely lend money which a statute
has empowered a community to borrow, when the statute
may be itself subsequently overthrown ?

To meet these difficulties some State Constitutions?
provide that the judges of the supreme court of the
State may be called upon by the governor or either
house of the legislature to deliver their opinions upon
questions of law, without waiting for these questions to
arise and be determined in an ordinary lawsuit between
parties.? This expedient seems a good one, for it procures

1 Massachusetts, Maine, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, and Florida.
In Vermont a similar power is given by statute. In Florida it is only
the governor to whom the power has been given, and whereas under the
Constitution of 1868 he could obtain the opinion of the justices “ upon
any point of law,” he can by the Constitution of 1886 require it only
me upon any question affecting his executive powers and duties.” A similar
provision was inserted in the Constitution of Missouri of 1865, but omitted
in the revised (and now operative) Constitution of 1875, apparently because
the judges had so often refused to give their advice when asked for it by
a house of the legislature, that there seemed little use in retaining the
enactment. In the other States the judges have apparently always con-
sented to answer, save on one or two occasions in Massachusetts. See on
the whole sulject an interesting pamphlet by Mr. J. B, Thayer, of the
Harvard University Law School.

2 The judges of the supreme court of Massachusetts suggest in theig
very learned and instructive opinion, delivered to the legislature, Decem-
ber 31, 1878, that this provision, which appears first in the Massachu-
setts Constitution of 1780, and was doubtless borrowed thence by the
other States, “evidently had in view the usage of the English Constitu-

CHAP, XXXVII STATE CONSTITUTIONS 49

a judicial and non-partisan interpretation, and procures
it at once before rights or interests have been created.
Bué it is open to the objection that the opinions so pro-
nounced by judges are given before cases have arisen
which show how in fact a statute is wotking, and what*
points it may raise; and that in giving them the judges
have not, as in contested lawsuits, the assistance of
counsel arguing for their respective clients. And this
is perhaps the reason why in most of the States where
the provision exists, the judges have declared that they
act under it in a purely advisory capacity, and that
their deliverances are to be deemed merely expressions
of opinion, not binding upon them should the point
alterwards arise in a lawsuit involving the rights of
parties.!

The highest court of a State may depart from a
view it has previously laid down, even in a legal
proceeding, regarding the construction of the Constitu-
tion, that is to say, it has a legal right to do so if
convinced that the former view was wrong. But it .
is reluctant to do so, because such a course unsettles
the law and impaifs the respect felt for the bench.
And there is less occasion for it to do so than in the
tion, by which the King as well as the House of Lords, whether acting
in their judicial or in their legislative capacity, had the right to
demand the opinion of the twelve judges of England.” This is still
sometimes done by the House of Lords; but the opinions of the judyes
80 given are not necessarily followed by that House, and thourh always
teported are not deemed to be binding pronouncements of law similar to
the decisions of a court,

1 Mr. Thayer shows, by an examination of the reported instances,
that in Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and Rhode Island, as also in
Missouri from 1865 to 1875, the courts held that their opinions rendered
uader these provisions of the State Constitutions were not to be deemed
judicial determinatiuns, equal in authority to decisions given in actual
litigation, but were rather prima fucie impressions, which the judges ought
not to hold themselves bound by, when subsequently required to deter-
mine the same point in an action or other legal proceeding.

VOL. I E

ixe) THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

parallel case of the supreme Federal court, because
as the process of amending a State Constitution is
simpler and speedier than that of altering the Federal
Constitution, a remedy can be more easily applied to:
‘any mistake which the State judiciary has committed.
This unwillingness to unsettle the Jaw goes so far
that State courts have sometimes refused to disturb
a practice long acquiesced in by the legislature, which
they have nevertheless declared they would have pro-
nounced unconstitutional had it come before them while
still new.

CHAPTER XXXVIII
THE DEVELOPMENT OF STATE CONSTITUTIONS

It was observed in last chapter that the State Consti-
tutions furnish invaluable materials for history. Their
interest is all the greater, because the succession
of Constitutions and amendments to Constitutions
from 1776 till to-day enables the annals of legislation
and political sentiment to be read in these documents
more easily and succinctly than in any similar series of
laws in any other country. They are a mine of instruc-
tion for the natural history of democratic communities.
Their fulness and minuteness make them, so to speak,
more pictorial than the Federal Constitution. They
tell us more about the actual methods and conduct of the
government than it does. If we had similar materials
concerning the history of as many Greek republics during
the ages of Themistocles and Pericles, we could rewrite
the history of Greece. Some things, however, even these
elaborately minute documents do not tell us. No one
could gather from them what were the modes of doing
business in the State legislatures, and how great a part the
gystem of committees plays there. No one could learn
what manner of men constitute those bodies and deter-
mine their character. No one would know that the
whole machinery is worked by a restlessly active party

52 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

organization. Nevertheless they are so instructive as
records of past movements, and as an index to the
present tendencies of American democracy, that. I
heartily regret that the space at my disposal permits
fhe to make only a sparing use of the materials which
I gathered during many months spent in studying the
one hundred and five Constitutions enacted since the
Declaration of Independence.’

Three periods may be distinguished in the develop-
ment of State Governments as set forth in the Constitu-
tions, each period marked by an increase in the length
and minuteness of those instruments.

The first period covers about thirty years from 1776
downwards, and includes the earlier Constitutions of the
original thirteen States, as well as of Kentucky, Vermont,
Tennessee, and Ohio.

Most of these Constitutions were framed under the
impressions of the Revolutionary War. They manifest
a dread of executive power and of military power,
together with a disposition to leave everything to the
legislature, as being the authority directly springing
from the people.? The election of a State governor
is in most States vested in the legislature. He is
nominally assisted, but in reality checked, by a council

t

1 I venture again to commend the study of these constitutions to the
philosophic inquirer into what may be called the science of comparative
politics, Both among the pre-Revolutionary charters and the State
constitutions he will find matter full of instruction. Among the former
I may refer expecially to the Frame of Government of Pennsylvania,
1682 and 1683, and to the Fundamental Constitutions of Carolina of 1669.
These last were framed by John Locke, and revised by the first Lord
Shaftesbury. They were found unsuitable, were only partially put in
force, and were abrogated by the proprietors in 1693, but they are nowe
the less interesting to the student of history on that account.

2 See the remarkable passage in the Federalist, Nos xlvi. and
xlvii, which by examining the structure of the State Governments,
shows the preduminance of the legislature.

cuar, xxxvi1l DEVELOPMENT OF CONSTITUTIONS 53

not of his own choosing. He has not (except in Massa-
chusetts) a veto on the Acts of the legislature. He has
not, like the royal. governors of colonial days, the right
of adjourning or dissolving it. The idea of giving
power to the people directly has scarcely appeared?
because the legislature is conceived as the natural and
necessary organ of popular government, much as the
House of Commons is in England. And hence many
of these early Constitutions consist of little beyond an
elaborate Bill of Rights and a comparatively simple
outline of a frame of government, establishing a repre-
sentative legislature,’ with a few executive officers and
courts of justice carefully separated therefrom.

The second: period covers the first half of the present
century down to the time when the intensity of the party
struggles over slavery (1850-60) interrupted to some ex-
tent the natural processes of State development. It is
a period of the democratization of all institutions, a de-
mocratization due not only to causes native to American
soil, but to the influence upon the generation which had
then come to manhood of French republican ideas, an
influence which declined after 1815 and ended with
1851, since which time French examples and ideas
have counted for very little. Such provisions for
the maintenance of religious institutions by the
State as had continued to exist are now swept away.
The principle becomes established that constitutions
must be directly enacted by popular vote. The choice
of a governor is taken from the legislature to be given

1 The wide powers of these early legislatures are witnessed to by the
far which prudent statesmen entertained of their action. Madison said, in
the Philadelphia Convention of 1787, “Experience proves a tendency in
our governments to throw all power into the legislative vortex. The
executives of the States are little more than ciphers ; the legislatures are

omnipotent.” How they might abuse this power the caxe of Rhode Island
showed.

54 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

to the people. Property qualifications are abolished,
and a suffrage practically universal, except that it often
excludes free persons of colour, is introduced. Even.
the judges are not spared. Many Constitutions shorten
‘their term of office, and direct them to be chosen
by popular vote. The State has emerged from the
English conception of a community acting through a
ruling legislature, for the legislature begins to be regarded
as being only a body of agents exercising delegated
and restricted powers, and obliged to recur to the sover-
eign people (by asking for a constitutional amendment)
when it seeks to extend these powers in any particular
direction. The increasing length of the constitutions
during this half century shows how the range of the
popular vote has extended, for these documents now
contain a mass of ordinary law on matters which in
the early days would have been left to the legislatures,
In the third period, which begins from about the
time of the Civil War, aslight reaction may be discerned,
not against popular sovereignty, which is stronger than
ever, but in the tendency to strengthen the executive
and judicial departments. The governor had begun to
receive in the second period, and has now in every State
but four, a veto on the acts of the legislature. His tenure
of office has been generally lengthened ; the restrictions
on his re-eligibility generally removed. In many States
the judges have been granted larger salaries, and their
terms of office lengthened. Some constitutions have even
transferred judicial appointments from the vote of the
people to the executive. But the most notable change
of all has been the narrowing of the competence of the
legislature, and the tying up of its action by a variety
of complicated restrictions. It may seem that to take
powers away from the legislature is to give them to the

cHap. xxxvil DEVELOPMENT OF CONSTITUTIONS 55

people, and is therefore another step towards pure de-
mocracy. But in America this is not so, because a
legislature always yields to any popular clamour, how-
ever transient, while direct legislation by the people
involves some delay. Such provisions are therefore con®
servative in their results, and are really checks imposed
by the citizens upon themselves.

This process of development, which has first exalted
and then depressed the legislature, which has extended the
direct interference of the people, which has changed the
Constitution itself from a short into a long, a simple into a
highly complex document, has of course not yet ended.
Forces are already at work which will make the consti-
tutions of forty years hence different from those of to-
day. To conjecture the nature of these forces we must
examine a little further the existing constitutions of the
States, and especially the later among them; and must
distinguish between different types of constitution, cor-
responding to the different parts of the Union in which
the States that have framed them are situate.

Three types were formerly distinguishable, the old
colonial type, best seen in New England and the older
middle States, the Southern or Slave State type (in
which the influence of the first Constitution of Virginia
was noticeable), and the new or Western type. At present
these distinctions are less marked. All the Southern
States except Kentucky (which never passed an ordin-
ance of secession) have given themselves new constitu-
tions since the war; and the differences between these
and the new constitutions of the North-Western and
Pacific States are not salient. This is because the
economic and social changes produced by the War of
Secession and abolition of slavery broke to pieces the
old social conditions, and made these Southern States

56 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

virtually new communities like those of the West.
There is still, however, a strong contrast between
the New England States, to which for this purpose
we may add New Jersey and Delaware, whose present
constitutions all date from the period between 1780
and 1844, and the Southern and Western States, nearly
all of whose constitutions are subsequent to that year.
In these older States the power of the executive is gene-
rally greater. The judges are frequently named by the
governor, and not elected by the people. The electoral
districts are not always equal. The constitutions are
not so minute, and therefore the need of recurring to the
people to change them arises less frequently.

Taking the newer, and especially the Western and
Southern Constitutions, and remembering that each is
the work of an absolutely independent body, which
(subject to the Federal Constitution) can organize its
government and shape its law in any way it pleases, so
as to suit its peculiar conditions and reflect the character
of its population, one is surprised to find how similar
these newer instruments are. There is endless variety
in. details, but a singular agreement “in essentials. The
influences at work, the tendencies which the constitu-
tions of the last forty years reveal, are evidently the
same over the whole Union. What are the chief of
those tendencies? One is for the constitutions to grow
longer. This is an absolutely universal rule. Virginia,
for instance, put her first constitution, that of 1776,
into four closely printed quarto pages, that is, into
about three thousand two hundred words.’ In 1830,
she needed seven pages; in 1850, eighteen pages,
in 1870, twenty-two pages, or seventeen thousand

1 The full quarto page in Poore’s edition of The Federal and State
Constitutions contains about eight hundred words.

cHap,xxxvil DEVELOPMENT OF CONSTITUTIONS 57

words. Texas has doubled the length of her con-
stitution from sixteen quarto pages in 1845 to thirty-
four in 1876. Pennsylvania was content in 1776 with
a document of eight pages, which for those times was a
long one ; she now requires twenty-three. The consti:
tution of Illinois filled ten pages in 1818; in 1870 it
had swollen to twenty-five. These are fair examples, but
the extremes are marked by the constitution of New
Hampshire of 1776, which was of about six hundred
words (not reckoning the preamble), and the constitution
of Missouri of 1875, which has more than twenty-six
thousand words. The new constitutions are longer, not
only because new topics are taken up and dealt with,
but because the old topics are handled in far greater
detail. Such matters as education, ordinary private
law, railroads, State and municipal indebtedness, were
either untouched or lightly touched in the earlier instru-
ments. The provisions regarding the judiciary and the
legislature, particularly those restricting the power of
the latter, have grown far more minute of late years, as
abuses of power became more frequent, and the respect
for legislative authority less. As the powers of a State
legislature are prima facie unlimited, these bodies can
be restrained only by enumerating the matters withdrawn
from their competence, and the list grows always ampler.
The time might almost seem to have come for prescribing
that, like Congress, they should be entitled to legislate
on certain enumerated subjects only, and be always
required to establish affirmatively their competence to
deal with any given topic.

I have already referred to the progress which the
newer constitutions show towards more democratic
arrangements. The suffrage is now in almost every State
enjoyed by all adult males. Citizenship is quickly and

58 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

easily accorded to immigrants. And, most significant
of all, the superior judges, who were formerly named by
the governor, or chosen by the legislature, and who held
office during good behaviour, are now in most States
elected by the people for fixed terms of years. I do not
ignore the strongly-marked democratic character of even
the first set of constitutions, formed at and just after the
Revolution ; but that character manifested itself chiefly
in negative provisions, @.e. in forbidding exercises of
power by the executive, in securing full civil equality
and the primordial rights of the citizen. The new
democratic spirit is positive as well as negative. It
refers everything to the direct arbitrament of the people.
It calls their will into constant activity, sometimes by
the enactment of laws on various subjects in the Con-
stitution, sometimes by prescribing to the legislature the
purposes which legislation is to aim at. Even the tend-
ency to support the executive against the legislature is
evidence not so much of respect for authority as of the
confidence of the people that the executive-will be the
servant of popular opinion, prepared at its bidding to
restrain that other servant—the legislature—who is less
trusted, because harder to fix with responsibility for
misdoing. On the whole, therefore, there can be no
doubt that the democratic spirit is now more energetic
and pervasive than it was in the first generation. It
is a different kind of spirit. It is more practical, more
disposed to extend the sphere of governmental inter-
ference, less content to rely on general principles.
One discovers in the wording of the most recent
constitutions a decline of that touching faith in the
efficacy of broad declarations of abstract human rights
which marked the disciples of Jefferson. But if
we compare the present with the second or Jack-

cHap. xxxvit DEVELOPMENT OF CONSTITUTIONS 59

sonian age, it may be said that there has been in
progress for some years past a certain anti-democratic
reiction, fainter than the levelling movement of sixty
years ago, and not likely to restore the state of things
that existed before that movement, yet noticeable as
showing that the people do learn by experience, and
are not indisposed to reverse their action and get clear
of the results of past mistakes. The common saying that
on the road to democracy there are vestigia nulla retror-
sum is not universally true in America.

That there are strong conservative tendencies in the
United States is a doctrine whose truth will be illus-
trated later on. Meantime it is worth while to ask how
far the history of State constitutions confirms the cur-
rent notion that democracies are fond of change. The
answer is instructive, because it shows how flimsy are
the generalizations which men often indulge in when
discussing forms of government, as if all communities
with similar forms of government behaved in the same
way. All the States of the Union are democracies, and
democracies of nearly the same type. Yet while some
change their constitutions frequently, others scarcely
change theirs at all. Let me recall the reader’s mind
to the distinction already drawn between the older or
New England type and the newer type, which we
find in the Southern as well as the Western States. It
is among the latter that changes are frequent. Louisiana,
for instance, whose State life began in 1812, has had
six complete new constitutions, without counting the
. so-called Secession Constitution of 1861. So has Georgia.
Arkansas, which dates from 1836, has had five, besides
many amendments passed in the intervals. Virginia
and South Carolina (both original States) have had five
each. Among the Northern States, Pennsylvania (an

60 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

original State) has had four; Illinois, dating from 1818,
three; New York, three; Delaware, three; whereas
Connecticut and Rhode Island? (both original State’),
and Maine (dating from 1820), have had only one each,
Vermont and New Hampshire two each. Massachusetts
still lives under her Constitution of 1780, which has
indeed been amended at various dates, yet not to
such an extent as to efface its original features. Of
the causes of these differences I will now touch on
two only. One is the attachment which in an old
and historic, a civilized and well-educated community,
binds the people to their accustomed usages and forms
of government. It is the newer States, without a past
to revere, with a population undisciplined or fluctuating,
that are prone to change. In well-settled common-
wealths the longer a constitution has stood untouched,
the longer it is likely to stand, because the force of
habit is on its side, because an intelligent people learns
to value the stability of its institutions, and to love that
which it is proud of having created.

The other cause is the difference, between the swift-
ness with which economic and social changes move in
different parts of the country. They are the most con-
stant sources of political change, and find their natural
expression in alterations of the Constitution. Such
changes have been least swift and least sudden in the
New England and Middle States, though in some of the
latter the growth of great cities, such as New York and
Philadelphia, has induced them, and induced therewith
a tendency to amend the constitutions so as to meet new
conditions and check new evils. They have been mosé

1 Connecticut gave herself a new constitution in 1818, Rhode Island
in 1842, both having previously lived under their old colonial constitu-
tions,

cHaP,.xxxvI DEVELOPMENT OF CONSTITUTIONS 61
ag Re he en es i ee Se

marked in regions where population and wealth have
grown with unexampled speed, and in those where the
extinction of slavery has changed the industrial basis of
society. Here lies the explanation of the otherwise
singular fact that several of the original States, such a?
Virginia and Georgia, have run through many constitu-
tions. These whilom Slave States have not only
changed greatly but changed suddenly: society was dis-
located by the Civil War, and has had to make more than
one effort to set itself right.

The total number of distinct constitutions adopted
in 1776 or enacted in the several States since that year
—the States being then 13 and now 38 in number—
is 105; and to these constitutions 214 partial amend-
ments have been at different times adopted. The
period since 1860 shows a somewhat greater frequency
of change than the eighty-four years preceding; but
that may be accounted for by the effects of the war
on the Southern States. The average duration of a
constitution has been estimated at thirty years, and ten
have lasted more than sixty years. In this connection
it must be remarked that both whole constitutions and
particular amendments are frequently rejected by the
people when submitted to them at the polls. This has
befallen six draft constitutions and more than twenty-
eight amendments within the last ten years.?

Putting all these facts together, and bearing in mind
to how large an extent the constitutions now, whether
wisely or foolishly, embody ordinary private and ad-

1 J take these figures from Dr. Hitchcock’s Study of American State
Constitutions, published in 1887, adding the last Constitution of Florida.
Several Constitutions have been amended since 1886, but I am unable
to give the exact number of amendments.

a Macpherson’s Fiandbook mentions 34 constitutional amendments as
adopted in the two years from July 1884 to July 1886, and 4 as rejected.

62 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART

ministrative law and therefore invite amendment, the
American democracy seems less inclined to changeful-
ness and inconstancy than either abstract consideraticns
or the descriptions of previous writers, such as De
Tocqueville, wotild have led us to expect. The respect
for these fundamental instruments would no doubt be
greater if the changes in them were even fewer, and
the changes would be fewer if the respect were greater ;
but I see little reason to think that the evil is increasing.

A few more observations on what the Constitutions
disclose are needed before I conclude this necessarily
brief sketch of the most instructive sources for
the history of popular government which our century
has produced—documents whose clauses, while they
attempt to solve the latest problems of democratic com-
monwealths, often recall the earliest efforts of our English
forefathers to restrain the excesses of medieval tyranny.

The Constitutions witness to a singular distrust by
the people of its own agents and officers, not only of the
legislatures but also of local authorities, as well rural as
urban, whose powers of borrowing or undertaking public
works are strictly limited. Even the judges are in some
States restrained in their authority to commit for con-
tempt of court, and, while permitted to state the law,
are generally forbidden to charge a jury upon the facts
of a case.

They witness also to a jealousy of the Federal
government. By most constitutions a Federal official
is made incapable, not only of State office, but of being
a member of a State legislature. These prohibitions are
almost the only references to the National government
to be found in the State constitutions, which so far as
their terms go might belong to independent communities.
They usually talk of corporations belonging to other

cHaP, xxxvit DEVELOPMENT OF CONSTITUTIONS 63
ere a ee ere ere ee er ee
States as “foreign,” and sometimes try to impose special
burdens on them.

They show a wholesome anxiety to protect and
safeguard private property in every way. ‘The people’s
consciousness of sovereignty has not ised the oppor*
tunity which the enactment of a constitution gives to
override private rights: there is rather a desire to
secure such rights from any encroachment by the
legislature: witness the frequent provisions against
the taking of property without due compensation,
and against the passing of private or personal
statutes which could unfairly affect individuals. The
only exceptions to this rule are to be found in the
case of anything approaching a monopoly, and in the
case of wealthy corporations. But the “monopolist” is
regarded as the enemy of the ordinary citizen, whom he
oppresses ; and the corporation—it is usually corpora-
tions that are monopolists—is deemed not a private
person at all, but a sort of irresponsible tyrant whose
resources enable him to overreach the law. Corporations
are singled out for special taxation. Labour laws are
enacted to apply to‘them only. A remarkable instance
of this hostility to monopolies is to be found in the
Constitution of Illinois of 1870, with its provisions anent
grain elevators, warehouses, and railroads.’ Nor are
the newer constitutions of other Western States, such as
Wisconsin and Texas, less instructive in this respect.

The extension of the sphere of State interference, with
the corresponding departure from the doctrine of laissez
faire, is a question so large and so interesting as to require
4 chapter to itself. Here it may suffice to remark, that
some departments of governmental action, which on the

1 See the remarkable group of cases beginning with Munn v. Illinois
(commonly called the Granger Cases) in 94 U.S. Reports, p. 113.

64 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

continent of Europe have long been handled by the
State, are in America still left to private enterprise.
For instance, the States neither own nor manage rail-
ways, or telegraphs, or mines, or forests, and they sell
their public lands instead of working them. There is,
nevertheless, visible in recent constitutions a tendency
to extend the scope of public administrative activity.
Some of the newer instruments establish ministries of
agriculture, labour offices, mining commissioners, land
registration offices, dairy commissioners, and agricultural
or mining colleges. And a reference to the statutes
passed within the last few years in the Western
States will show that more is being done in this
direction by the legislatures, as exponents of popular
sentiment, than could be gathered from the constitu-
tions, most of which are more than ten years old.

A spirit of humanity and tenderness for suffering,
very characteristic of the American people, appears in
the directions which many constitutions contain for the
establishment of charitable and reformatory institutions.
Sometimes the legislature is enjoined to provide that the
prisons are made comfortable. On the other hand, this
tenderness is qualified by the judicious severity which in
most States debars persons convicted of crime from
the electoral franchise.

In the older Northern constitutions, and in nearly
all the more recent constitutions of all the States, ample
provision is made for the creation and maintenance of
schools. Even universities are the object of popular
zeal, though a zeal not always according to knowledge.
Several Western constitutions direct their establishment
and support from public funds or land grants.

Although a Constitution is the fundamental and
supreme law of the State, one must not conclude that

cHaP.xxxvil DEVELOPMENT OF CONSTITUTIONS 65
IS en ee een es ee

its provisions are any better observed and enforced
than those of an ordinary statute. There is sometimes
Teason to suspect that when an offence is thought
worthy of being specially mentioned in a constitution,
this happens because it is specially frequent, and*
because it is feared that the legislature may shrink
from applying due severity to repress it. Certain it is
that in many instances the penalties threatened by
constitutions fail to attain their object. For instance,
the constitutions of most of the Southern States have
for many years past declared duellists, and even persons
who abet a duel by carrying a challenge, incapable of
office, or of sitting in the legislature. Yet the practice
of private warfare does not seem to have declined in
Mississippi, Texas, or Arkansas, where these provisions
exist. Virginia had such a provision in her constitu-
tion of 1830. She repeated it in her constitution of
1850, but with the addendum, that the disqualification
should not attach to those who had offended previously
—i.e. in violation of the constitution of 1830.1 So
far as the enactment has had any effect, that effect
would seem to have “been to encourage the practice of
shooting at sight, which is neither morally nor socially

1 “The General Assembly may provide that no person shall be capable
of holding or being elected to any post of profit, trust, or emolument, civil
or military, legislative, executive, or judicial, under the government of
this commonwealth who shall hereafter fight a duel, or send or accept a
challenge to fight a duel, the probable issue of which may be the death of
the challenger or challenged, or who shall be second to either party, or
shall in any manner aid or assist in such duel, or shall be knowingly the
bearer of such challenge or acceptance ; but no person shall be so dis-
qualified by reason of his having heretofore fought such duel or sent or
accepted such challenge, or been second in such duel, or bearer of such
challenge or acceptance” (Constitution of 1830, Art. iii. § 12, repeated
if Constitution of 1850, Art. iv. § 17). In her Constitution of 1870
Virginia is not content with suggesting to the legislature to disqualify
duellists, but does this directly by Art. iii. § 3. Seventeen Constitutions
now declare duellists disqualified for office, and nine others add a dis-
qualification for the franchise. Nearly all are Southern and Western States,

VOL, II F

66 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

an improvement on duelling, though apparently exempt
from these constitutional penalties.

New York has been so much exercised on the
subject of bribery and corruption, as to declare
“(amendments of 1874), not only that every member
of the legislature and every officer shall take an
oath that he has given nothing as a consideration for
any vote received for him (amendment to Art. xii. § 1),
and that the legislature shall pass laws excluding from
the suffrage all persons convicted of bribery or of any
infamous crime (amendment to Art. ii. § 2), but also
(amendment to Art. xv. §§ 1 and 2) that the giving or
offering to or receiving by an officer of any bribe shall
be a felony. And lobbying, which is openly practised
in every building where a legislature meets, is declared
by California to be a felony, and by Georgia to be a
crime.

CHAPTER XXXIX
DIRECT LEGISLATION BY THE PEOPLE

THE difficulties and defects inherent in the method of
legislating by a Constitution are obvious enough. Inas-
much as the people cannot be expected to distinguish
carefully between what is and what is not proper for a
fundamental instrument, there arises an inconvenient as
well as unscientific mixture and confusion of private
law and administrative regulation with the frame of
government and the general doctrines of public law.
This mixture, and the practice of placing in the Con-
stitution directions to the legislature to legislate in a
certain sense, or for certain purposes, embarrass a legis-
lature in its working by raising at every turn questions
of its competence to legislate, and of the agreement
between its acts and the directions contained in the
Constitution. And as the legislature is seldom either
careful or well-advised, there follows in due course an
abundant crop of questions as to the constitutionality of
statutes, alleged by those whom they affect prejudicially
in any particular instance to be either in substance in-
consistent with the Constitution, or such as the legis-
lature was expressly forbidden by it to pass. These
inconveniences are no doubt slighter in America than
they would be in Europe, because the lawyers and the

68 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

judges have had so much experience in dealing with
questions of constitutional conflict and ultra vires
legislation that they now handle them with amazing
dexterity. Still, they are serious, and such as a well-
ordered government ought to avoid. The habit of
putting into the Constitution matters proper for an
ordinary statute has the further disadvantage that it
heightens the difficulty of correcting a mistake or
supplying an omission. The process of amending a
constitution even in one specific point is a slow one,
to which neither the legislature, as the proposing
authority, nor the people, as the sanctioning authority,
willingly resort. Hence blemishes remain and are
tolerated, which a country possessing, like England, a
sovereign legislature would correct in the next session
of Parliament without trouble or delay.

It is sometimes difficult to induce the people to take
a proper interest in the amendment of the Constitution.
In those States where a majority of all the qualified
voters, and not merely of those voting, is required to
affirm an amendment, it often happens that the requisite
majority cannot be obtained owing to the small number
who vote.’ This has its good side, for it is a check on
hasty or frequent change. But it adds greatly to the
difficulty of working a rigid or supreme Constitu-
tion, that you may find an admitted, even if not very
grave evil, to be practically irremovable, because the
mass of the people cannot be induced to care enough
about the matter to come to the polls, and there deliver
their judgment upon it.

These defects are so obvious that we are entitled to
expect to find correspondingly strong grounds for the

1 This has happened more than once of late years in Kentucky and
Delaware.

cHap. xxx1x DIRECT LEGISLATION BY THE PEOPLE 69

maintenance, and indeed the steady extension of the
plan of legislating by and through a Constitution.
What are these grounds? Why do the Americans tend
more and more to remove legislation from the legislature
and entrust it to the people ?

We could quite well imagine the several State govern-
ments working without fundamental instruments to con-
trol them. In a Federal government which rests on, or
at least which began from, a compact between a number
of originally separate communities, the advantages of
having the relations of these communities to one another
and to the central authority defined by an instrument
placed beyond the reach of the ordinary legislature, and
not susceptible of easy change, are clear and strong.
Such an instrument is the guarantee for the rights of each
member placed above the impulses of a chance majority.
The case is quite different when we come to a single
homogeneous community. Each American State might
now, if it so pleased, conduct its own business, and
govern its citizens as a commonwealth “ at common law,”
with a sovereign legislature, whose statutes formed the
highest expression of popular will. Nor need it do so
upon the cabinet system of England. It might retain
the separation from the legislature of the executive
governor, elected by the people, and exercising his
veto on their behalf, and yet dispense altogether with
a rigid fundamental constitution, being content to vest
in its representatives and governor the plenitude of its
own powers. This, however, no American State does,
or has ever done, or is likely todo. And the question
why it does not suggests a point of interest for Europeans
as well as for Americans.

In the republics of the ancient world, where repre-
sentative assemblies were unknown, legislative power

7O THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART IT

rested with the citizens meeting in what we should
now call, primary assemblies, such as the Ecclesia of
Syracuse or the Comitia of Rome. The same plan pre- ,
vailed in the early Teutonic tribes, where the assembly
of the freemen ‘exercised all such powers as did not
belong to the king. The laws of the kings of the
Angles and Saxons, the capitularies of Charlemagne,
were promulgated in assemblies of the nation, and may
be said, though emanating from the prince, to have been
enacted by the people. During the middle ages, these
assemblies died out, and the right of making laws passed
either to the sovereign or to a representative assembly
surrounding the sovereign such as the English Parlia-
ment, the older method surviving only in such primitive
communities as some of the Swiss cantons, and the
tiny republics of Andorra and San Marino. The first
reappearance in modern Europe of the scheme of direct
legislation by the people is, so far as I know, the pro-
vision of the French Constitution framed by the National
Convention in 1793, which directs that any law pro-
posed by the legislative body shall be published and
sent to all the communes of the Republic, whose primary
assemblies shall be convoked to vote upon it, in case
objections to it have been raised by one-tenth of these
primary assemblies in a majority of the departments. In
recent times the plan has become familiar by its introduc-
tion, not only into most of the cantons of Switzerland,
but into the Swiss Federal Republic, which constantly
applies it, under the name of Referendum, by submit-
ting to the vote of the people laws passed by the
Federal legislature.’

1 The Swiss Federal Constitution provides that any Federal law and
Federal resolution of general application and not of an urgent character,
must on the demand of eight cantons or of 30,000 voters be submitted to
popular vote for acceptance or rejection (Constit. Art. 89). This vote is

cHap, xxxIx DIRECT LEGISLATION BY THE PEOPLE 71
a a Se

In England the influence of the same idea may be
discovered in two phenomena of recent years. One
is ‘the proposal frequently made to refer to the direct
vote of the inhabitants of a town or other local area
the enactment of some ordinance affecting that district?
as, for instance, one determining whether or no licences
shall be granted within it for the sale of intoxicating
liquors. This method of deciding an issue, commonly
known as Local Option, is a species of referendum. It
differs from the Swiss form, not merely in being locally
restricted, but rather in the fact that it is put to the
people, not for the sake of confirming an Act of the legis-
lature, but of deciding whether a particular Act shall be
operative in a given area. But the principle is the same ;
it is a transference of legislative authority from a represen-
tative body, whether the parliament of the nation or the
municipal council of the town, to the voters at the polls.’

The other English illustration may seem far fetched,
but on examination will be seen to involve the same
idea. It is now beginning to be maintained as a con-
stitutional doctrine, that when any large measure of
change is carried through the House of Commons, the
House of Lords has a right to reject it for the purpose
of compelling a dissolution of Parliament, that is, an
appeal to the voters. And there are some signs that
the view is making way, that even putting the House of
Lords out of sight, the House of Commons is not
morally, though of course it is legally, entitled to pass
a bill seriously changing the Constitution, which was
not submitted to the electors at the preceding general

frequently in the negative. See Swiss Federal Constitution, Art. 89 ;
and the remarks of M. Numa Droz in his Instruction civique, § 172. In
some cantons the submission of laws to popular vote is compulsory. In
Geneva it is facultatif. See Genéve et ses Institutions, by A. Gavard.

1 The reference to the vote of the ratepayers of a parish of the question
whether a rate shall be levied for a free library is another instance.

72 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

election. A general election, although in form a choice
of particular persons as members, has now practically
become an expression of popular opinion on the two-or
three leading measures then propounded and discussed
by the party leaders, as well as a vote of confidence or
no confidence in the Ministry of the day. It is in sub-
stance a vote upon those measures ; although, of course,
a vote only on their general principles, and not, like
the Swiss Referendum, upon the statute which the legis-
lature has passed. Even therefore in a country which
clings to and founds itself upon the absolute supremacy
of its representative chamber, the notion of a direct
appeal to the people has made progress."

In the United States, which I need hardly say has in
this matter been nowise affected by France or Switzer-
land or England, but has developed on its own lines, the
conception that the people (z.e. the citizens at large) are
and ought of right to be the supreme legislators, has
taken the form of legislation by enacting or amending a
Constitution. Instead of, like the Swiss, submitting
ordinary laws to the voters after they have passed the
legislature, the Americans take subjects which belong to
ordinary legislation out of the category of statutes, place
them in the Constitution, and then handle them as parts
of this fundamental instrument. They are not called
laws; but laws they are to all intents and purposes,
differing from statutes only in being enacted by an
authority which is not a constant but an occasional

1 Much importance has come to be attached in England to casual
parliamentary elections occurring when any important measure is
before Parliament, because such an election is taken to indicate the
attitude of the people generally towards the measure, and by con-
sequence the judgment they would pronounce were a general election
held. There have heen instances in which a measure or part of a

measure pending in Parliament has been dropped, because the result of
the “ by-election ” was taken to indicate that it displeased the people.

cuap. xxxIX D/JRECT LEGISLATION BY THE PEOPLE 73
era ee a as Se a ee

body, called into action only when a Convention or a
legislature lays propositions before it.

I have already explained the historical origin of this
system, how it sprang from the fact that the Constitutions
of the colonies having been given to them by an external
authority superior to the colonial legislature, the people
of each State, seeing that they could no longer obtain
changes in their Constitution from Britain, assumed to
themselves the right and duty of remodelling it ; putting
the collective citizendom of the State into the place of the
British Crown as sovereign. The business of creating
or remodelling an independent commonwealth was to
their thinking too great a matter to be left to the
ordinary organs of State life. This feeling, which
had begun to grow from 1776 onwards, was much
strengthened by the manner in which the Federal
Constitution was enacted in 1788 by State conventions.
It seemed to have thus received a specially solemn
ratification; and even the Federal legislature, which
henceforth was the centre of national politics, was
placed far beneath the document which expressed the
will of the people as a whole.

As the republic went on working out both in
theory and in practice those conceptions of democracy
and popular sovereignty which had been only vaguely
apprehended when enunciated at the Revolution, the
faith of the average man in himself became stronger,
his love of equality greater, his desire, not only to
rule, but to rule directly in his own proper person,
more constant. These sentiments would have told still
farther upon State governments had they not found
large scope in local government. However, even in
State affairs they made it an article of faith that no
Constitution could be enacted save by the direct vote of

74 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

the citizens; and they inclined the citizens to seize such

chances as occurred of making laws for themselves in

their own way. Concurrently with the growth of these ,
tendencies there had been a decline in the quality of

the State legislatures, and of the legislation which they

turned out. They were regarded with less respect ;

they inspired less confidence. Hence the people had

the further excuse for superseding the legislature, that

they might reasonably fear it would neglect or spoil the

work they desired to see done.

Instead of being stimulated by this distrust to mend
their ways and recover their former powers, the State
legislatures fell in with the tendency, and promoted their
own supersession. The chief interest of their members, as
will be explained later, is in the passing of special or local
Acts, not of general public legislation. They are extremely
timid, easily swayed by any active section of opinion,
and afraid to stir when placed between the opposite
fires of two such sections, as for instance, between the
Prohibitionists and the liquor-sellers. Hence they wel-
comed the direct intervention of the people as relieving
them of embarrassing problems. They began to refer
to the decision of a popular vote matters clearly within
their own proper competence, such as the question of
liquor traffic, pr the creation of a system of gratuitous
schools. This happened as far back as thirty years
ago. And in New York, the legislature having been
long distracted and perplexed by the question whether
articles made by convicts in the State prisons should
be allowed to be sold, and so to compete with articles
made by private manufacturers, recently resolved to
invite the opinion of the multitude, and accordingly
passed an Act under which the question was voted
on over the whole State. They could not (except of

cap. xxxIxX DJRECT LEGISLATION BY THE PEOPLE 75
a

course by proposing a constitutional amendment) enable
the people to legislate on the point; for it has been
.often held by American courts that the legislature,
having received a delegated power of law-making,
cannot delegate that power to any other person or’
body.’ But they could ask the people to advise them
how they should legislate ; and having obtained its view
in this manner, could pass a statute in conformity with
its wishes.

It is, however, chiefly in the form of an amendment
to the Constitution that we find the American voters
exercising direct legislative power. And this method
comes very near to the Swiss referendum, because the
amendment is first discussed and approved by the
legislature, a majority greater than a simple majority
being required in some States, and then goes before the

1 According to the maxim Delegata potestas non delegatur, a maxim
which would not apply in England, because there Parliament has an
original and not a delegated authority,

Judge Cooley says: “One of the settled maxims of constitutional law
is that the power conferred upon the legislature to make laws cannot be
delegated by that department to any other body or authority, Where the
sovereign power of the St&te has located the authority, there it must
remain ; and by the constitutional authority alone the laws must be made
until the Constitution itself is changed. The power to whose judgment,
wisdom, and patriotism this high prerogative has been entrusted cannot
relieve itself of the responsibility by choosing other ayencies upon
which the power shall be devolved” (Constit. Limit., p. 141) He
quotes from Locke (Civil Government, § 142) the remark that “The
legislature neither must nor can transfer the power of making laws
to anybody else, or place it anywhere but where the people have,”
This is one of Locke’s “bounds set to the legislative power of every
commonwealth in every form of government ;” but it has not precluded
the British Parliament from delegating large, and in many cases truly
legislative, powers to particular persons or authorities, such as the Crown
in Council.

® There has been much difference of opinion among American courts
as to the extent to which @ legislature may refer the operation of a general
law to popular vote in a locality, but “the clear weight of authority is in
support of legislation of the nature commonly known as local option laws.”
—Cooley, ut supra, p. 152; and see the cases collected in his notes.

76 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

citizens voting at the polls. Sometimes the State Con-
stitution provides that a particular question shall be
submitted by the legislature to the voters ; thus creating,
a referendum for that particular case. Thus Wisconsin
‘refers if to the voters to decide whether or no banks shall
be chartered.!. Minnesota declares that a certain class
of railway laws shall not take effect unless submitted to
and ratified by a majority of the electors. And she
provides, by a later amendment to her Constitution,
that “ the moneys belonging to the internal improvement
land fund shall never be appropriated for any purpose
till the enactment for that purpose shall have been
approved by a majority of the electors of the State,
voting at the annual general election following the
passage of the Act.”? In this last instance the referendum
goes the length of constituting the voters the financial
authority for the State, withdrawing from the legislature
what might seem the oldest and most essential of its
functions.

It is not uncommon for proposals submitted by the
legislature in the form of constitutional amendments to
be rejected by the people. Thus in Indiana, Nebraska,
Ohio, and Oregon, the legislature submitted amendments
extending the suffrage to women, and the people in all
four States refused the extension. Jn Colorado, where

1 Constitution of 1843, Art. xi § 5,“ The legislature may submit
to the voters at any general election the question of ‘Bank or no bank ?’
and if at any such election a number of votes equal to a majority of all
the votes cast at such election on that subject shall be in favour of banks,
then the legislature shall have power to grant bank charters, or to pass a
general banking law, with such restrictions and under such regulations as
they may deem expedient for the protection of the bill-holders: Provided,
that no such grant or law shall have any force or effect until the sare
shall have been submitted to a vote of the electors of the State at some
general election, and been approved by a majority of the votes cast on

that subject at such election.”
2 Amendments of 1871 and 1874 to the Constitution of 1857.

cHar. xxxIX DIRECT LEGISLATION BY THE PEOPLE 77
a ee
the Constitution of 1876 had provided a special refer-
endum on the point, the legislature passed its woman
.franchise law, and submitted it to popular vote in October
1877, when it was rejected by 14,000 votes to 7400.

What are the practical advantages’ of this plan of*
direct legislation by the people? Its demerits are
obvious. Besides those I have already stated, it tends to
lower the authority and sense of responsibility in the legis-
lature; and it refers matters needing much elucidation
by debate to the determination of those who cannot, on
account of their numbers, meet together for discussion,
and many of whom may have never thought about the
matter." These considerations will to most Europeans
appear decisive against it. The proper course, they will
say, is to improve the legislatures. The less you trust
them, the worse they will be. They may be ignorant ;
yet not so ignorant as the masses.

But the ; improvement of the legislatures is just what
the Americans despair of, or, as they would prefer to
say, have not time to attend to. Hence they fall back
on the referendum as the best course available under the
circumstances of the case, and in such a world as the
present. They do not claim that it has any great
educative effect on the people. But they remark with
truth that the mass of the people are equal in intelligence

1 A Scotch local option bill proposing to refer to the vote of the rate-
payers the decision of the question whether licences for the sale of intoxi-
cating liquors in any town shall be granted has called forth much
discussion as to the merits of popular voting, It is urged by some that
this provision, by taking away from the representative local authority
the determination of an important question, will lower the position of
that authority, and make leading residents less eager to be elected
mpmbers of it. It is replied that the local authorities cannot always be
trusted in such a question, that the ratepayers will be satisfied with no
decision but their own, and that to make the opinion of a candidate on
this one question the test of his fitness to be elected a member of the
local authority will really injure the election, by excluding men who
might possibly be the best in point of personal capacity.

78 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

and character to the average State legislator, and are
exposed to fewer temptations. The legislator can be
“got at,” the people cannot. The personal interest of,
the individual legislator in passing a measure for charter-
ing banks or spending the internal improvement fund
may be greater than his interest as one of the com-
munity in preventing bad laws. It will be otherwise
with the bulk of the citizens, The legislator may
be subjected by the advocates of women’s suffrage or
liquor prohibition to a pressure irresistible by ordinary
mortals; but the citizens are too numerous to be all
wheedled or threatened. Hence they can and do reject
proposals which the legislature has assented to. Nor
should it be forgotten that in a country where law
depends for its force on the consent of the governed,
it is eminently desirable that law should not outrun
popular sentiment, but have the whole weight of the
people’s deliverance behind it.

A brilliant, though severe, critic of Canadian institu-
tions deplores the want of some similar arrangement in the
several Provinces of the Dominion. Having remarked
that the veto of the lieutenant-governor on the Acts of
a Provincial legislature is in practice a nullity, and that
the central government never vetoes such Acts except
where they are held to exceed the constitutional com-
petence of the legislature, he urges that what is needed
to cure the faults of Provincial legislation is to borrow
the American plan of submitting constitutional amend-
ments (and, he might add, laws) to popular vote. ‘The
people cannot be lobbied, wheedled, or bull-dozed ;
the people is not in fear of its re-election if it throws
out something supported by the Irish, the Prohibitionist,
the Catholic, or the Methodist vote.” !

1 Mr. Goldwin Smith in the Contemporary Review,

cHAP, xxx1x_ DIRECT LEGISLATION BY THE PEOPLE 79

If the practice of recasting or amending State Con-
stitutions were to grow common, one of the advantages of
direct legislation by the people would disappear, for the
sense of permanence would be gone, and the same muta-
bility which is now possible in ordinary statutes would
become possible in the provisions of the fundamental
law. But this fault of small democracies,’ especially
when ruled by primary assemblies, is unlikely to recur in
large democracies, such as most States have now become,
nor does it seem to be on the increase among them.
Reference to the people, therefore, acts as a conservative
force; that is to say, it is a conservative method as
compared with action by the legislature.

In England, and indeed in most European countries,
representative government has been hitherto an in-
stitution with markedly conservative elements, because
the legislating representatives have generally belonged
to the wealthy or well-born and educated classes, who
having something to lose by change, are disinclined to
it, who have been looked up to by the masses, and who
have been imperfectly responsive to popular impulses.
American legislature$ have none of these features. The
men are not superior to the multitude, partly because
the multitude is tolerably educated and tolerably well
off. The multitude does not defer to them. They are
horribly afraid of it, and indeed of any noisy section in
it. They live in the breath of its favour; they hasten
to fulfil its behests almost before they are uttered.
Accordingly an impulse or passion dominant among the
citizens tells at once on the legislature, and finds ex-
pression in a law, the only check being, not the caution

1 So frequent a charge against the Greek republics and the Italian
republics of the middle ages, as Dante says of Florence—
“ Ch’ a mezzo Novembre,
Non giunge quel che tu d’Ottobre fili.”

80 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

of that body and its willingness to debate at length, but
the incapacity it often shows to embody in a practical
form the wishes manifested by the people. Hence in,
the American States representative government has by
‘no means that*conservative quality which Europeans
ascribe to it, whereas the direct vote of the people is
the vote of men who are generally better instructed than
the European masses, more experienced in politics, more
sensible of their interest in the stability of the country.
If, therefore, we regard the referendum in its effect upon
the State legislature, we shall regard it as being rather a
bit and bridle than a spur.

This method of legislation by means of a Constitution
or amendments thereto, arising from sentiments and
under conditions in many respects similar to those
which have produced the referendum in Switzer-
land, is an interesting illustration of the tendency of
institutions, like streams, to wear their channels deeper.
A historical accident, so to speak, suggested to the
Americans the subjection of their legiclatures to a fun-
damental law, and the invention has been used for
other purposes far more extensively than its creators
foresaw. It is now, moreover, serviceable in a way
which those who first used it did not contemplate, though
they are well pleased. with the result. It acts as a
restraint not only on the vices and follies of legislators,
but on the people themselves. Having solemnly bound
themselves by their Constitution to certain rules and
principles, the people come to respect those principles.
They have parted with powers which they might be
tempted in a moment of excitement, or under the
pressure of suffering, to abuse through their too pliant
representatives; and although they can resume these
powers by enacting a new Constitution or amending

cuap, xxxix D/JRECT LEGISLATION BY THR PEOPLE 81
t

the old one, the process of resumption requires time,
and involves steps which secure care and deliberation,
while allowing passion to cool, and the prospect of a
natural relief from economic evils to appear. It has
been well observed by Dr. von Holst’ thit the complete-'
ness and consistency with which the principle of the
direct sovereignty of the whole people is carried out in
America has checked revolutionary tendencies, by point-
ing out a peaceful and legal method for the effecting of
political or economical changes, and has fostered that
disposition to respect the decision of the majority which
is essential to the success of popular governments.

State Constitutions, considered as laws drafted by a
Convention and enacted by the people at large, are
better both in form and substance than laws made
by the legislature, because they are the work of abler
men, acting under a special commission which imposes
special responsibilities on them. The appointment of
a Constitutional Convention is an important event,
which excites general interest in a State. Its functions
are weighty and difficult, far transcending those of the
regular legislature. “Hence the best men in the State
desire a seat in it, and, in particular, eminent lawyers
become candidates, knowing how much it will affect the
law they practise. It is therefore a body superior in
composition to either the Senate or the House of a
State. Its proceedings excite more interest; its debates
are more instructive ; its conclusions are more carefully
weighed, because they cannot be readily reversed.? Or
if the work of altering the constitution is carried out
by a series of amendments, these are likely to be more

1 Constitutional Law of the United States, § 90,

2 Occasionally some particular clause of a draft constitution is separately
submitted to the people ; if they approve it, it is inserted in the cunstitu-
tion, which is voted on as a whole ; if they refuse it, it is omitted.

VOL. II G

82 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

fully considered by the legislature than ordinary statutes
would be, and to be framed with more regard to clear-
ness and precision. ,

In the interval between the settlement by the con- |
‘vention of its draft constitution, or by the legislature of
its draft amendments, and the putting of the matter
to the vote of the people, there is copious discussion
in the press and at public meetings, so that the citizens
often go well prepared to the polls. An all-pervading
press does the work which speeches did in the ancient
republics, and the fact that constitutions and amendments
so submitted are frequently rejected, shows that the
people, whether they act wisely or not, do not at any rate
surrender themselves blindly to the judgment of a con-
vention, or obediently adopt the proposals of a legislature.

These merits are indeed not always claimable for
conventions and their remodelled constitutions, much
less for individual amendments.’ The Constitution of
California of 1879 (whereof more in a later chapter) is a
striking instance to the contrary. But a general survey
of this branch of our inquiry leads to the conclusion that
the peoples of the several States, in the exercise of this
their highest function, show little of that haste, that
recklessness, that love of change for the sake of change,
with which European theorists, both ancient and modern,
have been wont to credit democracy ; and that the method
of direct legislation by the citizens, liable as it doubtless
is to abuse, causes, in the present condition of the States,
fewer evils than it prevents.

1 There is much controversy in America as to whether the better
method of reforming a constitution be to recast it by a convention or
remove particular blemishes by a series of amendments. Probably the

one plan or the other is to be preferred, according to the condition of
public sentiment and the likelihvod of securing a strong conveution.

CHAPTER XL
STATE GOVERNMENTS : THE LEGISLATURE

Tue similarity of the frame of government in the
thirty-eight republics which make up the United
States, a similarity which appears the more remarkable
when we remember that each of the republics is inde-
pendent and self-determined as respects its frame of
governinent, is due to the common source whence the
governments flow. They are all copies, some immediate,
some mediate, of ancient English institutions, viz.
chartered self-governing corporations, which, under the
influence of English habits, and with the precedent of the
English parliamentary system before their eyes,developed
into governments resembling that of England in the
eighteenth century. Each of the thirteen colonies had up
to 1776 been regulated by a charter from the British
Crown, which, according to the best and oldest of all
English traditions, allowed it the practical management of
its own affairs. The charter contained a sort of skeleton
constitution, which usage had clothed with nerves,
. muscles, and sinews, till it became a complete and
symmetrical working system of free government. There
was in each a governor, in two colonies chosen by the
people,! in the rest nominated by the Crown; there

1 However, in Connecticut and Rhode Island, the governor was chosen,

84 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

was a legislature; there were executive officers acting
under the governor’s commission and judges nominated
by him; there were local self-governing communities.
In none, however, did there exist what we call cabinet
government, i.e. the rule of the legislature through a
committee of its own members, “coupled with the
irresponsibility of the permanent nominal head of the
executive. This separation of the executive from the
legislature, which naturally arose from the fact that
the governor was an officer directly responsible to
another power than the colonial legislature, viz.
the British Crown, his own master to whom he
stood or fell,’ distinguishes the old colonial govern-
ments of North America from those of the British
colonies of the present day, in all of which cabinet
government prevails.? The latter are copies of the
present Constitution of England; the former resembled
it as it existed in the seventeenth and beginning of
the eighteenth century before cabinet government had
grown up.

When the thirteen colonies became sovereign States
at the Revolution, they preserved this frame of govern-
ment, substituting a governor chosen by the State for
one appointed by the Crown. As the new States
admitted to, the Union after 1789 successively formed
their constitutions prior to their admission to the Union,
each adopted the same scheme, its people imitating, as

not as now by the people at large, but by the Company assembled in
general court, a body which passed into the legislature of the colony.
See Charter of Connecticut of 1662, Charter of Rhode Island, 1663.

1 Even in Connecticut and Rhode Island the governor, though chosen
by the colony, was in a sense responsible to the Crown.

2 Of course in the British self-governing colonies the governor
is still responsible to the Crown, but this responsibility is confined
within narrow limits by the responsibility of his ministers to the colonial
legislature and by the wide powers of that legislature.

CHAP, XL STATE LEGISLATURES 85
ef

was natural, the older commonwealths whence they
came, and whose working they understood and admired.!
They were the more inclined to do so because they
found in the older constitutions that sharp separa-
tion of the executive, legislative, and judicial powers
which the political philosophy of those days taught
them to regard as essential to a free government, and
they all take this separation as their point of de-
parture.

I have observed in an earlier chapter that the in-
fluence on the framers of the Federal Constitution of the
examples of free government which they found in their
several States, had been profound. We may sketch out
a sort of genealogy of Governments as fullows :—

First. The English incorporated Company, a self-
governing body, with its governor, deputy-governor, and
assistants chosen by the freemen of the company, and
meeting in what is called the General Court or Assembly.

Next. The Colonial Government, which out of this
Company evolves a governor or executive head and a
legislature, consisting of representatives chosen by the
citizens and meeting in one or two chambers.

Thirdly. The State Government, which is nothing
but the colonial government developed and somewhat
democratized, with a governor chosen originally by the
legislature, now always by the people at large, and now
in all cases with a legislature of two chambers. From
the original thirteen States this form has spread over
the Union and prevails in every State.

Lastly. The Federal Government, modelled after the
State Governments, with its President chosen, through

1 Massachusetts worked for several years with a small council as the
executive power representing the former Crown governor, but in 1780
she came back to the plan of a single governor, while retaining, as she
still retains, a council surrounding him.

86 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

electors, by the people, its two-chambered legislature,
its judges named by the President.

Out of such small beginnings have great things grown.

It would be endless to describe the minor differences
ih the systems of the thirty-eight States. I will sketch
the outlines only, which, as dreads observed, are in the

main the same everywhere.

Every State has—

An executive elective head, the governor.

A number of other administrative officers.

A legislature of two houses.

A system of courts of justice.

Various subordinate local self-governing communi-
ties, counties, cities, townships, villages, school districts.

The governor and the other chief officials are not
now chosen by the legislature, as was the case under
most of the older State Constitutions, but by the people.
They are as far as possible disjoined from the legis-
lature. Neither the governor nor any other State
official can sit in a State legislature. He cannot lead
it. It cannot, except of course by passing statutes,
restrain him. ‘There can therefore be no question of any
government by ministers who link the executive to the
legislature according to the system of the free countries
of modern Kurope and of the British colonies.

Of these several powers it is bést to begin by
describing the legislature, because it is by far the
strongest and most promment.

An American State legislature always consists of
two houses, the smaller called the Senate, the larger
usually called the House of Representatives, though ir

1 One miyht add another generation at the beginning of this genealogy
by deriving the English corporate company from the Roman collegia, and
a generation at the end by observing how much the constitution of
modern Switzerland owes to that of the United States.

CHAP. XL : STATE LEGISLATURES 87

six States it is entitled “The Assembly,” and in three
“The House of Delegates.” The origin of this very
interesting feature is to be sought rather in history than
in theory. It is due partly to the fact that in some
colonies there had existed a small governor's council in’
addition to the popular representative budy, partly to a
natural disposition to imitate the mother country with
its Lords and Commons, a disposition which manifested
itself both in colonial days and when the revolting States
were giving themselves new Constitutions, for up to
1776 some of the colonies had gone on with a legislature
of one house only. Now, however, the need for two
chambers has become an axiom of political science, being
based on the belief that the innate tendency of an
assembly to become hasty, tyrannical, and corrupt, néeds
to be checked by the co-existence of another house of
equal authority. The Americans restrain their legis-
latures by dividing them, just as the Romans restrained
their executive by substituting two consuls for one king.
The only States that ever tried to do with a single house
were Pennsylvania, Georgia, and Vermont, all of whom
gave it up: the first after four years’ ernenes the
second after twelve years, the last after fifty years.’ It

1 Upon this subject of the division of the legislature, see Kent's
Commentaries, i. 208-210; and Story’s Commentaries on the American
Constitution, §§ 548-570. It deserves to be remarked that the Pennsyl-
vanian Constitution of 1786, the Georgian Constitution of 1777, and the
Vermont Constitutions of 1786 and 1793, all of which constituted one
house of legislature only, provided for a second body called the Execu-
tive Council, which in Georgia had the duty of examining bills sent to it
by the House of Assembly, and of remonstrating against any provisions
they disapproved, and in Vermont was empowered to submit to the
Assembly amendments to bills sent up to them by the latter, and in case
tle Assembly did not accept such amendments, to suspend the passing of
the bill till the next session of the legislature, In 1789, Georgia
abolished her Council, and divided her legislature into two houses ;
Pennsylvania did the same in 1790; Vermont in 1836. Both Pennsyl-
vania and Vermont had also a body called the Council of Censors,

88 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

is with these trifling exceptions the quod semper, quod
ubique, quod ab omnibus of American constitutional
doctrine.’

Both houses are chosen by popular vote, generally ?
‘in equal electoral districts, and by the same voters,
although in a few States there are minor variations as
to modes of choice.®

The following differences between the rules governing
the two Houses are general :—

1. The senatorial electoral districts are always larger,
usually twice or thrice as large as the House districts,
and the number of senators is, of course, in the same
proportion smaller than that of representatives.

2. A senator is usually chosen for a longer term
than a representative. In twenty-four States he sits for
four years, in one (New Jersey) for three, in eleven for

who may be compared with the Nomothete of Athens, elected every
seven years, and charged with the duty of examining the laws of the State
and their execution, and of suggesting amendments. This body was
abolished in Pennsylvania in 1790, but lasted on in Vermont till 1870.
All these experiments well deserve the study of constitutional historians.

1 It ought to be noted as an illustration of the divergences between
countries both highly democratic that in the Swiss cantons the legislatures
consist of one chamber only. In most of these cantons there is, to be sure,
a referendum and a small executive council Another remarkable diver-
gence is that whereas in America, and especially in the West, the tendency
is towards “rotation” in office, in Switzerland an official and a member
of a legislatur is usually continued in his post from one term to another,
in fact is seldém displaced except for some positive fault. At one time
officials were steadily re-elected in Connecticut.

2 In Connecticut, every town which had members in 1874 still
returns two members, whatever its size, and new towns obtain two mem-
bers when they reach 5000, Thus a great many very small places have
two members each, and the State is governed by the representatives of
“rotten boroughs,” As they form the majority, they have hitherto
refused to submit to the people a constitutional amendment for a Te-
distribution of seats on the basis of equal population.

3 For instance, in Rhode Island every town or city, be it great or
small, returns one senator. In Illinois, every district returns one
senator and three representatives, but the latter are elected by minority
voting.

CHAP, XL STATE LEGISLATURES 89

two, in two (Massachusetts and Rhode Island) for one
year only.

3. In most cases the Senate, instead of being elected
all at once like the House, is only partially renewed: half
its members going out when their two or four years
have been completed, and a new half coming in. This
gives it a sense of continuity which the House wants.

4, In some States the age at which a man is eligible
for the Senate is fixed higher than that for the House
of Representatives ; and in one (Delaware) he must own
freehold land of 200 acres or real or personal estate of
the value of £1000. Other restrictions on eligibility,
such as the exclusion of clergymen (which still exists in
six States, and is of old standing), that of salaried public
officials (which exists everywhere), that of United States
officials and members of Congress, and that of persons
not resident in the electoral district (frequent by law
and practically universal by custom), apply to both
Houses. In some States this last restriction goes so far
that a member who ceases to reside in the district for
which he was elected loses his seat ¢pso facto.

I have dwelt in an earlier chapter (Chap. XIV.) on
the strength of this local feeling as regards congressional
elections, and on the results, to a European eye mostly
unfortunate, which it produces. It is certainly no
weaker in State elections. Nobody dreams of offering
himself as a candidate for a place in which he does
not reside, even in new States, where it might be
thought that there had not been time for local feel-
ing to spring up. Hence the educated and leisured
residents of the greater cities have no chance of enter-
ing the State legislature except for the city district
wherein they dwell; and as these city districts are those
most likely to be in the hands of some noxious and selfish

90 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART It

ring of professional politicians, the prospect for such an
aspirant -is a dark one. We shall see presently that
some of these State legislatures sadly need reform in
their methods and their tone. Nothing more contri-
butes to make reform difficult than the inveterate
habit of choosing residents only as members. Sup-
pose an able and public-spirited man desiring to
enter the Assembly or the Senate of his State and
shame the offenders who are degrading or plunder-
ing it. He may be wholly unable to find a seat,
because in his place of residence the party opposed to
his own may hold a permanent majority, and he will
not be even considered elsewhere. Suppose a group of
earnest men who, knowing how little one man can effect,
desire to enter the legislature at the same time and work
together. Such a group can hardly arise except in
or near a great city. It cannot effect an entrance,
because the city has at best very few seats to be seized,
and the city men cannot offer themselves in any other
part of the State. That the restriction often rests on
custom, not on Jaw, makes the case more serious. A
law can be repealed, but custom has to be unlearned ;
the one may be done in a moment of happy impulse, the
other needs the teaching of long experience applied to
receptive minds.

The fact is, that the Americans have ignored in all
their legislative as in many of their administrative
arrangements, the differences of capacity between man
and man. They underrate the difficulties of government
and overrate the capacities of the man of common sense.
Great are the blessings of equality ; but what follies are
committed in its name!

The unfortunate results of this local sentiment have
been ageravated by the tendency to narrow the election

CHAP, XL STATE LEGISLATURES 91

areas, allotting one senator or representative to each dis-
trict. Under the older Constitution of Connecticut, for
~jnstance, the twelve senators were elected out of the
whole State by a popular vote. Now {Amdts. of a.p.
1828) the twenty-four senators are chosen by districts,
and the Senate is to-day an inferior body, because then
the best men of the whole State might be chosen, now
it is possible only to get the leading men of the districts.
In Massachusetts, under the Constitution of 1780, the
senators were chosen by districts, but a district might
return aS many as six senators: the Assembly men
were chosen by towns,’ each corporate town having
at least one representative, and more in proportion
to its population, the proportion being at the rate
of one additional member for every 275 ratable polls.
In 1836 the scale of population to representatives
was raised, and a plan prescribed (too complicated to be
here set forth) under which towns below the population
entitling them to one representative, should have a
representative during a certain number of years out of
every ten’ years, the, census being taken decennially.
Thus a small town “might send a member to the
Assembly for five years out of every ten, choosing
alternate years, or the first five, or the last five, as it
pleased. Now, however (Amdts. of a.p. 1857), the
State has been divided into forty Senatorial districts,
each of which returns one senator only, and into 175
Assembly districts, returning, one, two, or, in a few
cases, three representatives each. The composition of
the legislature has declined ever since this change
was made. The area of choice being smaller, inferior

1 A town or township means in New England, and indeed generally
in the United States, a small rural district, as opposed to a city. It
is a community which has not received representative municipal govern-
ment,—See Chapter XLVIII. post.

92 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

men are chosen; and in the case of the Assembly
districts which return one member, but are composed of
several small towns, the practice has grown up of giving,
each town its turn, so that not even the leading man of
the district, but the leading man of the particular small
community whose turn has come round, is chosen to sit
in the Assembly.

Universal manhood suffrage, subject to certain dis-
qualifications in respect of crime (including bribery) and
of the receipt of poor law relief, which prevail in many
States—in eight States no pauper can vote—is the rule
in nearly all the States. A property qualification was
formerly required in many, but now exists only in Rhode
Island, where the possession of real estate valued at $134,
or the payment of a tax of at least $1 is required from
all citizens not natives of the United States.’ Four other
States (Delaware, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, and Ten-
nessee) require the voter to have paid some State or county
tax (Massachusetts and Tennessee call it a poll tax) ;
but if he does not pay it, his party usually pay it for
him, so the restriction is of little, practical importance.
Massachusetts also requires that he shall be able to read
the State Constitution in English, and to write his name
(Amdt. of 1857), Connecticut, that he shall be able
to read any section of the Constitution or of the statutes,
and shall sustain a good moral character (Amdts. of
1855 and 1845).2 So far as I have been able to

1 Rhode Island has, since the above was in print, abolished this require-
ment by a constitutional amendment. There were about 25,000 persons
whem it had excluded. Eight constitutions forbid the imposition of any
property qualification.

2 The Constitution of Colorado, 1876, allows its legislature to pre-
scribe an educational qualification for electors, but no such law is to take
effect prior toa.p. 1890. Florida by its Constitution of 1868 directed its
legislature to prescribe such qualifications, which, however, were not to
apply till after 1880, nor to any person who might then be already a voter.
In the Constitution of 1886 I find no such provision.

CHAP, XL STATE LEGISLATURES 93

ascertain, this educational test is of little practical
consequence. In Massachusetts it does not seem to
be generally enforced, perhaps because the party
managers on both sides agree not to, trouble voters
about it. Of course certain terms of residence within
the United States, in the particular State, and in the
voting districts, are also prescribed : these vary greatly
from State to State, but are usually short.

The suffrage is generally the same for other pur-
poses as for that of elections to the legislature, and
is in every State confined to male inhabitants. In a
few States, however, women are permitted to vote at
school district and in one at municipal elections,’ and in
these no distinction is made between married and un-
married women ; nor has it been attempted, in the various
constitutional amendments framed to give political
suffrave to women, but hitherto always rejected by the
people, to draw such a distinction, which would indeed
be abhorrent to the genius of American law.’

It is important to remember that, by the Constitu-
tion of the United States, the right of suffrage in
Federal or national elections (ve. for presidential
electors and members of Congress) is in each State
that which the State confers on those who vote at
the election of its more numerous House. Thus
there might exist great differences between one State

1 On the other hand, the Constitutions of Alabama and Mississippi
forbid any educational qualification to be imposed. It is curious, yet
easily explicable, that two of the most ignorant States should prohibit
what two of the best educated States (Massachusetts and Connecticut)
expressly prescribe. The safeguard is applied where it is least, and for-
bidtlen where it is most, needed. In Alabama and Mississippi it would
have excluded most of the negroes and many of the poor whites,

2 Minnesota and Colorado give the school vote to women by their
Constitutions ; Massachusetts has done it by statute. Kansas has very
recently (1888) conferred the municipal franchise.

94 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

and another in the free bestowal of the Federal franchise.
That such differences are at present insignificant is
due, partly to the prevalence of democratic theories,
of equality over the whole Union, partly to the
provision of the fourteenth amendment to the Federal
Constitution, which reduces the representation of a
State in the Federal House of Representatives, and
therewith also its weight in a presidential election, in
proportion to the number of adult male citizens dis-
qualified in that State. As a State desires to have its
full weight in national politics, it has a strong motive
for the widest possible enlargement of its Federal
franchise, and this implies a corresponding width in its
domestic franchise.

The number of members of the legislature varies
greatly from State to State. Delaware, with nine
senators, has the smallest Senate, Illinois, with fifty-one,
the largest. Delaware has also the smallest House of
Representatives, consisting of twenty-one members;
while New Hampshire, a very small State, has the
largest with 321. The New York houses number 32
and 128 respectively, those of Pennsylvania 50 and 201,
those of Massachusetts 40 and 240. In the Western
and Southern States the number of representatives
rarely exceeds 120.

As there is a reason for everything in the world, if
one could but find it out, so for this difference between the
old New England States and those newer States which
in many other points have followed their precedents.
In the New England States local feeling was and is
intensely strong, and every little town wanted to have
its member. In the West and South, local divisions
have had less natural life; in fact, they are artificial
divisions rather than genuine communities that arose

CHAP. XL STATE LEGISLATURES 95

spontaneously. Hence the same reason did not exist
in the West and South for having a large Assembly ;
while the distrust of representatives, the desire to
have as few of them as possible and pay them as little
as possible, have been specially strong motives in the
West and South, as also in New York and Penn-
sylvania, and have caused a restriction of numbers.

In all States the members of both Houses receive
salaries, which in some cases are fixed at an annual
sum of from $150 (Maine) to $1500 (New York),
the average being $500 (£100). More frequently, how-
ever, théy are calculated at so much for every day
during which the session lasts, varying from $1 (in
Rhode Island) to $8 (in California and Nevada) per
day (4s. 2d. to £1:13:4), besides a small allow-
ance, called mileage, for travelling expenses. These
sums, although unremunerative to a man who leaves a
prosperous profession or business to attend in the State
capital, are an object of such desire to many of the
representatives of the people, that the latter have
thought it prudent to restrict the length of the legis-
lative sessions, which now stand generally limited to
a fixed number of days, varying from forty days
in Georgia, Nebraska, and Oregon, to 150 days in
Pennsylvania. The States which pay by the day are
also those which limit the session. Some States secure
themselves against prolonged sessions by providing that
the daily pay shall diminish, or shall absolutely cease
and determine, at the expiry of a certain number of
days, hoping thereby to expedite business and check
inprdinate zeal for legislation.’

1 These limitations on payment are sometimes, where statutory,
repealed for the occasion. In the Swiss Federal Assembly a member
receives pay (16s. per diem) only for those days on which he answers to
his name on the roll call.

96 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

It was formerly usual for the legislature to meet
annually, but the experience of bad legislation and over
legislation has led to fewer as well as shorter sittings ;
and sessions are now biennial in all States but six: viz.
“Massachusetts, Connecticut, Rhode Island, New York,
New Jersey, South Carolina, all of them old States. In
these the sessions are annual, save in that odd little
nook Rhode Island, which still convokes her legis-
lature every May at Newport, and afterwards holds an
adjourned session at Providence, the other chief city of
the commonwealth. There is, however, in nearly all
States a power reserved to the governor to summon
the Houses in extraordinary session should a pressing
occasion arise, but the provisions for daily pay do
not usually apply to these extra sessions.’

Bills may originate in either House, save that in
nineteen States money bills must originate in the
House of Representatives, a rule for which, in the pre-
sent condition of things, when both Houses are equally
directly representative of the people and chosen by the
same electors, no sufficient ground appears. It is a
curious instance of the wish which animated the framers
of the first Constitutions of the original thirteen States
to reproduce the details of the English Constitution
that had heen deemed bulwarks of liberty. The newer
States borrowed it from their elder sisters, and the
existence of a similar provision in the Federal Con-
stitution has no doubt helped to perpetuate it in all the
States. But there is a reason for it in Congress, the
Federal Senate not being directly representative of
equal numbers of citizens, which is not found in the
State legislatures : it is in these last a mere survival of no

1 Some of the biennially-meeting legislatures are apt to hold adjourned
sessions in the off years.

CHAP, XL STATE LEGISLATURES 97
a
present functional value. Money bills may, however, be
amended or rejected by the State Senates like any other
bills, just as the Federal Senate amends money bills
brought up from the House.

In one point a State Senate enjoys a special power,
obviously modelled on that of the English House of
Lords and the Federal Senate. It sits as a court under
oath for the trial of State officials impeached by the
House.’ Like the Federal Senate, it has in many States
the power of confirming or rejecting appointments to
office made by the governor. When it considers these
it is said to “go into executive Session.” The
power is an important one in those States which
allow the governor to nominate the higher judges.
In other respects the powers and procedure of the two
Houses of a State legislature are identical ;? except that,
whereas the lieutenant-governor of a State is generally
ex officio president of the Senate, with a casting vote
therein, the House always chooses its own Speaker.
The legal quorum is usually fixed, by the Constitution,
at a majority of the whole number of members elected,*
though a smaller number may adjourn and compel the
attendance of absent members. Both Houses do most
of their work by committees, much after the fashion of
Congress,‘ and the committees are in both usually

1 In New York impeachments are tried by the Senate and the judges
of the Court of Appeal sitting together: in Nebraska by the judges of
the Supreme court.

2 Here and there one finds slight differences, as, for instance, in Ver-
mont the power decennially to propose amendments to the Constitution
belongs to the Senate, though the concurrence of the House is needed.
However, I do not attempt in this summary to give every detail of every
Constitution, but only a fair general account of what commonly prevails,
and is of most interest to the student of comparative politics.

3 So thirty-two constitutions. Four fix the quorum at two-thirds, and
two specify a number.

* See, as to the committees of Congress, Chapter XV. in Vol.I. Some

VOL. II H

98 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

chosen by the Speaker (in the Senate by the President),
though it is often provided that the House (or Senate)
may on motion vary their composition.” Both Houses
sit with open doors, but in most States the Constitution
empowers them to exclude strangers when the business
requires secrecy.

The State governor has of course no right to dis-
solve the legislature, nor even to adjourn it unless the
Houses, while agreeing to adjourn, disagree as to the
date. Such control as the legislature can exercise
over the State officers by way of inquiry into their con-
duct is generally exercised by committees, and it is in
committees that the form of bills is usually settled and
their fate decided, just as in the Federal Congress.
The proceedings are rarely reported. Sometimes
when a committee takes evidence on an important
question reporters are present, and the proceedings more
resemble a public meeting than a legislative session.
It need scarcely be added that neither House separ-
ately, nor both Houses acting together, can control
an executive officer otherwise than either by passing a
statute prescribing a certain course of .action for him,
which if it be in excess of their powers will be held
unconstitutional and void, or by withholding the ap-
propriations necessary to enable him to carry out the
course of ‘action he proposes to adopt. The latter

constitutions provide that no bill shall pass unless it has been previously
referred to and considered by a committee.

1 ‘In Massachusetts there were in 1881 six standing committees of the
Senate, ten of the House, twenty-five joint standing committees, and six
joint special committees of both Houses. In Pennsylvania there were in
1887 twenty-nine standing committees of the Senate, thirty-four of ¢he
House. In Indiana there were in 1887 thirty-seven standing committees
of the House, and four joint standing committees of House and Senate.
In Minnesota in 1886 there were thirty-two standing committees of the
Senate, thirty-four ‘of the House, and two joint standing committees.

CHAP. XL STATE LEGISLATURES 99

en

method, where applicable, is the more effective, because
it can be used by a bare majority of either House,
whereas a bill passed by both Houses may be vetoed by
the governor, a point so important ag to need a few
words.

Four States, three of them original States, vest
legislative authority in the legislature alone. These are
Rhode Island, Delaware, North Carolina, and Ohio.
All the rest require a bill to be submitted to the
governor, and permit him to return it to the legis-
lature with his objections. If he so returns it, it can
only be again passed “over the veto” by something
more than a bare majority. To so pass a bill over the
veto there is required—

In two States a majority of three-fifths in each

House. ,

In twenty-three States a majority of two-thirds in

each House.

In nine States a majority in each House of all the

members elected to that House.

Here, therefore, as in the Federal Constitution, we
find a useful safeguard against the unwisdom or mis-
conduct of a legislature, and a method provided for
escaping, in extreme cases, from those deadlocks which
the system of checks and balances tends to occasion.

I have adverted in a preceding chapter to the restric-
tions imposed on the legislatures of the States by their
respective Constitutions. These restrictions, which are
numerous, elaborate, and instructive, take two forms—

I. Exclusions of a subject from legislative com-
petence, 2.e. prohibitions to the legislature to pass any
law on certain enumerated subjects. The most im-
portant classes of prohibited statutes are—

Statutes inconsistent with democratic principles, as,

100 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

for example, granting titles of nobility, favouring
one religious denomination, creating a property
qualification for suffrage or office.

Statutes against public policy, e.g. tolerating lot-
teries, impairing the obligation of contracts,
incorporating or permitting the incorporation of
banks, or the holding by a State of bank stock.’

Statutes special or local in their application, a very
large and increasing category, the fulness and
minuteness of which in many Constitutions show
that the mischiefs arising from improvident or
corrupt special legislation must have become
alarming. The list of prohibited subjects in the
Constitution of Missouri of 1875 is the most
complete I have found.’

Statutes increasing the State debt beyond a certain
limited amount, or permitting a local authority
to increase its debt beyond a prescribed amount,
the amount being usually fixed in proportion to
the valuation of taxable property within the area
administered by the local authority.®

II. Restrictions on the procedure of the legislature,

a.€. directions as to the particular forms to be observed
and times to be allowed in passing bills, sometimes all
bills, sometimes bills of a certain specified nature.
Among these restrictions will be found provisions—
As to the majorities necessary to pass certain bills.

1 See, for instance, Constitution of Texas of 1876.

3 Similar lists occur in the constitutions of all the Western and
Southern States as well as of some Eastern States (eg. Constitution of
Pennsylvania of 1873, Art. iii. § 74 Constitution of New York, amend-
ments of 1874 to Constitution of 1846).

8 Further information on this head will be found in Chapter XLIII. dn
State Finance. The local authorities had been usually forbidden by
statute to borrow or tax beyond a certain amount, but as they had formed
the habit of obtaining dispensations from the State legislatures, the check
mentioned in the text has been imposed on the latter.

CHAP, XL STATE LEGISLATURES 101

Sometimes a majority of the whole number of
members elected to each House is required, or
a majority exceeding a bare majority.

As to the method of taking the votes, e.g. by calling
over the roll and recording the vote of each
member.

As to allowing certain intervals to elapse between
each reading of a measure, and for preventing
the hurried passage of bills at the end of the
session.

As to including in a bill only one subject, and
expressing that subject in the title of the bill.

Against re-enacting, or amending, or incorporating,
any former Act by reference to its title merely,
without setting out its contents.’

The two latter classes of provisions might be found
wholesome in England, where much of the difficulty
complained of by the judges in construing the law arises
from the modern habit of incorporating parts of former
statutes, and dealing with them by reference.

Where statutes have been passed by a legislature
upon a prohibited subject, or where the prescribed forms
have been transgressed or omitted, the statute will be
held void so far as inconsistent with the Constitution.

Even these multiform restrictions on the State legis-
latures have not been found sufficient. Bitted and
bridled as they are by the Constitutions, they contrive,
as will appear in a later chapter, to do plenty of ‘hnis-
chief in the direction of private or special legislation.

1 Indiana and Oregon direct every Act to be plainly worded, avoid-
inf as far as possible technical terms, and Louisiana (Constitution of
1879, § 31) says: “The General Assembly shall never adopt any system
or code of laws by general reference to such system or code of laws, but
in all cases shall recite at length the several provisions of the laws it may
enact.”

102 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART IT

Although State legislatures have of course no con-
cern whatever with foreign affairs, this is not deemed
a reason for abstaining from passing resolutions on that
subject. The ‘passion for resolutions is strong every-
where jn America, and an expression of sympathy with
an oppressed foreign nationality, er of displeasure at
any unfriendly behaviour of a foreign power, is not only
an obvious way of zelieving the feelings of the legis-
lators, but often af electioneering device, which appeals
to some section of the State voters. Accordingly such
resolutions are common, and, though of course quite
irregular, quite innocuous,

Debates in these bodies are seldom well reported,
and sometimes not reported at all. One result is that
the conduct of members escapes the scrutiny of their
constituents; a better one that speeches are generally
short and practical, the motive for rhetorical displays
being absent. If a man does not make a reputation
for oratory, he may for quick good sense and business
habits. However, so much of the real wore is done
in committees: that talent for intrigue or “ manage-
ment” usually counts for more than debating power.

CHAPTER XLI
THE STATE EXECUTIVE

THE executive department in a State consists of a
governor (in all the States), a lieutenant-governor, (in
twenty-seven), and of various minor officials. The
governor, who, under the earlier Constitutions of most
of the original thirteen States, was chosen by the
legislature, is now always elected by the people, and
by the same suffrage, practically universal, as the legis-
lature. He is elected directly, not, as under the Federal
Constitution, by a college of electors. His term of
office is, in sixtcen.States, four years; in two States,
three years ; in eighteen States, two years; and in two
States (Massachusetts and Rhode Island), one year.
His salary varies from $10,000 (£2000) in New York
and Pennsylvania to $1000 (£200) in Michigan. Some
States limit his re-eligibility ; but in those which do not
there seems to exist no tradition forbidding a third term
of office similar to that which has prevailed in the
Federal Government since the days of Washington.

The earlier Constitutions of the original States (except
South Carolina) associated with the governor an execu-
tive council’ (called in Delaware the Privy Council),

1 This is another interesting illustration of the disposition to repro-
duce England. Vermont was still under the influence of English pre-

104 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

but these councils have long since disappeared, except
in Massachusetts, Maine, and North Carolina, and the
governor remains in ,solitary glory the official head
and representative of the majesty of the State. His
powers are, however, in ordinary times more specious
than solid, and only. one of them is of great practical
value. He is charged with the duty of seeing that the
laws of the State are faithfully administered by all
officials and the judgments of the courts carried out,
He has, in nearly all States, the power of reprieving
and pardoning offenders, but in some this does not
extend to treason or to conviction on impeachment (in
Vermont he cannot pardon for murder), and in some,
other authorities are associated with him in the exercise
of this prerogative. He is commander-in-chief of the
armed forces of the State, can embody the militia, repel
invasion, suppress insurrection.

He appoints some few officials, but seldom to high
posts, and in many States his nominations require the
approval of the State Senate. Patronage, in which
the President of the- United States finds one of his
most desired and most disagreeable functions, is in
the case of a State governor of slight value, because
the State offices are not numerous, and the more im-
portant and Jucrative ones are filled by the direct election
of the people. However, in a few States the governor
still retains the nomination of the judges. He has in
cedents when it framed its Constitutions of 1786 and 1793. Maine was
influenced by Massachusetts. None of the newer Western States has ever
tried the experiment of such a council.

New York had originally two Councils, a “ Council of Appointment,”
consisting of the Governor and a Senator from each of the (originally four)
districts, and a ‘‘ Council of Revision,” consisting of the Governor, the
Chancellor and the judges of the Supreme court, and possessing a veto
on statutes. The Governor has now, since the extinction of these two

councils, obtained some of the patronage which belonged to the former as
well as the veto which belonged to the latter.

CHAP. XLI THE STATE EXECUTIVE 105

many the power of suspending or removing certain
officials, usually local officials, from office, upon proof of
their misconduct (see Constitution of New York of 1846,
Arts. v. and x.) He has the right oft requiring ‘nfor-
mation from the executive officials, and is usually bound
to communicate to the legislature his views regarding
the condition of the commonwealth. He may also,
recommend measures to them, but does not frame and
present bills. In a few States he is directed to present
estimates. He has in all the States but four a veto upon
bills passed by the legislature. This veto may be over-
ridden by the legislatures in manner already indicated
(see p.,99), but generally kills the measure, because if
the bill j is a bad one, it calls the attention of the people
to the fact and frightens the legislature, whereas if the
bill be an undbjectionable one, the governor’s motive for
vetoing it is probably a party motive, and the requisite
overriding majority can seldom be secured in favour of
a bill which either party dislikes. The use of his veto is,
in ordinary times, a governor's most serious duty, and
chiefly by his discharge of it is he judged.

Although much less sought after and prized than in
“the days of the Fathers,” when a State governor some-
times refused to yield precedence to the President of the
United States, the governorship is still, particularly in
New England, and such great States as New York or
Ohio, a post of some dignity, and affords an opportunity
for the display of character and talents. It was in his
governorship of New York that Mr. Cleveland, for

« ) It deserves to be remarked that neither the Constitution of the Swiss
Confederation nor any cantonal constitution vests a veto in any officer.
Switzerland seems in this respect more democratic than the American
States, while in the amount of authority which the Swiss allow to the
executive government over the citizen (as witness the case of the Salvation
Army troubles in Canton Bern) they are less democratic.

106 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

instance, commended himself to his party, and rose
to be President of the United States. Similarly
Mr. Hayes was put forward for the Presidency in
©1876 because he had been a good governor of Ohio.
During the Civil War, when each governor was respon-
sible for enrolling, equipping, officering, and sending
forward troops from his State,’ and when it rested
with him to repress any attempts at disorder, much
depended on his energy, popularity, and loyalty. In
some States men still talk of the “war governors” of
those days as heroes to whom the North owed deep
gratitude. And since the Pennsylvanian riots of 1877
and those which have subsequently occurred in Cin-
cinnati and Chicago have shown that tumults may
suddenly grow to serious proportions, it has in many
States become important to have a man of prompt
decision and fearlessness in the office which issues
orders to the State militia. In most States there is an
elective lieutenant-governor who steps into the gover-
nor’s place if i becomes vacant, and who is usually also
ex officio President of the Senate,-as the Vice-President
of the United States is of the Federal Senate. Other-
wise he is an insignificant personage, though sometimes
a member of some of the executive boards.”

The names and duties of the other officers vary from
State to State. The most frequent are a secretary of
state (in all States), a treasurer (in all), an attorney-
general, a comptroller, an auditor, a superintendent of
public instruction. Now and then we find a State

1 Commissions to officers up to the rank of colonel inclusive were
usually issued by the governor of the State: the regiment, in fact, was a
State product, though the regular Federal army is of course raised and
managed by the Federal Government directly.

2 In States which have no lieutenant-governor, the President of the
State Senate usually succeeds if the governor dies or becomes incapable.

CHAP, XLI THE STATE EXECUTIVE 107

engineer, a surveyor, a superintendent of prisons.
Some States have also various boards of commissioners,
e.g. for railroads, for canals, for prisons, for the land
office, for agriculture, for immigratjon. Most of
these officials are in nearly all States elected by the
people at the general State election. Sometimes, how-
ever, they, or some of them, are either chosen by
the legislature, or, more rarely, appointed by the
governor, whose nomination usually requires the con-
firmation of the Senate. Their salaries, which of course
vary with the importance of the office and the parsi-
mony of the State, seldom exceed $5000 (£1000) per
annum and are usually smaller. So, too, the length of
the term of office varies. It is often the same as that
of the governor, and never exceeds four years, except
that in New Jersey, a conservative State, the secretary
and attorney-general hold for five years; and in Ten-
nessee the attorney-general who, oddly enough, is ap-
pointed by the supreme court of the State, holds for eight.

It has already been observed that the State officials
are in no sense a ministry or cabinet to the governor.
Holding independently of him, and responsible neither
to him nor to the legislature, but to the people, they
do not take generally his orders, and need not regard his
‘advice.’ Each has his own department to administer,
and as there is little or nothing political in the work, a

1 Florida, by her Constitution of 1868, Art. vi. 17, and Art. viii.,
created a “cabinet of administrative officers,” consisting of eight officials,
appointed by the governor, with the consent of the Senate, who are to
hold office for the same time as the governor, and “assist the governor
in the performance of his duties.” However, in her Constitution of
1386 she simply provides that ‘the governor shall be assisted by admin-
istrative officers,” viz. secretary of state, attorney-general, comptroller,
treasurer, superintendent of public instruction, and commissioner of agri-
culture, all elected by the people at the same time with the governor
and for the same term. The council of North Carolina (Constitution
of 1868) consists of five officials, who are to “advise the governor

108 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

general agreement in policy, such as must exist between

the Federal President and his ministers, is not required.

Policy rests with the legislature, whose statutes, prescrib-,
ing minutely the action to be taken by the officials, leave

little room for executive discretion. Europeans may

best realize the nature of the system by imagining a

municipal government in which the mayor, town clerk,

health officer, and city architect are all chosen directly

by the people, instead of by the common council, and in

which every one of these latter officials is for most

purposes, and except so far as he needs appropriations

of money, independent not only of the mayor, but also

of the common council, except in so far as the latter
acts by general ordinances—that is to say, acts as-a
purely legislative and not as an administrative body.’

To give a clearer idea of the staff of a State govern-

ment I will take the great State of Ohio, and give the
functions of the officials by whom it is administered.?

The executive officials of Ohio are :—

A Governor, elected by the people for two years.
His chief duties are to execute the laws, convene
the legislature on extraordinary’ occasions, com-
mand the State forces, appoint staff officers and
aides-de-camp, grant pardons and _ reprieves,
isspie commissions to State and county officers,
make a variety of appointments, serve on certain

in the execution of his duty,” but they are elected directly by the people.
Their position may be compared with that of the Council of India under
receut English statutes towards the English Secretary of State for India.

1 In the Swiss Confederation the Federal Council of Seven consists of
persons belonging to different parties, who sometimes speak against one
another in the chambers (where they have the right of speech), but this
is not found to interfere with their harmonious working as an adminis-
trative body.

2 T abridge this from a useful little book, called the Ohio Voter?
Manual, by Mr. W. 8. Collins, stating the mode of election, duties, and
powers of every officer elected at the polls in the State of Ohio,

CHAP, XLI THE STATE EXECUTIVE 109
es Se ne ee

boards, and remove, with the assent of the
Senate, any official appointed by him and it.
He is paid $4000 (£800) a year.

A Ineutenant-Governor, elected by the people for two
years, salary $800 (£160) a year, with the duty
of succeeding to the governor (in case of death
or disability), and of presiding in the Senate.

A Secretary of State, elected by the people for two
years (along with the governor), salary $2000
(£400) a year, besides sundry fees for copies of
documents. His duties are to take charge of
laws and documents of the State, gather and re-
port statistics, distribute instructions to certain
officers, and act as secretary to certain boards,
to serve on the State printing and State library
boards, to make an abstract of the votes for
candidates at presidential and State elections.

A State Auditor, elected by the people for four
years, salary $3000 (£600). Duties—to keep
accounts of all moneys in the State treasury,
and of all appropriations and warrants, to give
warrants for all payments from or into the
treasury, to conduct financial communications
with county authorities, and direct the attorney-
general to prosecute revenue claims, to serve on
various financial boards, and manage various
kinds of financial business.

A State Treasurer, elected by the people fortwoyears,
salary $3000 (£600). Duties—to keep account
of all drafts, paying the money into the treasury,
and of auditor’s warrants for drafts from it, and
generally to assist and check the auditor in the
supervision and disbursement of State revenues,
publishing monthly statements of balances.

110 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

A State Attorney-General, elected by the people for
two years, salary $1500 (£300) a year, and 3 per
cent on all collections made for the State, but ,
total not to exceed $2000 a year in all. Duties
—to appear for the State in civil and criminal
cases, advise legally the governor and other
State officers, and the Assembly, proceed against
offenders, enforce performance of charitable
trusts, submit statistics of crime, sit upon
various boards.

A State Commissioner of Common Schools, elected by
the people for three years, salary $2000 (£400)
a year. Duties—to visit and advise teachers’
institutes, boards of education, and teachers,
deliver lectures on educational topics, see that
educational funds are legally distributed, prepare
and submit annual reports on condition of schools,
appoint State board of examiners of teachers.

Three Members of Board of Public Works, elected
by the people for three years, one in each year,
salary $800 (£160) a year, and travelling
expenses, not exceeding $50 a month. Duties
—to manage and repair the public works (in-
cluding canals) of the State, appoint and super-

ise minor officials, let contracts, present annual

detailed report to the governor.

Besides these, the people of the State elect the judges
and the clerk of the supreme court. Other officials are
either elected by the people in districts, counties, or
cities, or appointed by the governor or legislature.

Of the subordinate civil service of a State there, is
little to be said. It is not large, for the sphere of
administrative action which remains to the State
between the Federal government on the one side,

CHAP, XLI THE STATE EXECUTIVE 11
eS

and the county, city, and township governments on
the other, is not wide. It is ill-paid, for the State
legislatures, especially in the West, are parsimonious.
It is seldom well-manned, for able men have no induce-
ment to enter it; and the so-called “Spoils System,”
which has been hitherto applied to State no less than
to Federal offices, makes places the reward for political
work, 2.e. electioneering and wirepulling. Efforts are
now being made in some States to introduce reforms
similar to those begun in the Federal administration,
whereby certain walks of the civil service shall be kept
out of politics, at least so far as to secure competent
men against dismissal on party grounds, Such reforms
would in no case apply to the higher officials chosen
by the people, for they are always elected for short
terms and on party lines.

Every State, except Oregon, which is content to rely
on the ordinary law, provides for the impeachment of
executive officers, and usually of all such officers, for
grave offences. In all, save two, the State House of
Representatives is the impeaching body; and in all but
New York the State “Senate sits as the tribunal, a two-
thirds majority being generally required for a conviction.
Impeachments are rare in practice.

There is also in many States a power of removing
officials, sometimes by the vote of the legislature, some-
times by the governor on the address of both houses, or
by the governor alone, or with the concurrence of the
Senate. Such removals must of course be made in
respect of some offence, or for some other sufficient
cause, not from caprice or party motives; and when the
case does not seem to justify immediate removal, the
governor is sometimes empowered to suspend the officer,
pending an investigation of his conduct.

CHAPTER XLII
THE STATE JUDICIARY

Tue Judiciary in every State includes three sets of
courts :—-A supreme court or court of appeal; superior
courts of record; local courts; but the particular
names and relations of these several tribunals and the
arrangements for criminal business vary greatly from
State to State. We hear of courts of common pleas, pro-
bate courts,’ surrogate courts, prerogative courts, courts
of oyer and terminer, orphans’ courts, court of general
sessions of the peace and gaol delivery, quarter sessions,
hustings’ courts, county courts, etc. etc. All sorts of
old English institutions have been transferred bodily,
and sometimes look as odd in the midst of their new
surroundings as the quaint gables of a seventeenth-
century house among the terraces of a growing London
suburb. As respects the distinction which Englishmen
used to deem fundamental, that of courts of common
law and courts of equity, there has been great diversity
of practice. Most of the original thirteen colonies once
possessed separate courts of chancery, and these were
maintained for many years after the separation from
England, and were imitated in a few of the earlier

1 Admiralty business is within the exclusive jurisdiction of the
Federal courts.

CHAP. XLII THE STATE JUDICIARY 113
a Se Se eA NE! Ee SN

among the new States, such as Michigan, Arkansas,
Missouri. In some of the old States, however, the hos-
tility to equity jurisdiction, which marked the popular
party in England in the seventeenth century, had
transmitted itself to America. Chancery courts were
regarded with suspicion, because thought to be less bound
by fixed rules, and therefore more liable to be abused
by an ambitious or capricious judiciary." Massachusetts,
for instance, would permit no such court, though she
was eventually obliged to invest her ordinary judges
with equitable powers, and to engraft a system of equity
on her common law, while still keeping the two systems
distinct. Pennsylvania held out still longer, but she also
now administers equity, as indeed every civilized State
must do in substance, dispensing it, however, through the
same judges as those who apply the common law, and
having more or less worked it into the texture of the
older system. Special chancery courts were abolished
in New York, where they had flourished and enriched
American jurisprudence by many admirable judgments,
by the democratizing constitution of 1846; and they
now exist only in a’ few of the States, chiefly older
Eastern or Southern States,’ which, in judicial matters,
have shown themselves more conservative than their
sisters in the West. In three States only (New York,
North Carolina, and California) has there been a com-
plete fusion of law and equity, although there are several
others which have provided that the legislature shall
abolish the distinction between the two kinds of pro-

1 Note that the grossest abuses of judicial power by American judges,
such as the Erie Railroad injunctions of Judge Barnard of New York in
1869, were perpetrated in the exercise of equitable jurisdiction. Equity in
granting discretion opens a door to indiscretion, or to something worse.

2 Distinct chancery courts remain in Delaware, New Jersey, Vermont,
Tennessee, Alabama, Mississippi, Michigan.

VOL, II I

¥I4 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

cedure. Five States provide for the establishment of
tribunals of arbitration and conciliation.

The jurisdiction of the State courts, both civil and,
criminal, is absolutely unlimited, ze. there is no appeal
from them to the Federal courts, except in certain cases
specified by the Federal Constitution (see above, Chapter
XXITI.), being cases in which some point of Federal
law arises. Certain classes of cases are, of course,
reserved for the Federal courts and in some the
State courts enjoy a concurrent jurisdiction.’ All
crimes, except such as are punishable under some
Federal statute, are justiciable by a State court; and
it is worth remembering that in most States there
exist much wider facilities for setting aside the verdict
of a jury finding a prisoner guilty, by raising all
sorts of points of law, than are permitted by the law and
practice of England. Such facilities have been and are
abused, to the great detriment of the community.

One or two other points relating to law and justice
in the States require notice. Each State recognizes the
judgments of the courts of a sister State, gives credit to
its public acts and records, and delivers up to its justice
any fugitive from its jurisdiction charged with a crime.
Of course the courts of one State are not bound either by
law or usage to follow the reported decisions of those of
another State. They use such decisions merely for their
own enlightenment, and as some evidence of the common
law, just as they use the English law reports. Most of
the States have within the last half century made sweep-
ing changes, not only in their judicial system, but in
the form of their law. They have revised and codified
their statutes, a carefully corrected edition whereof is
issued every few years. They have in many instances

1 See Chapter XXII. ante,

CHAP, XLII THE STATE JUDICIARY 115

adopted codes of procedure, and in some cases have
even enacted codes embodying the substance of the
common law, and fusing it with the statutes. Such
codes, however, have been condemned by the judg-
ment of the abler and more learned part of the pro-
fession, as tending to confuse the law and make it more
uncertain and less scientific! A warm controversy has
lately been raging in New York on the subject. But
with the masses of the people the proposal is popular,
for it holds out a prospect, unfortunately belied by the
result in States which, like California, have tried the
experiment, of a system whose simplicity will enable the
layman to understand the law, and render justice cheaper
and more speedy. A really good code might have these
happy effects. But it may be doubted whether the
codifying States have taken the steps requisite to
secure the goodness of the codes they enact. And
there is a grave objection to the codification of State
law which does not exist in a country like England
or France. So long as the law of a State remains
common law, 2.e. rests upon custom and decisions given
by the judges, the law of each State tends to keep in
tolerable harmony with that of other States, because
each set of judges is enlightened by and disposed to
be influenced by the decisions of the Federal courts
and of judges in other States. But when the whole law
of a State has been enacted in the form of a code all
existing divergences between one State and another
are sharpened and perpetuated, and new divergences
probably created. Hence codification increases the
vasiations of the law between different States, and these

1 This is perhaps less true of Louisiana, where the civil law of Rome,
which may be said to have been the common law of the State, offered a
better basis for a code than the English common law dves. The
Louisiana code is based on the Code Napoleon,

116 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

variations may impede business and disturb the ordinary
relations of life.

Important as are the functions of the American
judiciary, the powers of a judge are limited by the State
Constitutions in a manner surprising to Europeans. He
is not allowed to charge the jury on questions of fact,’
but only to state the law. He is sometimes required to
put his charge in writing. His power of committing for
contempt of court is often restricted. Express rules
forbid him to sit in causes wherein he can have any family
or pecuniary interest. In one Constitution his punctual
attendance is enforced by the provision that if he
does not arrive in court within half an hour of the time
fixed for the sitting, the attorneys of the parties may
agree on some person to act as judge, and proceed forth-
with to the trial of the cause. And in California he is
not allowed to draw his salary till he has made an affi-
davit that no cause that has been submitted for decision
for ninety days remains undecided in his court.’

I come now to three points, which are not only im-
portant in themselves, but instructive as illustrating the
currents of opinion which have influenced the peoples
of the States. These are—

The method of appointing the judges.

Their tenure of office.

Their salaries.

The remarkable changes that have been made in the
two former matters, and the strange practice which now
prevails in the latter, are full of significance for the
student of modern democracy, full of warning for Europe
and the British colonies.

1 A frequent form is that in the Constitution of Tennessee of 1870
(Art. vi. § 9)—*‘ Judges shall not charge juries with respect to matters of
fact, but may state the testimony and declare the law.”

2 The Californian judges are said to have contrived to evade this.

CHAP. XLII THE STATE JUDICIARY 117

In colonial days the superior judges were appointed
by the Governors, except in Rhode Island and Connecti-
cut, where the legislature elected them. When, in and
after 1776, the States formed their firsé Constitutions,
four States,’ besides the two just named, vested the
appointment in the legislature, five? gave it to the
Governor with the consent of the council; Delaware gave
it to the legislature and President (=Governor) in joint
ballot, while Georgia alone entrusted the election to the
people.

In the period between 1812 and 1860, when the tide
of democracy was running strong, the function was in
several of the older States taken from the Governor or
the legislature to be given to the people voting at the
polls; and the same became the practice among the
new States as they were successively admitted to the
Union. Mississippi, in 1832, made all her judges elected
by the people. The decisive nature of the change was
marked by the great State of New York, which, in her
highly democratic Constitution of 1846, transferred all
judicial appointments to the citizens at the polls.

At present we find that in twenty-five States, the
judges are elected by the people. These include nearly
all the Western and Southern States, besides New York,
Pennsylvania, and Ohio.

In five States * they are elected by the legislature.

In eight States‘ they are appointed by the Governor,
subject however to confirmation either by the council,
or by the legislature, or by one House thereof.

1 Virginia, New Jersey, North Carolina, and South Carolina.
Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Pennsylvania, Maryland, New York.

3 Rhode Island, Vermont, Virginia, South Carolina, Georgia.
* Massachusetts, Connecticut, New Hampshire, Delaware, Maine,
Mississippi, New Jersey, Louisiana ; in the last of which, however, district
judges, and in Maine and Connecticut probate judges, are popularly elected.

118 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART IT

I may observe that all the thirteen States which do
not appoint the judge by popular election either belong
to the original thirteen colonies or are States which
have been specially influenced by one of those thirteen
(as, for instance, Maine was influenced by Massachusetts).
It is these older commonwealths that have clung to the
less democratic methods of choosing judicial officers ;
while the new democracies of the West, together with
the most populous States of the East, New York and
Pennsylvania, States thoroughly democratized by their
great cities, have thrown this grave and delicate function
into the rude hands of the masses, that is to say, of
the wirepullers.

Originally, the superior judges were, in most States,
like those of England since the Revolution of 1688,
appointed for life, and held office during good behaviour,
a.e, were removable only when condemned on an impeach-
ment, or when an address requesting their removal had
been presented by both houses of the legislature.’ A judge
may now be removed upon such an address in thirty States,
a majority of two-thirds in each house being usually re-
quired. The salutary provision of the British Constitution
against capricious removals has been faithfully adhered to.
But the wave of democrary has in nearly all States swept
away the old system of life-tenure. Only four now
retain it.2 In the rest a judge is elected or appointed
for a term, varying from two years in Vermont to twenty-
one years in Pennsylvania. Eight to ten years is the
average term prescribed ; but a judge is always re-eligible,

1 The power of impeachment remains but is not often used.

2 Massachusetts, Rhode Island, New Hampshire, Delaware, ,all
of them among the original thirteen. In New Hampshire and
Delaware the judge must retire at seventy years of age. In Florida
though the three justices of the supreme court are now (Constitution of
1886) elected by the people, the seven circuit judges are appointed by
the governor.

CHAP, XLII THE STATE JUDICIARY 119

and likely to be re-elected if he be not too old, if he
has given satisfaction to the bar, and if he has not
, offended the party which placed him on the bench.

The salaries paid to State judges of the higher courts
range from $8500 (£1700), (chief-justice), in Pennsyl-
vania, and $7000 (£1400) +$2000 (£400) for expenses
in New York, to $2000 in Oregon. $4000 to $5000
(£800 to £1000) is the average, a sum which, especi-
ally in the greater States, fails to attract the best legal
talent. Judges of the inferior courts of course receive
salaries proportionately lower. In general the new
Western States are the worst paymasters,! their popu-
lation of farmers not perceiving the importance of
securing high ability on the bench, and deeming $4000
a larger sum than a quiet-living man can need. The
lowness of the scale on which the salaries of Federal
judges are fixed confirms this tendency.

Any one of the three phenomena I have described
—popular elections, short terms, and small salaries—
would be sufficient to lower the character of the judi-
ciary. Popular elections throw the choice into the
hands of political parties, that is to say, of knots of
wirepullers inclined to use every office as a means of
rewarding political services, and garrisoning with grate-
ful partisans posts which may conceivably become of
political importance. Short terms oblige the judge to
remember and keep on good terms with those who
have made him what he is, and in whose hands his
fortunes lie. They induce timidity, they discourage
independence. And small salaries prevent able men
fram offering themselves for places whose income is
perhaps only one-tenth of what a leading barrister can

1 Vermont and New Hampshire also pay their supreme court judyes
only $2500 (£500) and $2700 respectively.

120 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

make by private practice. Putting the three sources
of mischief together, no one will be surprised to
hear that in many of the American States the State
judges are men of moderate abilities and scanty
learning, inferior, and sometimes vastly inferior, to
the best of the advocates who practise before them.
It is more hard to express a general opinion as to their
character, and particularly as to what is called, even in
America where robes are not worn, the “ purity of the
judicial ermine.” Pecuniary corruption seems, so far as
a stranger can ascertain, to be rare, perhaps very rare,
but there are other ways in which sinister influences can
play on a judge’s mind, and impair that confidence in
his impartiality which is almost as necessary as im-
partiality itself. And apart from all questions of dis-
honesty or unfairness, it is an evil that the bench should
not be intellectually and socially at least on a level
with the bar.

The mischief is serious. But I must own that it is
smaller than a European observer is prepared to expect.
In most of the twenty-four States where this system
prevails the bench is respectable; and in some it is
occasionally adorned by men of the highest eminence.
Not even in California or Arkansas are the results so
lamentable as,might have been predicted. New York
City, under the dominion of the Tweed Ring, has afforded
the only instance of flagrant judicial scandals; and even
in those loathsome days, the Court of Appeals at Albany,
the highest tribunal of the State, retained the respect of
good citizens. Justice in civil causes between man and
man is fairly administered over the whole Union, and the
frequent failures to convict criminals, or punish them
when convicted, are attributable not so much either to
weakness or to partiality on a judge’s part as to the

CHAP, XLII THE STATE JUDICIARY 121
er a rt)

tenderness of juries and the inordinate delays and com- .
plexity of criminal procedure.

Why then have sources of evil so grave failed to
produce correspondingly grave results? Three reasons.
may be suggested :—

One is the co-existence in every State of the Federal
tribunals, presided over by judges who are usually
capable and always upright. Their presence helps to
keep the State judges, however personally inferior, from
losing the sense of responsibility and dignity which
befits the judicial office, and makes even party wire-
pullers ashamed of nominating as candidates notoriously
incapable or tainted men.

Another is the influence of a public. opinion which
not only recognizes the interest the community has in
an honest administration of the law, but recoils from
turpitude in a highly placed official. The people act
as a check upon the party conventions that choose
candidates, by making them feel that they damage
themselves and their cause if they run a man of
doubtful character, and the judge himself is made to
dread public opinion in the criticisms of a very unre-
ticent press. Democratic theory, which has done a
mischief in introducing the elective system, partly
cures it by subjecting the bench to a light of publicity
which makes honesty the safest policy. Whatever
passes in court is, or may be, reported. The judge
must give his reasons for every judgment he delivers.

Lastly, there is the influence of the bar, a potent
influence even in the present day, when its réle is
less brilliant than in former generations. The local
party leaders who select the candidates and “run”
the conventions are in some States mostly lawyers
themselves, or at least in close relations with some

122 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART IL

leading lawyers of the State or district. Now lawyers
have not only a professional dislike to the entrusting
of law to incapable hands, the kind of dislike which
@ skilled bricklayer has to seeing walls badly laid,
but they have a personal interest in getting fairly com-
petent men before whom to plead. It is no pleasure
to them to have a judge so ignorant or so weak that a
good argument is thrown away upon him, or that you
can feel no confidence that the opinion given to a client,
or a point of law which you think clear, will be verified
by the decision of the court. Hence the bar often
contrives to make a party nomination for judicial office
fall, not indeed on a leading barrister, because a leading
barrister will not accept a place with $4000 a year,
when he can make $14,000 by private practice, but on
as competent a member of the party as can be got to
take the post. Having constantly inquired, in every
State I visited wherein the system of popular elections to
judgeships prevails, how it happened that the judges
were not worse, I was usually told that the bar had
interposed to prevent such and such a bad nomination,
or had agreed to recommend such and such a person
as a candidate, and that the party had yielded to
the wishes of the bar. Occasionally, when the wire-
pullers are on their good behaviour, or the bar is excep-
tionally public-spirited, a person will be brought forward
who has no claims except those of character and learning.
But it is perhaps more common for the lawyers to put
pressure on one or other party in nominating its party
candidates to select capable ones. Thus when a few
years ago the Republicans of New York State wene
running bad candidates, some leading Republican
lawyers persuaded the Democrats to nominate better
men, and thereupon issued an appeal in favour of

CHAP, XLII THE STATE JUDICIARY 123

these latter, who were accordingly carried at the ensuing
election. ,

These causes, and especially the last, go far to nullify
the malign effects of popular election and short terms,
But they cannot equally nullify the effect of small
salaries. Accordingly, while corruption and partiality
are uncommon among State judges, inferiority to the
practising counsel is a conspicuous and frequent fault.

One is obliged to speak generally, because there are
differences between the various States too numerous to
be particularized. In some, especially in the North-
West, the tone of the party managers and of the bar is
respectable, and the sense of common interest makes
everybody wish to have as good men as the salaries
will secure. In others there are traditions which even
unscrupulous wirepullers fear to violate. Pennsylvania,
for instance, though her legislature and her city govern-
ments have been impure, and little under the influence
of the bar, still generally elects capable judges.’ The
scandals of Barnard and Cardozo’ were due to the fact
that the vast and ignorant population of New York was
dominated by a gang of professional politicians who
neither feared the good citizens nor regarded the bar.

As there are institutions which do not work as well
as they theoretically ought, so there are happily others
which work better. The sale of offices under the old
monarchy of France, the sale of commissions in the
English army till 1871, the sale of advowsons and
next presentations to livings which still exists in the
Anglican Church Establishment, the bribery of electors
which has only the other day been extinguished in

1 Pennsylvania, it is fair to say, pays better than most States, and
gives long terms, so she can obtain better men than most.
2 The notorious Tweed Ring judges of twenty years ago.

124 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

England, were or are all of them indefensible in theory,
all mischievous in practice. But none of them did so
much harm as a philosophical observer would have
predicted, because other causes were at work to mitigate
and minimize their evils.

During the last few years there has been a distinct
change for the better. Some States which had vested
the appointment of judges in the legislature, like
Connecticut, or in the people, like Mississippi, have by
recent constitutional amendments or new Constitutions,
given it to the governor with the consent of the legislature
or of one house thereof.’ Others have raised the salaries,
or lengthened the terms of the judges, or, like New York,
have introduced both these reforms. Within the decade
ending December 1886, though twenty-eight States
altered their Constitutions, no one, except Florida, took
appointments from legislature or governor to entrust
them to popular vote. In this point at least, the tide
of democracy which went on rising for so many years,
seems to have begun to recede from the bigh-water mark
of 1840-1860. The American people, if sometimes bold
in their experiments, have a fund of good sense which
makes them watchful of results, and not unwilling to
reconsider their former decisions.

1 In Connecticut/the change was made at the instance of the Bar

Association of the State, which had seen with regret that the dominant
party in the State legislature was placing inferior men on the bench.

CHAPTER XLIII
STATE FINANCE

THE financial systems in force in the several States
furnish one of the widest and most instructive fields of
study that the whole range of American institutions
presents to a practical statesman, as well as to a student
of comparative politics. It is much to. be wished that
_some person equipped with the necessary special know-
ledge could survey them with a philosophic eye, and
present the results of his survey in a concise form. From
such an attempt I am interdicted not only by the want
of that special knowledge, but by the compass of the
subject, and the difficulty of obtaining in Europe ade- —
quate materials. Tlese materials must be sought not
only in the Constitutions of the States, but even more
in their statutes, and in the reports presented by the
various financial officials, and by the special commissions
occasionally appointed to investigate the subject or some
branch of it. All I can here attempt is to touch on a few
of the more salient features of the topic, and to cull from
the Constitutions some illustrations of the dangers feared
and the remedies desired by the people of the States.
What I have to say falls under the heads of—

Purposes for which State revenue is required.

Forms of taxation.

Exemptions from taxation.

126 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

Methods of collecting taxes.

Limitations imposed on the power of taxing.

State indebtedness.

Restrictions imposed on the borrowing power.

I. The budget of a State is seldom large, in proportion
to the wealth of its inhabitants, because the chief burden
of administration is borne not by the State, but by its
subdivisions, the counties, and still more the cities and
townships. The chief expenses which a State undertakes
in its corporate capacity are—({1) The salaries of its
officials, executive and judicial, and the incidental
expenses of judicial proceedings, such as payments to
jurors and witnesses; (2) the State volunteer militia ;
(3) charitable and other public institutions, such as State
lunatic asylums, State universities, agricultural colleges,
etc. ;1 (4) grants to schools ;? (5) State prisons, compara- .
tively few, since the prison is usually supported by the
county ; (6) State buildings and public works, including,
in a few cases, canals; (7) payment of interest on State
debts. Ofthe whole revenue collected in each State under
State taxing laws, a comparatively small part is taken by
the State itself and applied to State purposes. In 1882

1 The Constitutions of Louisiana and Georgia allow State revenue to be
applied to the supplying of wooden legs and arms to ex-Confederate soldiers.

2 All or nearly all States have set apart for the support of schools
and of other educational or benevolent institutions, sometimes includ-
ing universities, a considerable fund derived from the sale of Western
lands granted for the purpose by the Federal government about twenty-
five years ago, and derived in some cases also from lands appropriated
originally by the State itself to these objects.

3 In the State of Connecticut (population in 1883 about 650,000) the
total revenue raised by taxation in 1883-84 was $8,524,776 (£1,800,000),
which was collected by and for the following authorities and purposes :~

The State. . . . $1,462,328
Counties. 3 : - 1,131,766
Towns - é - 2,808,682
Cities and boroughs : . 1,636,957

School districts . . - 1,485,043

CHAP. XLII STATE FINANCE 127

only seven States raised for State purposes a revenue
exceeding $2,000,000. In that year the revenue of
New York was $7,690,416 (pop. in 1882 about
5,200,000). In 1886-87 the revenue of Pennsylvania
was $7,646,147 (pop. about 4,700,000). These are small”
sums when compared either with the population and
wealth of these States, or with the revenue raised in
them by local authorities for local purposes. They are
also small in comparison with what is raised by in-
direct taxation for Federal purposes.

II. The Federal government raises. its revenue by
indirect taxation, ‘and by duties of customs and
excise, though it has the power of imposing direct
taxes, and used that power freely during the War of
Secession. State revenue, on the other hand, arises
almost wholly from direct taxation, since the Federal
Constitution forbids the levying of import or export
duties by a State, except with the consent of Congress,
and directs the produce of any such duties as Congress
may permit to be paid into the Federal treasury. The
chief tax is in every State a property tax, based on a
valuation of property, and generally of all property,
real and personal, within the taxing jurisdiction.

The valuation is made by officials called appraisers
or assessors, appointed by the local communities, though
under general State laws.? It is their duty to put a
value on all taxable property ; that is, speaking generally,
on all property, real and personal, which they can dis-
cover or trace within the area of their authority. As
the contribution, to the revenues of the State or county,
leviable within that area is proportioned to the amount

1 Stamp duties were also resorted to during the Civil War, but at
present none are levied by the National government,

2 The account in the text does not, of course, claim to be true in all
particulars for every State, but only to represent the general usage.

128 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

and value of taxable property situate within it, the
local assessors have, equally with the property owners, an
obvious motive for valuing on a low scale, for by doing
so they relieve their community of part of its burden.
The State is accordingly obliged to check and correct
them by’ creating what is called a Board of Equalization,
which compares and revises the valuations made by the
various local officers, so as to secure that taxable property
in each locality is equally and fairly valued, and made
thereby to bear its due share of public burdens. Simi-
larly a county has often an equalization board to super-
vise and adjust the valuations of the towns and cities
within its limits. However, the existence of such boards
by no means overcomes the difficulty of securing a really
equal valuation, and the honest town which puts its
property at a fair value suffers by paying more than its
share. Valuations are generally made at a figure much
below the true worth of property. In Connecticut, for
instance, the law directs the market price to be the
basis, but real estate is valued only at from one-third to
two-thirds thereof.* Indeed one hears everywhere in
America complaints of inequalities arising from the
varying scales on which valuers proceed.

1 See, for a specimen of the provisions for equalization boards, the
Constitution of California, Art. xiii, § 9, in the Appendix to this volume,

2 The special commission on taxation in Connecticut in their recent
singularly clear and interesting report (1887) observe :—“ One great defect
in the practical execution of our tax laws consists in inequalities of assess-
ment and valuation, This shows itself especially as between the different
towns. , . . It is notorious that in few, if any, towns do the assessors
value real estate at what they think it is fairly worth. On the contrary,
they generally first make this appraisal of its actual value, and then put
it in the list at a certain proportion of such appraisal, varying from 334
to 75 per cent. Similar reductions are made in valuing personal prop-
erty, though with less uniformity, and so perhaps with more injustice”
(p. 8). “ Household furniture above $500 in value constitutes an item of
only $9500 in one of our cities, while a neighbouring town of not more
than half the population returns $12,900” (p. 16).

CHAP, XLIII STATE FINANCE 129

A still more serious evil is the fact that so large a
part of taxable property escapes taxation. Lands and
houses cannot be concealed ; cattle and furniture can be
discovered by a zealous tax officer. Buta great part,
often far the largest part of a rich man’s wealth, consists
in what the Americans call “intangible property,” notes,
bonds, book debts, and Western mortgages.’ At this it
is practically impossible to get, except through the
declaration of the owner; and though the owner is
required to present his declaration of taxable property
upon oath, he is apt to omit this kind of property. The
Connecticut commissioners report that “the proportion
of these intangible securities to other taxable property
has steadily declined from year to year. In 1855 it
was nearly 10 per cent of the whole, in 1865 about 74
per cent, in 1875 a little over 5 per cent, and in 1885
about 32 per cent. Yet during the generation covered
by these statistics the amount of State railroad and
municipal bonds, and of Western mortgage loans has
very greatly increased, and our citizens have, in every
town in the State, invested large sums in them. Why
then do so few get into the tax list? The terms of the
law are plain, and the penalties for its infringement
are probably as stringent as the people will bear. .
The truth is that no system of tax laws can ever reach
directly the great mass of intangible property. It is
not to be seen, and its possession, if not voluntarily
disclosed, can in most cases be only the subject of con-

1 The difficulty does not arise with stock or shares even when held in a
company outside a State, because all States now tax corporations or
companies within their jurisdiction, and the principle is generally (though
not universally) adopted, that where stocks in a corporation outside the
State have been so taxed, they shall not be again taxed in the hand of the
holder of the stock, who may reside within the State. State laws and tax

assessors can in each State succeed in reaching the property of the cor-
poration itself.

VOL. IT K

130 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

jecture. The people also in a free government are
accustomed to reason for themselves as to the justice
and validity of the laws, and too apt to give themselves
the benefit of the doubt when they have in any way the —
“power to construe it for themselves, Such a power is
practically given in the form of oath used in connection
with our tax lists, since it refers only to such property
of the parties giving them in as is taxable according to
their best knowledge, remembrance, or belief. The man
who does not believe that a western farm loan or foreign
railroad bond (2.e. bond of a company outside the State)
ought to be taxed, is too often ready to swear that to
the best of his belief it is not liable to taxation... . As
the law stands, it may be a burden on the cvunscience of
many, but it is a burden on the property of few, not
because there are few who ought to pay, but because there
are few who can be made to pay. Bonds and notes held
by an individual are for the most part concealed from the
assessors, nor do they in most towns make much effort
to ascertain their existence.’ The result is that a few
towns, a few estates, and a few persons of a high sense
uf honesty, bear the entire weight of the tax. Such has
been the universal result of similar laws elsewhere.”

A comparison of the tax lists with the probate
records convinced the commissioners that, whereas in
1884 more than a third of the whole personal property
assessed in the State of Connecticut escaped taxes, the
proportion not reached by taxation was in 1886 much
greater ; and induced them to recommend that “all the
items of intangible property ought to be struck out of

1 “ A person, formerly assessor in one of our leading cities, reported
that he had made efforts when in office to get this kind of property into
the ‘grand list,’ and succeeded during his last two years in finding out

and adding over $200,000 of it; but he adds, ‘That may have had
something to do with my defeat when election came around.’ ”

CHAP, XLIII STATE FINANCE 130
cd
Se

the tax list.” The probate inventories of the estates of
deceased persons, and the last returns made to the tax
assessors by those persons, “show, to speak of it mildly,
few points of contact.” Connecticut is a commoh-
wealth in most respects above the average. In every
part of the country one hears exactly the same.’ The tax
returns sent in are rarely truthful; and not only does a
very large percentage of property escape its lawful
burdens, but “the demoralization of the public con-
science by the frequent administration of oaths, so often
taken only to be disregarded, is an evil of the greatest
magnitude. Almost any change would seem to be an
improvement.” ?

There is probably not a State in the Union of which
the same thing might not be said. In Ohio, for instance,
the Governor remarks in a special message of April

1 The West Virginian tax commission, in 1884, says, “At present
all taxes from invisible property come from a few conspicuously conscien-
tious citizens, from widows, executors, and from guardians of the insane
and infants ; in fact, it is a comparatively rare thing to find a shrewd
trader who gives in any considerable amount of notes, stocks, or money.
The truth is, things have come to such a condition in West Virginia that,
as regards paying taxes on this kind of property, it is almost as voluntary
and is considered pretty much in the same light as donations to the
neighbourhood church or Sunday school.”—Quoted by the Connecticut
commissioners, who add that the New Hampshire commission of 1878
report that in that State three-fourths of all personal property is not
reached by the assessors. Reference may also be made to the Report of
the Tax Commission of Baltimore, 1886; and to the supplementary
Report of one member of the Maryland Tax Commission, Mr. Richard
T. Ely, in which a great deal of instructive evidence as to the failure in
various States of the efforts made to tax intangible property has been dili-
gently collected and set forth (Baltimore, 1888).

2 Judge Foster, in the case of Kirtland v. Hotchkiss, 42 Conn.
Rep., p. 449. So Mr. David A. Wells, in his report as Special Tax
Commissioner to the New York Legislature, says: “Oaths as a matter of
restraint or as a guarantee of truth in respect to official statements have
in great measure ceased to be effectual ; or in other words, perjury, direct
or constructive, has become so comimon as to almost cease to occasion
notice, This is the all but unanimous testimony of officials who have of
late had extensive experience in the administration of both the national
and State revenue laws.”

132 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART Il

1887: “The great majority of the personal property of
this State is not returned, but entirely and fraudulently
withheld from taxation. The idea seems largely to
prevail that there is injustice and inequality in taxation,
‘and that there is no harm in cheating the State, although
to do so a false return must be made and perjury com-
mitted. This offence against the State and good morals
is too frequently committed by men of wealth and
reputed high character, and of corresponding position in
society.” In New York the Governor said (Annual
Message of 1886): “ For years the State assessors have
directed public attention to the fact that the personalty
of the tax-payers was escaping assessment, yet there hag
been a shrinkage from 1871 to 1884 of $107,184,371
(£21,436,874).” That is to say, notwithstanding the
immense increase of personal property in New York
during these thirteen years, personal property stood
assessed at £21,000,000 less in 1884 than in 1871.

I have dwelt upon these facts, not only because
they illustrate the difficulties inherent in a property
tax, but also because they help to explain the occasional
bitterness of feeling among the American farmers as
well as the masses against capitalists, much of whose
accumulated wealth escapes taxation, while the farmer
who owns his land, as well as the working man who
puts his savings into the house he lives in, is assessed
and taxed upon this visible property. We may,
in fact, say of most States, that under the present
system of taxation the larger is the city the smaller
is the proportion of personalty reached by taxation
(since concealment is easier in large communities), ang
the richer a man is the smaller in proportion to his
property is the contribution he pays to the State. Add
to this that the rich man bears less, in proportion to his

CHAP. XLIII STATE FINANCE 133

income, of the burden of indirect taxation, since the pro-
tective tariff raises the price not merely of luxuries but
of all commodities, except some kinds of food.’

Besides the property tax, which ise the main source,
of revenue, the States often levy taxes on particular
trades or occupations,? sometimes in the form of a

1 An experienced Massachusetts publicist writes to me apropos of the
passage in the text: “If one State compels a man to make a full declara-
tion of his personal property for taxation and another does not there will
be a tendency for capital to flow from the former to the latter. In Ver-
mont, for instance, a law has been passed requiring every person under
penalty to make sworn returns of his moveable property, and the result
is that capital seems to be leaving that State.

“ In New York the law taxes personal property, but if a person makes
no return the assessors are instructed to ‘doom’ him according to the
best of their knowledge and belief; and the amount becomes a matter
of ‘trade,’ Returns are practically made only by trustees and corpora-
tions, not by capitalists. It is a case of bad law tempered by violation.

“In Massachusetts the practice in each town depends mainly upon the
assessors. In Boston the chief office having resolved to let no one escape,
has for twenty years gone on increasing the assessment each year till the
victim makes a return. At first, men had some scruple about leaving
the city before lst May (the date of residence when taxes are assessed),
but these were soon overcome, and now nearly all the capitalists have
country places where they retire at a still inclement season, and are
received with open arms by the local assessors, who accept just what they
choose to pay, while their political influence, their taxes, and their public
donations are lost to the city. Occasionally the assessors in a country town
take it into their heads to apply the screw after the fashion of the city
authority, and then there is a fine turmoil. As the rich men generally
live in one quarter of the (country) town, the next step is to apply to the
legislature to get the town divided, and the vicinity of Boston is thus
being gradually cut up into small pieces.”

2 North Carolina empowers its legislature to tax all trades, profes-
sions, and franchises. Arkansas in 1868 (Article x. § 17) directed its
general assembly to ‘tax all privileges, pursuits, and occupations that
are of no real use to society,” adding that all others shall be exempt. But
having apparently found it hard to determine which occupations are
useless, she dropped the direction in her Constitution of 1874, and now
merely empowers the taxation of “ hawkers, pedlers, ferries, exhibitions,
and privileges.”

The persons or things on whom licence taxes or occupation taxes may
be imposed are the following, some being mentioned in one State Constitu-
tion, some in another—Pedlers, hawkers, auctioneers, brokers, pawn-
brokers, merchants, commission merchants, “ persons selling by sample,”
showmen, jugglers, innkeepers, toll bridges, ferries, telegraphs, express

134 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

licence tax, taxes on franchises enjoyed by a corpora-
tion, taxes on railroad stock, or (in a few States) taxes
on collateral inheritances. Comparatively little resort
«is had to the so-called “death-duties,” ae. probate,
legacy, and succession duties, nor is much use made of
an income tax. Five States, however, authorize it. As
regards poll taxes there is much variety of practice.
Some State Constitutions (e.g. Ohio) forbid such an
impost, as “ griévous and oppressive”; others direct it
to be imposed, and about one-half do not mention it.
Where it exists, there is sometimes a direction that it
shall be applied to schools or some other specified useful
purpose, such as poor relief, so as to give the poor, who
perhaps pay no other direct tax, a sense of their duty to
contribute to public objects, and especially to those in
whose benefits they directly share. The amount of
a poll tax is always small, $1 or $2: sometimes the
payment of it is made a pre-requisite to the exercise of
the electoral franchise. It is, I think, never imposed on
women or minors.

In some States “foreign” corporations, 7.e. those
chartered by or domiciled in another State, are taxed
more heavily than domestic corporations. New Hamp-
shire has recently, by taxing “ foreign” insurance com-
panies, suceeded 1 in driving them out of its limits.

I have found no instance of a progressive inheritance
duty, or of a progressive income tax such as some of the
Swiss cantons have imposed. California, however, in
her Constitution of 1879 (see Appendix to this volume)
has attempted to tax the same property twice over.

There is always a desire to hit companies, especially

agents (i.e. parcels’ delivery), grocery keepers, liquor dealers, insurance,
vendors of patents, persons or corporations using franchises or privileges,
hanks, railroads, destructive domestic animals, dealers in “options” or
“futures,”

CHAP, XLIII STATE FINANCE 135
en |

banks? and railroads. The newer Constitutions often
direct the legislature to see that such undertakings are
duly taxed, sometimes forbidding it ever to deprive
itself of the power of taxing any corporation, doubtless,
from the fear that these powerful bodies may purchase
from a pliant legislature exemption from civic burdens.

IfI. In most States, certain descriptions of property
are exempted from taxation, as for instance, the build-
ings or other property of the State, or of any local
community, burying grounds, schools and universities,
educational, charitable, scientific, literary, or agricul-
tural institutions or societies, public libraries, churches
and other buildings or property used for religious
purposes, cemeteries, household furniture, farming im-
plements, deposits in savings banks. Often too it is
provided that the owner of personal property below a
certain figure shall not pay taxes on it, and occasionally
ministers of religion are allowed a certain sum (as for
instance in New York, $1500) free from taxation.

No State can tax any bonds, debt certificates, or
other securities issugd by, or under the authority of, the
Federal government, including the circulating notes
commonly called “ greenbacks.” This has been held
to be the law on the construction of the Federal Con-
stitution, and has been so declared in a statute of Con-
gress. It introduces an element of great difficulty into
State taxation, because persons desiring to escape tax-
ation are apt to turn their property into these exempted
forms just before they make their tax returns.

IV. Some of the State taxes, such, for instance, as
licence taxes, or a tax on corporations, are directly
levied by and paid to the State officials. But others,

1 As to banks, see Ohio Constitution of 1851, Article xii. § 3.
Banks were an object of as much popular dislike then as railroads are now.

136 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART It

and particularly the property tax, which forms so large
a source of revenue, are collected by the local authorities.
The State having determined what income it needs,
.<apportions this sum among the counties, or in New Eng-
land, sometimes directly among the towns, in proportion
to their paying capacity, that is, to the value of the
property situate within them.’ So similarly the counties
apportion not only what they have to pay to the State,
but also the sum they have to raise for county pur-
poses, among the cities and townships within their
area, in proportion to the value of their taxable property.
Thus, when the township or city duthorities assess and
collect taxes from the individual citizen, they collect at
one and the same time three distinct sets of taxes, the
State tax, the county tax, and the city or township tax.
Retaining the latter for local purposes,’ they hand on
the two former to the county authorities, who in turn
retain the county tax, handing on to'the:State what it
requires, ‘Thus trouble and expense- are ‘saved jn the
process of collecting, and the citizen sees in one tax-
paper all he has to pay.

V. Some States, taught by their sad experience of
reckless legislatures, limit by their Constitutions the
amount of taxation which may be raised for State pur-
poses in any one year. Thus Texas in 1876 forbade the
State property tax to exceed one half per cent on the
valuation (exclusive of the sum needed to pay interest
on the State debt), and has since reduced the percentage
to ‘35.2 A similar provision exists in Missouri, and in

1 As ascertained by the assessors and board of equalization.

2 Sometimes, however, the town or township in its corporate capacity
pays the State its share of the State tax, instead of collecting it specifi-
cally from individual citizens.

3 In spite of this Texas had in March 1888 a surplus of $2,000,000
in her State treasury, so that the Governor was obliged to summon the

CHAP. XLIII STATE FINANCE 137
four other. Southern or Western States. We shall see
presently that this method of restriction has been more
extensively applied to cities and other subordinate
communities. Sometimes we find directions that no
greater revenue shall be raised than the current needs
of the State require, a rule which Congress would have
done well to observe, seeing that a surplus revenue
invites extravagant and reckless expenditure and gives
opportunity for lecislative jobbery.’

It may be thought that the self-interest of the
people is sufficient to secure economy and limit tax-
ation. But, apart from the danger of a corrupt legis-
lature, it is often remarked that as in many States a
large proportion of the voters do not pay State taxes,’
the power of imposing burdens lies largely in the
hands of persons who have no direct interest, and
suppose themselves to have no interest at all, in keeping
down taxes which they do not pay. So far, however,
as State finance is concerned, this has been no serious
source of mischief, and more must be attributed to the
absence of efficient control over expenditure, and to the
fact that (as in Congress) the committee which reports
on appropriations of the revenue is distinct from that
which deals with the raising of revenue by taxation.

Another illustration of the tendency to restrict
the improvidence of representatives is furnished by
the prohibitions in many Constitutions to pass bills

legislature in extra session to dispose of this surplus and prevent the
growth of another.

i Sir T. More in his Utopia mentions with approval a law of the
Macarians forbidding the king to have ever more than £1000 in the
public treasury.

2 Mr. Ford says (Citizens Manual) that it is estimated that only eight
per cent of the whole population of the United States pay State taxes.
Of course, a much larger percentage of the voters pay, they being nearly
one-fourth of the whole.

138 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

appropriating moneys to any private individual or
corporation, or to authorize the payment of claims
against the State arising under any contract not
strictly and legally binding, or to release the claims
which the State may have against railroads or other
corporations. One feels, in reading these multiform
provisions, as if the legislature was a rabbit seeking
to issue from its burrow to ravage the crops wherever
it could, and the people of the State were obliged to
close every exit, because they could not otherwise re-
strain its inveterate propensity to mischief.

VI. Nothing in the financial system of the States
better deserves attention than the history of the State
debts, their portentous growth, and the efforts made,
when the people had taken fright, to reduce their
amount, and to set limits to them in the future.

Sixty years ago, when those rich and ample Western
lands which now form the States of Ohio, Indiana,
Illinois, Michigan, and Missouri ‘were being opened up
and settled, and again forty years ago, when railway
construction was in the first freshness of its marvellous
extension, and was filling up the lands along the
Mississippi at an increasingly rapid rate, every one was
full of hope; and States, counties, and cities, not less
than individual men, threw themselves eagerly into
the work of developing thé resources which lay around
them. The States, as well as these minor communities,
set to work to make roads and canals and railways ;
they promoted or took stock in trading companies, they
started or subsidized banks, they embarked in, or pledged
their credit for, a hundred enterprises which they
were ill-fitted to conduct or supervise. Some under-
takings failed lamentably, while in others the profits
were grasped by private speculators, and the burden

CHAP, XLIII STATE FINANCE 139

left with the public body. State indebtedness, which in
1825 (when there were twenty-four States) stood at
an aggregate over the whole Union of $12,790,728
(£2,500,000), had in 1842 reached+ $203,777,916'
(£40,000,000), in 1870 $352,866,898 (£70,000,000).

A part of the increase between the latter years was
due to loans contracted for the raising and equipping
of troops by many Northern States to serve in the Civil
War, the intention being to obtain ultimate reimburse-
ment from the national treasury. There was also a
good deal in the way of executed works to show for
the money borrowed and expended, and the States (in
1870 thirty-seven in number) had grown vastly in
taxable property. Nevertheless the huge and increasing
total startled the people, and, as everybody knows,
some States repudiated their debts. The diminution
in the total indebtedness of 1880, which stood at
$250,722,081 (£50,144,000), and is the indebtedness of
thirty-eight States, ig partly due to this repudiation.
Even after the growth of State debts had been checked
(in the way to be presently mentioned), minor com-
munities, towns, counties, but above all, cities trod in
the same path, the old temptations recurring, and the
risks seeming smaller because a municipality had a more
direct and close interest than a State in seeing that
its money or credit was well applied. Municipal in-
debtedness has advanced, especially in the larger cities,
at a dangerously swift rate. Of the State and county
debt much the largest part had been incurred for, or in
connection with, so-called “internal improvements” ;
but of the city debt, though a part was due to the

1 In 1838 it was estimated that of the total debt of the States, then
calculated at $170,800,000 (say £35,000,000), $60,200,000 had been

incurred for canals, $42,800,000 for railroads, and $52,600,000 for
banking,

140 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART IT

bounties given to volunteers in the Civil War, much
must be set down to extremely lax and wasteful ad-
ministration, and much more to mere stealing, practised
by methods to be hereafter explained, but facilitated
by the habit of subsidizing, or taking shares in, cor-
porate enterprises which had excited the hopes of the
citizens. :

VU. The disease spread till it terrified the patient,
and a remedy was found in the insertion in the Constitu-
tions of the States of provisions limiting the borrowing
powers of State legislatures. Fortunately the evil had
been perceived in time to enable the newest States
(Minnesota, Wisconsin, Oregon, Kansas, Nevada, Ne-
braska, West Virginia, Colorado) to profit by the ex-
perience of their predecessors. For the last thirty years,
whenever a State has enacted a Constitution, it has
inserted sections restricting the borrowing powers of
States and local bodies, and often also providing for the
discharge of existing liabilities. ‘Not only is the passing
of bills for raising a State loan surrounded with special
safecuards, such as the requirement of a two-thirds
majority in each house of the legislature; not only
is there a prohibition ever to borrow money for, or even
to undertake, internal improvements (a fertile source of
jobbery and waste, as the experience of Congress shows) ;
not only is there almost invariably a provision that
whenever a debt is contracted the same Act shall create
a sinking fund for paying it off within a few years, but
in most Constitutions the total amount of the debt is
limited, and limited to a sum beautifully small in pro-
portion to the population and resources of the State.’
Thus Wisconsin fixes its maximum at $200,000

1 Debts incurred for the purpose of suppressing insurrection or re-
pelling invasion are excepted from these limitations.

CHAP, XLII STATE FINANCE ql
ooo 5 nf
(£40,000) ; Minnesota and Iowa at $250,000, Ohio at
$750,000; Nebraska at $100,000; prudent Oregon at
$50,000; and the great and wealthy State of Penn-
sylvania, with a population now exceeding 5,000,000
(Constitution of 1878, Art. ix. § 4), at $1,000,000."

In thirty-one States, including all those with recent
Constitutions, the legislature is forbidden to “ give or
lend the credit of the State in aid of any person, associa-
tion, or corporation, whether municipal or other, or to
pledge the credit of the State in any manner whatsoever
for the payment of the liabilities present or prospective
of any individual association, municipal, or other cor-
poration,” ? as also to take stock in a corporation, or
otherwise embark in any gainful enterprise. Many
Constitutions also forbid the assumption by the State
of the debts of any individual or municipal corporation.

The care of the people for their financial freedom and
safety extends even to local bodies. Many of the recent
Constitutions limit, or direct the legislature to limit, the
borrowing powers of counties, cities, or towns, sometimes
even of incorporated school districts, to a sum not ex-
ceeding a certain percéntage on the assessed value of the
taxable property within the area in question. This per-
centage is ysually five per cent (e.g. Illinois, Constit. of
1870, Art. ix. § 12), sometimes (e.g. Pennsylvania,
Constit. of 1873, Art. ix. § 8) seven per cent; New
York (Amend. of 1884), ten per cent. Sometimes also

1 New York (Constitution of 1846, Art. vii. §§ 10-12) also names
a million of dollars as the maximum, but permits laws to be passed rais-
ing loans for “some single work or object,” provided that a tax is at the
same time enacted sufficient to pay off this debt in eighteen years; and
that any such law has been directly submitted to the people and approved
by them at an election.

2 Constitution of Missouri of 1875 (Art. iv. § 45), a Constitution
whose provisions on financial matters and restrictions on the legislature
are copious and instructive, Similar words occur in nearly all Western
and Southern, as well as in some of the more recent Eastern Constitutions.

142 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

the amount of the tax leviable by a local authority in
any year is restricted to a definite sum—for instance,
to one half per cent on the valuation.’ And in all the
States but seven, cities, counties, or other local incor-
porated authorities are forbidden to pledge their credit
for, or undertake the liabilities of, or take stock in, or
otherwise give aid to, any undertaking or company.
Sometimes this prohibition is absolute; sometimes it is
made subject to certain conditions, and may be avoided
by their observance. For instance, there are States in
which the people of a city can, by special vote, carried
by a two-thirds majority, or a three-fifths majority, or
(in Colorado) by a bare majority of the tax-payers,
authorize the contracting of a debt which the munici-
pality could not incur by its ordinary organs of govern-
ment. Sometimes there is a direction that any munici-
pality creating a debt must at the same time provide
for its extinction by a sinking fund. Sometimes the
restrictions imposed apply only to a particular class of
undertakings—e.g. banks or railroads. The differences
between State and State are endless; but everywhere
the tendency is to make the protection against local in-
debtedness and municipal extravagance more and more
strict ; nor will any one who knows these local authori-
ties, and the temptations, both good and bad, to which
they are éxposed, complain of the strictness.”

Cases, of course, occur in which a restriction on the
taxing power or borrowing power of a municipality is
found inconvenient, because a costly public improvement
is rendered more costly if it has to be done piecemeal.

1 See, for elaborate provisions under this head, the Constitution of
Missouri of 1875.

2 In a Note to Chapter LL post, placed at the end of this volume, I

have given some specimens of the constitutional provisions which restrict
the borrowing powers of local authorities,

CHAP. XLIII STATE FINANCE 143
pe ee ee ee ed ae
The corporation of Brooklyn was thus recently prevented
from making all at once a great street which would have
been a boon to the city, and will have to spend more
money in buying up the land for it: hit by bit. But
the evils which have followed in America from the
immixture both of States and of cities in enterprises of
a public nature, and the abuses incident to an unlimited
power of undertaking improvements, have been so great
as to make people willing to bear with the occasional
inconveniences which are inseparable from restriction.

Says Judge Cooley: “A catalogue of these evils
would include the squandering of the public domain ;
the enrichment of schemers whose policy it has been
first to obtain all they can by fair promises, and then
avoid, as far and as long as possible, the fulfilment of
the promises; the corruption of legislation ; the loss of
State credit; great public debts recklessly contracted
for; moneys often recklessly expended; public discontent,
because the enterprises fostered from the public treasury,
and on the pretence of public benefit, are not believed to
be managed in the public interest ; and finally, great
financial panic, collapse, and disaster.”? ,

The provisions above described have had the effect
of steadily reducing the amount of State and county
debts, although the wealth of the country makes rapid
strides, A careful writer estimates this reduction be-
tween 1870 and 1880 at 25 per cent in the case of State
debts, and in that of county, town, and school district
debts at 8 per cent.? In cities, however, there has been,
within the same decade, not only no reduction, but an

1 Cooley, Constit. Limit. p. 266, The notes to pp. 262 and 272 con-
tain a very instructive sketch of the history of these financial evils,

2 Mr. Robert L. Porter, in the American Cyclopedia of Political

Science, article “ Debts”; an article in which much valuable informa-
tion on this large subject will be found.

144 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

increase of over 100 per cent, possibly as much as 130
per cent. The total debt of cities with a population
exceeding 7500 was, in 1880 (in round numbers),
$710,000,000 (£142,000,000); that of smaller muni-
cipalities, $56,000,000.

This striking difference between the cities and the
States may be explained in several ways. One is that
cities cannot repudiate, while sovereign States can and
do.’ Another may be found in the later introduction
into State Constitutions of restrictions on the borrowing
powers of municipalities. But the chief cause is to be
found in the conditions of the government of great
cities, where the wealth of the community is largest,
and is also most at the disposal of a multitude of
ignorant voters. Several of the greatest cities lie in
States which did not till recently, or have not even
now, imposed adequate restrictions on the borrowing
power of city councils. Now city councils are not only
incapable administrators, but are prone to such public
improvements as present opportunities for speculation,
for jobbery, and even for wholesale embezzlement.

‘
1 In some parts of New England the city, town, or other municipal
debt is also the personal debt of every inhabitant, and is therefore an
excellent security.

CHAPTER XLIV
THE WORKING OF STATE GOVERNMENTS

Tue difficulty I have already remarked of explaining to
Europeans the nature of an American State, viz. that
there is in Europe nothing similar to it, recurs wher we
come to inquire how the organs of government which
have been described play into one another in practice. To
say that a State is something lower than the nation but
greater than a municipality, is’ to say what is obvious,
but not instructive; for the peculiarity of the State
is that it combines some of the features which are to
Europeans characteristic of a nation and a nation only,
with others that belong to a municipality.

The State seems great or small according to the
point of view from which one regards it. It is vast if
‘one regards the sphere of its action and the complete-
ness of its control in that sphere, which includes the
maintenance of law and order, nearly the whole field of
civil and criminal jurisprudence, the supervision of all
lucal governments, an unlimited power of taxation.
But if we ask, Who are the persons that manage this
great machine of government ; how much interest do the
citizens take in it; how much reverence do they feel for
it? the ample proportions we had admired begin to
dwindle, for the persons turn out to be insignificant, and

VOL. II L

146 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

the interest of the people to have steadily declined. The
powers of State authorities are powers like those of a
European parliament ; but they are wielded by men most
of whom are less distinguished and less respected by their
fellows than are those who fill the city councils of Man-
chester or Cologne. Several States exceed in area and
population some ancient European monarchies. But
their annals may not have been illumined by a single
striking event or brilliant personality.

A further difficulty in describing how a State
government works arises from the endless differences of
detail between the several States. The organic frame of
government is similar in all ; but its functional activities
vary according to the temper and habits, the ideas
education and traditions of the inhabitants of the State.
A European naturally says, “Select a typical State, and
describe that to us.” But there is no such thing as a
typical State. Massachusetts or Connecticut is a fair
sample of New England, Minnesota or lowa of the North-
West ; Georgia or Alabama shows the evils, accompanied
no doubt by great recuperative power, that still vex the
South ; New York and Illinois the contrast between the
tendencies of an ignorant city mob and the steady-going
farmers of the rural counties. But to take any one of
these States as a type, asking the reader to assume
what is said of it to apply equally to the other thirty-
seven commonwealths, would land us in inextricable
confusions. I must therefore be content to speak
quite generally, emphasizing those points in which
the colour and tendencies of State governments are
much the same over the whole Union, and begging
the European reader to remember that illustrations
drawn, as they must be drawn, from some particular
State, will not necessarily be true of some other State

cuap. xLiv WORKING OF STATE GOVERNMENTS 147
ea on cr TY nn

government, because its life may go on under different
conditions.

The State governments, as has been observed already,
bear a family likeness to the National oy Federal govern-
ment, a likeness due not only to the fact that the latter
was largely modelled after the systems of the old
thirteen States, but also to the influence which the
Federal Constitution has exerted ever since 1789 on
those who have been drafting or amending State Con-
stitutions. Thus the Federal Constitution has been both
child and parent. Where the State Constitutions differ
from the Federal, they invariably differ in being more
democratic. It still expresses the doctrines of 1787.
They express the views of later days, when democratic
ideas have been more rampant, and men less cautious
than the sages of the Philadelphia Convention have
given legal form to popular beliefs. This difference,
which appears not only in the-mode of appointing
judges, but in the shorter terms which the States allow
to their officials and senators, comes out most clearly in
the relations established between the legislative and the
executive powers. The national executive, as we have
seen, 1s disjoined from the national legislature in a way
strange to Europeans. Still, the national executive is
all of a piece. The President is supreme ; his ministers
are his subordinates, chosen by him from among his
political associates. They act under his orders; he
is responsible for their conduct. But in the States
there is nothing even distantly resembling a cabinet.
The chief executive officials are directly elected by the
people.” They hold by a title independent of the State
governor. They are not, except so far as some
special statute may provide, subject to his directions,
and he is not responsible for their conduct, since he can-

148 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

not control it. As the governor need not belong to the
party for the time being dominant in the legislature, so
the other State officials need not be of the same party as
the governor. They may even have been elected at
a different time, or for a longer period.

A European, who studies the mechanism of State
government—very few Europeans so far having studied
it—is at first puzzled by a system which contradicts his
preconceived notions. ‘ How,” he asks, “can such
machinery work? One can understand the scheme under
which a legislature rules through officers whom it has,
whether legally or practically, chosen and keeps in power.
One can even understand a scheme in which the executive,
while independent of the legislature, consists of persons
acting in unison, under a head directly responsible to
the people. But will not a scheme, in which the execu-
tive officers are all independent of one another, yet not
subject to the legislature, want every condition needed
for harmonious and efficient action? They obey nobody.
They are responsible to nobody, except a people which
only exists in concrete activity for one election day
every two or three years, when it is dropping papers
into the ballot-box. Such a system seems the negation
of a system, and more akin to chaos,”

Tn ne attempts to penetrate this mystery, our
European ‘receives little help from his usually helpful
American friends, simply because they do not understand
his difficulty. Light dawns on him when he perceives
that the executive business of a State is such as not to
need any policy, in the European sense, and therefore
no harmony of view or purpose among those who
manage it. Everything in the nature of State policy
belongs to the legislature, and to the legislature alone.

Compare the Federal President with the State

cHar. xLIv. WORKING OF STATE GOVERNMENTS 149
ee

Governor. The former has foreign policy to deal with,
the latter has none. The former has a vast patronage,
the latter has scarcely any. The former has the com-
mand of the army and navy, the latter has only thes
militia, insignificant in ordinary times. The former has
a post-office, but there is no State postal-service. Little
remains to the Governor except his veto, which is not so
much an executive as a legislative function; the duty
of maintaining order, which becomes important only
when insurrection or riot breaks out; and the almost
mechanical duty of representing the State for various
matters of routine, such as demanding from other
States the extradition of offenders, issuing writs for
the election of congressmen or of the State legis-
lature, receiving the reports of the various State
officials. These officials, even the highest of them who
correspond to the cabinet ministers in the National
government, are either mere clerks, performing work,
such as that of receiving and paying out State moneys,
strictly defined by statute, and usually checked by other
officials, or else are in the nature of commissioners of
inquiry, who may inspect and report, but can take no
independent action of importance. Policy does not lie
within their province; even in executive details their
discretion is confined within narrow limits. They have,
no doubt, from the governor downwards, opportunities
for jobbing and malversation ; but even the less scrupu-
lous are restrained from using these opportunities by the
fear of some investigating committee of the legislature,
with possible impeachment or criminal prosecution as a
consequence of its report. Holding for terms which
seldom exceed two or three years, they feel the insecurity
of their position ; but the desire to earn re-election by the
able and conscientious discharge of their functions, is a

150 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

less effective motive than it would be if the practice of
re-electing competent men were more frequent. Un-
fortunately here, as in Congress, the tradition of many
States is, that when a man has enjoyed an office, how-
ever well he may have served the public, some one else
ought to have the next turn.

The reason, therefore, why the system I have sketched
rubs along in the several States is, that the executive
has little to do, and comparatively small sums to handle.
The further reason why it has so little to do is two-fold.
Local government is so fully developed that many
functions, which in Europe would devolve on a central
authority, are in all American States left to the county,
or the city, or the township, or the school district.
These minor divisions narrow the province of the State,
just as the State narrows the province of the central
government. And the other reason is, that legislation has
in the several States pushed itself to the farthest limits,
and so encroached on subjects which European legislatures
would leave to the executive, that executive discretion
is extinct, and the officers are the mere hands of the
legislative brain, which directs them by statutes drawn
with extreme minuteness, carefully specifies the purposes
to which each money grant is to be applied, and super-
vises them py inquisitorial committees.

It is a natural consequence of these arrangements
that State office carries little either of dignity or of
power. A place is valued chiefly for its salary, or for.
such opportunities of obliging friends or securing com-
missions on contracts as it may present, though in
the greatest States the post of attorney-general or
comptroller is often sought by able men. A State
Governor, however, is not yet a nonentity. In more
than one State a sort of perfume from the old days

cHar. xLIV. WORKING OF STATE GOVERNMENT$ 151

a

lingers round the office, as in Massachusetts, where the

traditions of last century were renewed by the eminent

man who occupied the chair of the commonwealth during

the War of Secession and did much to stimulate and

direct the patriotism of its citizens. Though no one

would nowadays, like Mr. Jay in 1795, exchange the

chief-justiceship of the United States for the governorship

of his State, a Cabinet minister will sometimes, as Mr.

Folger did a few years ago, resign his post in order to
offer himself for the governorship of a great State like
New York. In all States, the Governor, as the highest
official and the depositary of State authority, may at any
moment become the pivot on whose action public order
turns. In the Pennsylvania riots of 1877 it was the

accidental absence of the Governor on a tour in the West

which enabled the forces of sedition to gather strength.

During the more recent disturbances which large strikes,

especially among railway employés, have caused in the’
West, the prompt action of a Governor has preserved or,
restored tranquillity in more than one State; while

the indecision of the Governor of an adjoining one has

emboldened strikers to stop traffic, or to molest work-

men who had been hired to replace them. So in a com-

mercial crisis, like that which swept over the Union in

1837, when the citizens are panic-stricken and the

legislature hesitates, much may depend on the initiative

of the Governor, to whom the eyes.of the people naturally

turn. His right of suggesting legislative remedies,

usually neglected, then becomes significant, and may

abridge or increase the difficulties of the community.

It is not, however, as an executive magistrate that a
State Governor usually makes or mars a reputation, but
in his quasi-legislative capacity of agreeing to or vetoing
bills passed by the legislature. The merit of a Governor

152 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

is usually tested by the number and the boldness of his
vetoes ; and a European enjoys, as I did in the State of
New York in 1870, the odd spectacle of a Governor
appealing to the people for re-election on the ground
that he had defeated in many and important instances
the will of their representatives solemnly expressed in
the votes of both Houses. That such appeals should
be made, and often made successfully, is due not only
to the distrust which the people entertain of their
legislatures, but also, to their honour be it said, to
the respect of the people for courage. They like above
all things a strong man; just as English constituencies
prefer a candidate who refuses to swallow pledges or be
dictated to by cliques.

This view of the Governor as a check on the legis-.
lature explains why the Americans think it rather a
gain than an injury to the State that he shouid
belong to the party which is for the time being in a
minority in the legislature. How the phenomenon
occurs may be seen by noting the different methods of
choice employed. The Governor is chosen by a mass
vote of all citizens over the State. The representatives
are chosen by the same voters, but in districts. Thus
one party may have a majority on a gross poll of the
whole State, but may find itself in a minority in the
larger number of electoral districts. This happens in
New York State, on an average, in two years out of every
three. The mass vote shows a Democratic majority,
because the Democrats are overwhelmingly strong in
New York City, and some other great centres of popula-
tion. But in the rural districts and most of the smaller
towns the Republican party commands a majority’ suffi-
cient to enable them to carry most districts. Hence,
while the Governor is usually a Democrat, the legislature

cHaP. xLIV. WORKING OF STATE GOVERNMENTS © 153
——_.

is usually Republican. Little trouble need be feared
from the opposition of the two powers, because such
‘issues as divide the parties have scarce any bearing
on State politics. Some good may be hoped, because
a Governor of the other party is more likely to check or
show up the misdeeds of a hostile Senate or Assembly
than one who, belonging to the group of men which
guides the legislature, has a motive for working with
them, and may expect to share any gains they can amass."

Thus we are led back to the legislature, which is so
much the strongest force in the several States that we
may almost call it the Government and ignore all
other authorities. Let us see how it gets on without that
guidance which an executive ministry supplies to the
Chambers of every free European country. .

As the frame of a State government generally
resembles the National government, so a State legis-
lature resembles Congress. But, in most States, it
exaggerates the characteristic defects of Congress. It
has fewer able and high-minded men among its mem-
bers. It has less of recognized leadership. It is sur-
rounded by temptations relatively greater. It is
guarded by a less watchful and less interested public
opinion. But before we inquire what sort of men fill
the legislative halls, let us ask what kinds of business
draw them there.

The matter of State legislation may be classified
under three heads:

1 Sometimes, however, inconvenience arises from the hostility of the
State Senate and the Governor. Quite recently the Senate of New
York persistently refused to confirm the nominations made to certain
offices by the Governor, with the effect of securing the retention in office
long beyond their legal term of several officials, these old officials holding
on and drawing their salaries because no new men had been duly appointed
to fill their places. The Senate was thought to have behaved ill; but
the Governor was not trusted and exerted no moral authority.

154 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART IT

I. Ordinary private law, 7.e. contracts, torts, in-
heritance, family relations, offences, civil and criminal
procedure.

II. Administrative law, including the regulation of
municipal and rural local government, public works,
education, the liquor traffic, vaccination, adulteration,
charitable and penal establishments, the inspection of
mines or manufactories, together with the general law
of corporations, of railroads, and of labour, together
also with taxation, both State and local, and the
management of the public debt.

III. Measures of a local and special nature, such as
are called in England “ private bills,” ze. bills for char-
tering and incorporating gas, water, canal, tramway,
or railway companies, or for conferring franchises in
the nature of monopolies or privileges upon such bodies,
or for altering their constitutions, for incorporating cities
and minor communities and regulating their affairs.

Comparing these three classes of business, between
the first and second of which it is no doubt hard to
draw a sharp line, we shall find that bills of the second
class are more numerous than those of the first, bills
of the third more numerous than those of the
other two put together. Ordinary private law, the
law which guides or secures us in the everyday rela-
tions of life, and upon which nine-tenths of the suits
between man and man are founded, is not greatly
changed from year to year in the American States.
Some Western, and a few Eastern States have made bold
experiments in the field of divorce, others have added
new crimes to the statute-book and amended their
legal procedure. But commercial law, as well as the
law of property and civil rights in general, remains
tolerably stable. People are satisfied with things as

cuap. xLIV. WORKING OF STATE GOVERNMENTS 155

rr

they are, and the influence of the legal profession is
exerted against tinkering. In matters of the second
class, which I have called administrative, because they
generally involve the action of the State or of some of
the communities which exist within it, there is more
legislative activity. Every session sees experiments
tried in this field, generally with the result of enlarging
the province of government, both by interfering with
the individual citizen and by attempting to do things
for him which apparently he either does not do or
does not do well for himself? But the general or
“public” legislation, as Englishmen would call it,
is dwarfed by the “private bill” legislation which -
forms the third of our classes. The bills that are
merely local or special outnumber general bills every-
where, and outnumber them enormously in _ those
States which, like Virginia and Mississippi, do not
require corporations to be formed under general laws.
Such special bills are condemned by thoughtful
Americans, not only as confusing the general law, but
because they furnish, unless closely watched, oppor-
tunities for perpetrating jobs, and for inflicting injustice
on individuals or localities in the interest of some knot
of speculators. They are one of the scandals of the
country. But there is a further objection to their
abundance in the State legislatures. They are a
perennial fountain of corruption. Promoted for pecu-
niary ends by some incorporated company or group of

1 See the chapter on “ Laissez Faire,” Vol. III. p. 266.

Many of these measures have been prepared by associations outside
the legislature, who embody their wishes in a bill, give it to a member
or members, and get it passed, perhaps with scarcely any debate. Thus
not only the Labour organizations, such as the Knights of Labour, and
the Grangers (farmers’ clubs), but the Women’s Christian Temperance

Union, the medical profession, the dentists, the dairymen, get their
favourite schemes enacted.

156 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART IT

men proposing to form a company, their passage is
secured by intrigue, and by the free expenditure of
money which finds its way in large sums to the fewe
influential men -who control a State Senate or Assembly,
and in smaller sums to those among the rank and file of
members who are accessible to these solid arguments,
and careless of any others. It is the possibility of
making profit in this way out of a seat in the legislature
which draws to it not a few men in those States which,
like New York, Pennsylvania, or Illinois, offer a pro-
mising field for large pecuniary enterprises. Where the
earcase is there will the vultures be gathered together.
The money power, which is most formidable in the shape
of large corporations, chiefly attacks the legislatures
of these great States. It is, however, felt in nearly
all States. And even where, as is the case in most
States, only a small minority of members are open to
bribes, the opportunity which these numerous local and
special bills offer to a man of making himself important,
of obliging his friends, of securing something for his
locality, and thereby confirming his local influence, is
sufficient to make a seat in the legislature desired chiefly
in respect of such bills, and to obscure, in the eyes uf
most members, the higher functions of general legis-
lation which these assemblies possess. One may apply
to these cémmonwealths, though in a new sense, the
famous dictum, corruptissima republica plurimae leges.

One form of this special legislation is peculiarly
attractive and pernicious. It is the power of dealing by
statute with the municipal constitution and actual
management of cities. Cities grow so fast that all
undertakings connected with them are particularly
tempting to speculators. City revenues are so large as
to offer rich plunder to those who can seize the control

cHap.xLiv IVORKING OF STATE GOVERNMENTS 157
Se te ne ee ee a
of them. The vote which a city casts is so heavy as to
throw great power into the hands of those who control
it, and enable them to drive a good bargain with the
wirepullers of a legislative chamber. Hence the control
exercised by the State legislature over city government
is a most important branch of legislative business, a
means of power to scheming politicians, of enrichment
to greedy ones, and if not of praise to evil-doers, yet
certainly of terror to them that do well.’

We are now in a position, having seen what the main
business of a State legislature is, to inquire what is
likely to be the quality of the persons who compose it.
The conditions that determine their quality may be said
to be the following :—

I. The system of selection by party conventions.
As this will be described in later chapters, I will here
say no more than that it prevents the entrance of good
men and favours that of bad ones.

II. The habit of choosing none but a resident in any
electoral district to represent that district, a habit which
narrows the field of choice, and not only excludes com-
petent men from other parts of the State, but deters
able men generally from entering State politics, since
he who loses his seat for his own district cannot find
his way back to the legislature as member for any other.

III. The fact that the capital of a State—z.e. the
meeting-place of the legislature and residence of the
chief officials, is usually a small town, at a distance

1 Although this tinkering with city government is most harmful
where the cities are large, it is abundant even where the cities are small.
For instance, in Wisconsin, a Western State with no large cities, there
were passed in the session of 1885 about 500 acts granting or dealing
with city charters, filling 1342 pages of print. Atl the other acts of the
year filled only about 600 pages. I owe this fact, as well as that stated

in note 1, p. 155, to an interesting discourse by Dr. Albert Shaw of Min-
neapvlis, delivered in 1888 before Cornell University.

158 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

from the most populous city or cities of the State,
and therefore a placé neither attractive socially nor
convenient for business men or lawyers, and which,
it may be remarked in passing, is more shielded
from a vigilant public opinion than is a great city,
with its keen and curious press. Pennsylvanians who
might be willing to serve in a legislature meeting at
Philadelphia are less inclined to attend one at Harris-
burg. An eminent citizen of Connecticut observed to
me that, whereas everybody in that little State could
reach Hartford in a few hours from its farthest corner,
a member attending the legislature of Illinois or Wis-
consin might often have to quit his home and live during
the session at Springfield or Madison, because these
capitals are remote from the outer parts of those large
commonwealths. He thought this an important factor
in the comparative excellence of the Connecticut legis-
lature.

IV. The nature of the business that comes before a
State legislature. As already explained, by far the
largest part of this business excites little popular interest
and involves no large political issues. Unimportant it
is not. Nothing could well be more important than to
repress special legislation, and deliver cities from the
fangs of the spoiler. But its importance is not readily
apprehendsd by ordinary people, the mischiefs that have
to be checked being spread out over a multitude of bills,
most of them individually insignificant, however ruinous
in their cumulated potency. Hence a leading politician
seldom troubles himself to enter a State legislature,
while the men who combine high character with talent
and energy are too much occupied in practising their
profession or pushing their business to undertake the
dreary task of wrangling over gas and railroad bills in

cuar, xuIv. WORKING OF STATE GOVERNMENTS 159
a ee
committees, or exerting themselves to win some advan-
tage for the locality that returns them.

I have not mentioned among these depressing con-

‘ditions the payment of salaries to members, because it
does not seem to make any substantial difference. It is
no doubt an attraction to some of the poorer men, to
penurious farmers, or half-starved lawyers. But in
attracting them it does not serve to keep out any
better men. Probably the sense of public duty would
be keener if legislative work was not paid at all. This
is matter for speculation. But, looking at the question
practically, I doubt whether the discontinuance of
salaries would improve the quality of American legis-
lators. The drawbacks to the position which repel the
best men, the advantages which attract inferior men,
would remain the same as now; and there is nothing
absurd in the view that the places of those who might
cease to come if they did not get their five dollars a day
would be taken by men who would manage to make as
large an income in a less respectable way.

After this, it need scarcely be said that the
State legislatures are not high-toned bodies. The
best seem to be those of some of the New England
States, particularly Massachusetts, where the venerable
traditions surrounding an ancient commonwealth do
something to sustain the dignity of the body and
induce good men to enter it. This legislature, called
the General Court, is, according to the best authorities,
substantially pure, and does its work well. Its com-
position is inferior to that of the General Courts of
sixty years ago, but does not seem to be declining at
present. Connecticut has a good Senate, and a fair
House of Representatives. It is also reported to be
honest, though not free from demagogism. Vermont

160 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

is pure; New Hampshire, a State where constitu-
encies are reproached with bribery, less respectable.
Next come some of the North-Western States, where
the population, consisting almost entirely of farmers,
who own as well as work their land, sends up
membérs who fairly represent its average intelligence,
and are little below the level of its average virtue.
There are no traditions in such States, and there are
already corporations rich enough to corrupt members
and be themselves black-mailed. Hence one is pre-
pared to find among the legislators professional poli-
ticians of the worst class. But the percentage of such
men is small in States like Michigan, Iowa, Minnesota,
Oregon, probably not more than from five to ten
per cent, the other members being often ignorant and
narrow, but honest and well-intentioned. In Ohio and
Indiana the proportion of black sheep may be a little
higher.

It is hard to present a general view of the Southern
States, both because there are great differences among
them, and because they are still in a state of transi-
tion, generally, it would seem,‘ transition towards a
better state of things. Roughly speaking, their legis-
latures seem to stand below those of the North-
West, though in most a few men of exceptional ability
and standiag may be found. Kentucky and Georgia
are among the better States, Louisiana and Arkansas,
the former infected by New Orleans, the latter a singu-
larly rude community, among the worst.

The lowest place belongs to the States which, pos-
sessing the largest cities, have received the largest influx
of European immigrants, and have fallen most com-
pletely under the control of unscrupulous party managers.
New York, Philadelphia, Baltimore, Chicago, San Fran-

cHAP, xLivV. WORKING OF STATE GOVERNMENTS 161
——— re eee eer

cisco have done their best to poison the legislatures of
the States in which they respectively lie by filling these
bodies with members of a low type, as well as by being
themselves the centres of enormous accumulations of |
capital. They have brought the strongest corrupting
force into contact with the weakest and most corruptible
material ; and there has followed in Pennsylvania and
New York such a Witches’ Sabbath of jobbing, bribing,
thieving, and prostitution of legislative power to private
interest as the world has seldom seen. Of course even
in these States the majority of the members are not
bad men, for the majority come from the rural districts
or smaller towns, where honesty and order reign as they
do generally in Northern and Western America outside
a few large cities. Many of them are farmers or small
lawyers, who go up meaning to do right, but fall into
the hands of schemers who abuse their inexperience and
practise on their ignorance. One of the ablest and most
vivacious of the younger generation of American politi-
cians’ says :—‘‘ The New York legislature taken as a
whole is not so bad a body as we would be led to believe,
if our judgment was based purely on what we read in the
metropolitan papers; for the custom of the latter is
to portray things as either very much better or very
much worse than they are. Where a number of men,
many of them poor, some of them unscrupulous, and
others elected by constituents too ignorant to hold them
to a proper accountability for their actions, are put into
a position of great temporary power, where they are
called to take action upon questions affecting the welfare
of large corporations and wealthy private individuals,

1 Mr. Theodore Roosevelt of New York, from whose instructive
article in the Century Magazine for April 1885, I quote the passage in
the text,

VOL. II M

162 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART It

the chances for corruption are always great; and that
there is much viciousness and political dishonesty,
much moral cowardice, and a good deal of actual bribe-
taking at Albany, no one who has had practical experi-
ence of legislation can doubt. At the same time, I
think the good members outnumber the bad. . . . The
representatives from the country districts are usually
good men, .well-to-do farmers, small lawyers, or prosper-
ous store-keepers, and are shrewd, quiet, and honest.
They are often narrow-minded, and slow to receive an
idea; but they cling to it with the utmost tenacity.
For the most part they are native Americans, and those
who are not are men who have become completely
Americanized in their ways and habits of thought. . .
The worst legislators come from the great cities. They
are usually foreigners of little or no education, with
exceedingly misty ideas as to morality, and possessed of
an ignorance so profound that it could only be called
comic were it not for the fact that it has at times such
serious effects on our laws. It is their ignorance quite
as much as actual Viciousness which makes it so difficult
to procure the passage of good laws, or to prevent the
passage of bad ones; and it is the most irritating of the
many elements with which we have to contend in the
fight for good government.”?

The samd writer goes on to say that after sitting in
three New York legislatures he came to think that
about one third of the members were open to corrupt
influences, but that although the characters of those men
were known to their colleagues and to the “lobby,” it
was rarely possible to convict them, Many of’ this

1 Any one with experience of legislative bodies will agree with the
view that ignorance and stupidity cause more trouble than bad intentions,
seeing that they are the materials on which men of bad intentions play.

CHAP. XLIV. WORKING OF STATE GO VERNMENTS 163

—
worst third had not gone into the legislature meaning
to make gain out of the position, but had been corrupted
by it. They found that no distinction was to be won
there by legitimate methods, and when temptation came
in their way they fell, having feeble consciences and
no statesmanlike knowledge. Or they were anxious
above all things to pass some local measure on which
their constituents were set, and they found they could
not win the support of other members except by be-
coming accomplices in the jobs or “steals” which these
members were “putting through.”* Or they gained
their seat by the help of some influential man or
powerful company, and found themselves obliged to
vote according to the commands of their “ owner.”*

The corrupt member has several methods of making

1 « There are two classes of cases in which corrupt members get money—
one is when a wealthy corporation puts through some measure which
will be of great benefit to itself, although perhaps an injury to the public
at large ; the other when a member introduces a bill hostile to some
moneyed interest with the expectation of being paid to let the matter
drop. The latter, technically called a ‘strike, is much the most common,
for in spite of the outcry against them in legislative matters, corporations
are more often sinned against than sinning. It is difficult in either case
to convict the offending member, though we have very good laws against
bribery.”—-Mr. Theodore Roosevelt, ut supra.

2 «There came before a committee (of the New York House) of which
I happened to be a member, a perfectly proper bill in the interest of a
certain corporation ; the majority of the committee, six in number, were
thoroughly bad men, who opposed with the hope of being paid to cease
their opposition, When I consented to take charge of the bill, I stipu-
lated that not a penny should be paid to ensure its passage, It therefore
became necessary to see what pressure could be brought to bear on the
recalcitrant members ; and accordingly we had to find out who were the
authors and sponsors of their political being. Three proved to be under
the control of local statesmen of the same party as themselves, and of
equally bad moral character; one was ruled by a politician of unsavoury
reputation from a different city; the fifth, a Democrat, was owned by a
Republican (!) Federal official, and the sixth by the president of a horse-
car [street tramway] company. A couple of letters from these two
magnates forced the last-mentioned members to change front on the bill
with surprising alacrity."—-Mr, Theodore Roosevelt, wt supra.

164 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

gains, One, the most obvious, is to exact money or
money’s worth for his vote. A second is to secure by
it the support of a group of his colleagues in some other
measure in which he is personally interested, as for
instance a measure which will add to the value of land
near a particular city. This is “log-rolling,” and is
the most difficult method to deal with, because its
milder forms are scarcely distinguishable from that
legitimate give and take which must go on in all
legislative bodies. A third is black-mailing. A member
brings in a bill either specially directed against some
particular great corporation, probably a railway, or
proposing so to alter the general law as in fact to in-
jure such a corporation, or a group of corporations. He
intimates privately that he is willing to “see” the
directors or the law-agents of the corporation, and is
in many cases bought off by them, keeping his bill on
the paper till the last moment so as to prevent some
other member from repeating the trick. Even in the
North-Western States there is usually a group of such
“ scallawag” members, who, finding the $300 they
receive insufficient, increase their legislative income by
levying this form of taxation upon the companies of
the State. Nor is the device quite unknown in New
England, where a ten hours labour bill, for instance, has
frequently beey brought in to frighten the large cor-
porations and other capitalists into inducing its author
to drop it, the inducements being such as capitalists can
best apply. Every considerable railway keeps an agent
or agents continually on the spot while a State legis-
lature is in session, watching the bills brought in and
the committees that deal with them. Such an agent
sometimes relies.on the friends of the railway to defeat
these bills, and uses the usual expedients for creating

cHaP. xLiv WORKING OF STATE GOVERNMENTS 165

friends. But it is often cheaper and easier to square
the assailant.’ Of course the committees are the focus
of intrigue, and the chairmanship of a committee the
position which affords the greatest facilities for an un-
scrupulous man. Round the committees there buzzes
that swarm of professional agents which Americans call
“the lobby,” soliciting the members, threatening them
with trouble in their constituencies, plying them with
all sorts of inducements, treating them to dinners,
drinks, and cigars.”

In these demoralized States the State Senate is apt
to be a worse body than the House, whereas in the
better States the Senate is usually the superior body.°
The reason is two-fold. As the Senate is smaller—in
New York it consists of 32 members against 128 in the
Assembly—the vote of each member is of more con-
sequence, and fetches, when venal, a higher price.
Other things being equal, a stronger temptation is

1 The president of a Western railroad, an upright as well as
able man, told me that he was obliged to keep constant guard at the
capital of the State in which the line Jay, while the legislature was sitting,
and to use every means tg defeat bills aimed at the railway, because
otherwise the shareholders would have been ruined. He deplored the
necessity. It was a State of comparatively good tone, but there was such
@ prejudice against railroads among the farming population, that mis-
chievous bills had a chance of success, and therefore desperate remedies
were needed.

2 “Qne senator, who was generally known as ‘the wicked Gibbs,’
spent two years at Albany, in which he pursued his ‘ business’ so shame-
lessly that his constituents refused to send him there again ; but he coolly
came out a year later and begved for a return to the Assembly on the
ground that he was financially embarrassed, and wished to go to the
Assembly in order to retrieve his fortunes on the salary of an Assembly-
man, which is $1500 (£300) !”—Mr. J. B. Bishop of New York, in a
paper entitled Money in City Elections, p. 6.

3 Some of my American informants would not admit this ; and some
fixed the percentage of corrupt men, even at Albany, much lower than
Mr. Roosevelt does. Writers of the pessimistic school make it even higher.
I give here and elsewhere what seem to me to be on the whole the best
supported views, though, as Herodotus says of the rise of Cyrus, “ know-
ing how to tell three other paths of story also.”

166 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART IL

more likely to overcome virtue, and other things
practically are equal, because it is just as hard to fix
responsibility on a senator as on an Assembly man, and
the post is no more dignified. And the second reason is
that the most adroit and practised intriguers work their
way up ihto the Senate, where their power (which includes
the confirmation of appointments) is greater and their
vote more valuable. There is a survival of the fittest, but
as fitness includes the absence of scruples, this comes in
practice to mean the natural selection of the worst.

I escape from this Stygian pool to make some ob-
servations which seem applicable to State legislatures
generally, and not merely to the most degraded.

The spirit of localism, surprisingly strong every-
where in America, completely rules them. A member
is not a member for his State, chosen by a district
but bound to think first of the general welfare of the
commonwealth. He is a member for Brownsville, or
Pompey, or the Seventh district, and so forth, as the
case may be. His first and main duty is to get the
most he can for his constituency out of the State
treasury, or by means of State legislation. No appeal
to the general interest would have weight with him
against the interests of that spot. What is more, he is
deemed by his colleagues of the same party to be the
sole exponent Of the wishes of the spot, and solely en-

1 Tt will be remembered that the picture I am drawing is true of
four or five State legislatures only. Similar faults exist in many others,
but have not blossomed forth into the same luxuriance, and probably
never may. Mr. Theodore Roosevelt says, “I have had opportunity of
knowing something about the workings of but a few of our other State
legislatures ; from what I have heard and seen I should say that we (New
York) stand about on a par with those of Pennsylvania, Maryland, and
Illinois, above that of Louisiana,and below those of Vermont, Massachusetts,
Rhode Island, and Minnesota, as well as below the national legislature at
Washington.” There is great diversity between the legislatures even of
the same State (or Territory) in different years.

cHaP.xLiv WORKING OF STATE GOVERNMENTS 167
af,

titled to handle its affairs. If he approves a bill which
affects the place and nothing but the place, that is con-
clusive. Nobody else has any business to interfere.
This rule is the more readily accepted, because its appli-
cation all round serves the private interest of every
member alike, while members of more enlarged views,
who ought to champion the interests of the State and
sound general principles of legislation, are rare. When
such is the accepted doctrine as well as invariable practice,
log-rolling becomes natural and almost legitimate. Each
member being the judge of the measure which touches
his own constituency, every other member supports that
member in passing the measure, expecting in return
the like support in a like cause. He who in the public
interest opposes the bad bill of another, is certain to
find that other opposing, and probably with success, his
own bill, however good.

There is in State legislators, particularly in the West,
a restlessness which, coupled with their limited range
of knowledge and undue appreciation of material in-
terests, makes them rather dangerous. Meeting for
only a few weeks in’ the year, or perhaps in two years,
they are alarmingly active during those weeks, and
run measures through whose results are not appre-
hended till months afterwards. It is for this reason,
no less than from the fear of jobbery, that the meet-
ing of the legislature is looked forward to with anxiety
by the “good citizens” in these communities, and
its departure hailed as a deliverance. I once asked
the governor of a far Western commonwealth how he
got on with his legislature. “I won’t say they are bad
men,” he answered, “but the pleasantest sight of the
year to me is when at the end of the session I see their
coat tails go round the street corner.”

168 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

Both this restlessness and the general character of
State legislation are illustrated by the enormous numbers
of bills introduced in each session, comparatively few of
which pass, becayse the time is too short, or opposing
influences can be brought to bear on the committees.

Thera were introduced (in the sessions of 1885 or
1886)—

In Alabama 1469 bills (442 passed)

», Kentucky 2390 ,, (1400 ,, )

», New Jersey 712 ,, (275 a ©

» Illinois 1107 ,, (1381 )
», Pennsylvania 1065 ,, (221 bee a
»» New York 2093 ,, (681 oy

In ten States the total number of bills introduced
was 12,449, of which 3793 passed, The vast majority
of these bills were local or special. In South Carolina,
during four years, out of about 900 Acts passed, only 256
related to matters of general public concern. Acts of
incorporation, grants of inheritance, changes of names
and releases from indebtedness, had consumed a. large
proportion of the time of the legislature at a great public
expense, and to the serious detriment of the State? Yet

+?

1 Even among the Acts which appear in the statute-books of the
States, under the heading of general laws there are many of a local or
special character. I find, on referring to the laws of Louisiana passed in
1886, that of 96 so-called general Acts passed, 30 were really local or
special. In Nebraska, in 1887, there were passed 114 general Acts, 22 of
which, while classed among general laws, were really local or personal,
and 17 were described as special. In Minnesota, in 1887, of 265 classed
as general Acts, 36 seem from their titles to be local or special. But it
is not always easy to discover the substance from the title, so the number
of special Acts classed as general may be still larger.

As remarked in an earlier chapter, the total number of bills of all
kinds introduced in 1885 into the British Parliament, which is the sole
legislative authority fur a population of thirty-eight millions, was 481, of
which 282 passed.

2 [ take these figures from the instructive and entertaining presiden-
tial address of Mr. William Allen Butler to the American Bar Association
at its annual meeting in 1886.

cHAp.xuiv WORKING OF STATE GOVERNMENTS 169
a ee
South Carolina is not a State in which there is much
capital or many large undertakings. The place which
the petty matters mentioned take in it would, in more
prosperous communities, be taken by -bills relating to
railroad and other companies, and to cities. The ex-
pense to which the States are put by their legislatures,
with results rather injurious than beneficial, is very great.
‘In South Carolina, where the session is short, the cost
is reported by the secretary of state at only $52,000. But
in Pennsylvania, with 158 days of session, it is $686,500
(£137,300). In Connecticut the last session of ninety
days cost $98,000, while the general expenses of the
legislature of California are $130,000 for a session of
sixty days. The cost of printing, of travelling, and
other incidental expenses must be added in order to form
an accurate estimate of the burden imposed on the tax-
payers of the States to carry on this badly-managed
business of law-making, which varies from a daily aver-
age cost of about $1000 per diem for every legislative
session to over $4000 per diem, making an aggregate in
the total number of States, and in Congresa, which it is
impossible to ascertain with exactness, but which cannot,
I think, be less than $10,000,000 (£2,000,000), not as
an exceptional outlay, but as the price paid for current
legislation.”?

Nothing is more remarkable about these State legis-
lators than their timidity. No one seems to think of
having an opinion of his own. In matters which touch the
interests of his constituents, a member is, of course, their
humble servant. In burning party questions—they are
few, and mostly personal—he goes with his party. In
questions of general public policy he looks to see how the
cat jumps; and is ready to vote for anything which the

1 Mr. W. A. Butler’s address ut supra.

170 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

people, or any active section of the people, cry out for,
though of course he may be secretly unfriendly, and may
therefore slily try to spoil a measure. This want of in-
dependence has‘some good results. It enables a small
minority of zealous men, backed by a few newspapers, to
carry schemes of reform which the majority regard with
indifference or hostility. Thus in bodies so depraved as
the legislatures of New York and Pennsylvania, bills
have lately been passed greatly improving the charters
of cities, and even establishing an improved system
of appointments to office. A few energetic reformers
went to Albany and Harrisburg to strengthen the hands
of the little knot of members who battle for good govern-
ment there, and partly frightened, partly coaxed a
majority of the Senate and House into adopting proposals
opposed to the interests of professional politicians.
Some six years ago, two or three high-minded and
sagacious ladies obtained by their presence at Albany
the introduction of valuable reforms into the charitable
institutions of New York city. The ignorance and heed-
lessness of the “ professionals,” who do not always see
the results of legislative changes, and do not look forward
beyond the next few months, help to make such triumphs
possible ; and thus, as the Bible tells us that the wrath
of man shall praise God, the faults of politicians are
turned to work’ for righteousness.

In the recent legislation of many States, especially
Western States, there is a singular mixture of philan-
thropy and humanitarianism with the folly and jobbery
which have been described already, like threads of gold
and silver woven across a warp of dirty sacking. Every
year sees bills passed to restrict the sale of liquor, to
prevent the sale of indecent or otherwise demoralizing
literature, to protect women and children, to stamp out

CHAP. XLIV. WORKING OF STATE GOVERNMENTS 171

lotteries and gambling houses, to improve the care of
the blind, the insane, and the poor, which testify to a
warm and increasing interest in all good works. These
measures are to be explained, not merely by that power
which an actiye and compact minority enjoys of getting
its own way against a crowd of men bent each on his
own private gain, and therefore not working together
for other purposes, but also by the real sympathy which
many of the legislators, especially in the rural districts, feel
for morality and for suffering. Eventhe corruptpoliticians
of Albany were moved by the appeals of the philanthropic
ladies to whom I have referred ; much more then would
it be an error to think of the average legislator as a bad
man, merely because he will join in a job, or deal un-
fairly with a railroad. The moral standard of Western
America is not quite the same as that of England, just
as the standard of England differs from that of Germany
or France. It is both higher and lower. Some sins
excite more anger or disgust than they do in Eng-
land ; some are more lightly forgiven, or more quickly
forgotten. Laxity in the discharge of a political trust
belongs to the latter category. The newspapers accuse
everybody; the ordinary citizen can seldom tell who
is innocent and who is guilty. He makes a sort of
compromise in his own mind by thinking nobody quite
black, but everybody gray. And he goes on to think
that what everybody does cannot be very sinful.

CHAPTER XLV
REMEDIES FOR THE FAULTS OF STATE GOVERNMENTS

Tue defects in State governments, which our examina-
tion of their working has disclosed, are not those we
should have expected. It might have been predicted,
and it was at one time believed, that these authorities,
consumed by jealousy and stimulated by ambition, would
have been engaged in constant efforts to extend the
sphere of their action and encroach on the National
government. This does not happen, and seems most
unlikely to happen. The people of each State are now
not more attached to the government of their own
commonwealth than to the Federal goverment of the
nation, whose growth has made even the greatest State
seem insignificant beside it.

A study of the frame of State government, in which
the executive department is absolutely severed from the
legislative, might have suggested that the former would
become too independent, misusing its powers for personal
or party purposes, while public business would suffer
from the want of concert between the two greatauthorities,
that which makes and that which carries out the law.

This also has proved in practice to be no serious evil.
The legislature might indeed conceivably work better if
the governor, or some of his chief officials, could sit in it

cHar.xiv REMEDIES FOR THEIR FAULTS 173
HH
and exercise an influence on its deliberations. Such an
adaptation of the English cabinet system has, however,
never been thought of for American States; and the
example of the Provincial legislatures of Canada, in each .
of which there is a responsible ministry sitting in the
legislature, does not seem to recommend it for imitation.
Those who founded the State governments did not
desire to place any executive leaders in a representative
assembly. Probably they were rather inclined to fear
that the governor, not being accountable to the legis-
lature, would retain too great an independence. The
recent creation of various administrative officers or
Boards has gone some way to meet the difficulties
which the incompetence of the legislatures causes, for
these officers or Boards frequently prepare bills which
some member of the legislature introduces, and which
are put through without opposition, perhaps even with-
out notice, except from a handful of members. On the
whole, the executive arrangements of the State work
well, though they might, in the opinion of some judicious
publicists, “be improved by vesting the appointment of
the chief officials in the governor, "instead of leaving it
to direct popular election. This would tend to give
more unity of purpose and action to the administration.
The collisions which occur in practice between the
governor and the legislature relate chiefly to appoint-
ments, that is to say, to personal matters, not involving
issues of State policy.

The real blemishes in the system of State govern-
ment are all found in the composition or conduct of the
legislatures. They are the following :-—

Inferiority in point of knowledge, of skill, and some-

times of conscience, of the bulk of the men who

fill these bodies.

174 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART It

Improvidence in matters of finance.

Heedlessness in passing administrative bills.

Want of proper methods for dealing with local and

special bills,

Failure of public opinion adequately to control legis-

lation, and particularly special bills.

The practical result of these blemishes has been to
create a large mass of State and local indebtedness
which ought never to have been incurred, to allow
foolish experiments in law-making to be tried, and
to sanction a vast mass of private enterprises, in
which public rights and public interests become the
sport of speculators, or a source of gain to monopolists,
with the incidental consequence of demoralizing the
legislators themselves and creating an often unjust
prejudice against all corporate undertakings.

What are the checks or remedies which have been
provided to limit or suppress these evils? Any one who
has followed the account given of the men who compose
the legislatures and the methods they follow will have
felt that these checks must be considerable, else the
results would have been worse than those we see. All
remedies are directed against the legislative power, and
may be arranged under four heads.

First, there is the division of the legislature into two
houses. A! job may have been smuggled through one
house, but the money needed to push it through the
other may be wanting. Some wild scheme, professing
to benefit the farmers, or the cattlemen, or the railroad
employés, may, during its passage through the Assembly,
rouse enough attention from sensible people to enable
them to stop it in the Senate. The mere tendency of
two chambers to disagree with one another is deemed a
benefit by those who hold, as the Americans do, that

CHAP. XLV REMEDIES FOR THEIR FAULTS 175
I
every new measure is prima facie likely to do more
harm than good. Most bills are bad—ergo, kill as
Tany as you can. Each house, moreover, has, even
in such demoralized State legislatures as those of New
York or Pennsylvania, a satisfaction, if not an interest, in
unveiling the tricks of the other.

Secondly, there is the veto of the governor. How
much the Americans value this appears from the fact
that, whereas in 1789 there was only one State, Massa-
chusetts, which vested this power in the chief magistrate,
all of the present thirty-eight States except four (only
one of these a new State) give it to him. Some
Constitutions contain the salutary provision that the
governor may reject one or more items of an appro-
priation bill while approving the bill as a whole; and
this has been found to strengthen his hands immensely
in checking the waste of public money on bad enter-
prises. This veto power, the great stand-by of the
people of the States, illustrates admirably the merits
of concentrated responsibility. The citizens, in choos-
ing the governor to represent the collective authority of
the whole State, lay oh him the duty of examining every
bill on its merits. He cannot shelter himself behind the
will of the representatives of the people, because he is
appointed to watch and check those representatives as a
policeman watches a suspect. He is bound to reject the
bill, not only if it seems to him to infringe the Constitu-
tion of the State, but also if he thinks it in any wise
injurious to the public, on pain of being himself sus-
pected of carelessness, or of complicity in some corrupt
design. The legislature may, of course, pass the bill
over his veto by a two-thirds vote ; but although there
may exist a two-thirds majority in favour of the measure,
they may fear, after the veto has turned the lamp of

176 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

public opinion upon it, to take so strong a step. There
are, of course, great differences between one governor
and another, as well as between one State and another,
as regards the honesty with which the power is exercised,
for it may be, and sometimes is, used by a ‘ Ring’ governor
to defeat measures of reform. But it isa real and effective
power everywhere ; and in such a State as New York,
where the importance of the office often secures the
election of an able and courageous man, it has rendered
inestimable services.’

Thirdly, there are limitations imposed on the com-
petence of the legislature. In the last chapter but one
some of these limitations have been mentioned, the most
numerous, and at present the most important of which
relate to special and local (or what would be called
in England “ private”) bills, I have remarked that
these bills, while they destroy the harmony and sim-
plicity of the law, and waste the time of the legisla-
ture, are also a fertile source of jobbery.? To expunge

1 It may be suggested that the existence of this ultimate remedy tends
to make good members relax their opposition to bad bills, because they
know that the veto will kill them. This scmetimes happens, but is a
less evil than the disuse of the veto would be.

2 “Tn twelve States the legislature is forbidden to create any corpora-
tion whatever, municipalities included, except by general law, and in thir-
teen others to create by special Act any except municipal corporations, or
those to which no other law is applicable, In some States corporations
can be created by special Act only for municipal, charitable, or reforma-
tory purposes. Such provisions are not intended to discourage the forma-
tion of private corporations. On the contrary, in all these States general
laws exist under which they can be formed with great facility. Indeed
the defects in some of these statutes, and their failure to provide safe-
guards against some at least of the very evils which they were intended to
meet, might well suggest to legislators the question whether in avoiding
the Scylla of special legislation they have not been drawn into the Charybdis
of franchises indiscriminately bestowed. Perhaps the time will come
when recommendations such as those urged by the New York railroad
cominission will be acted on, and the promoters of a new railroad will be
obliged to furnish some better reason for its existence, and for their exer-
cising the sovereign power of eminent domain, than the chance of forcing

cuap.xtv REMEDIES FOR THEIR FAULTS ow

them or restrict them to cases where a special statute
was really needed, would be a great benefit. To some
extent this has been effected by the constitutional pro-
hibitions I have described. TIlinois, for instance, has by
such prohibitions reduced her sessional statutes to about
300 pages, and Iowa averages only 200-250 pages,
whereas the Wisconsin statutes of 1885 reached 2000
pages, there being in that State far less effective re-
strictions.' But the powers of evil do not yield with-
out a battle. All sorts of evasions are tried, and
some succeed. Suppose, for instance, that there is a
prohibition in the Constitution of New York to pass
any but general laws relating to the government of
cities. An Act is passed which is expressed to apply to
cities with a population exceeding one hundred thousand
but less than two hundred thousand. There happens to
be only one such city in the State, viz. Buffalo, but as
there might be more, the law is general, and escapes
the prohibition.

I owe to the kindness of a legal friend a very recent
instance of another way in which the provisions against
special legislation ate evaded, viz. by passing Acts

a company already established to buy them out—or, failing that, the
alternative of being sold out under foreclosure, pending a receivership.”—
Hitchcock, State Constitutions, p. 36.

“The legislature which can grant or withhold chartered privileges at
pleasure wields an immense power. And it will also readily be seen what
a great field for favouritism and jobbery exists, when special Acts of
incorporation are required for each case in which special favours and
special privileges may be given away by a legislature that may be corruptly
influenced, without imposing any reciprocal obligation on the corporation.
It will be safe to say that fully two-thirds of the lobbyism, jobbery, and
log-rolling, the fraud and trickery that are common to our State legisla-
tures, is due to this power of creating private corporations.”—Ford,
Citizens’ Manual, ii. p. 68.

1 That the evil of special legislation is generally felt to be serious is
proved among other things by the disabilities in this regard which Con-
gressional statutes have imposed upon the legislatures of the Territories.

VOL. II N

178 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

which, because they purport to amend general Acts, are
themselves deemed general. The Constitution of New
York prohibits the legislature from passing any private
or local Act incorporating villages, or providing for
building bridges. A general Act is passed in 1885 for
the incorporation of villages, with general provisions as
to bridges. Next year the following Act is passed, which
I give verbatim. It amends the Act of 1885, by taking
out of it all the ¢ounties in the State except Westchester,
and then excludes application of the Act to two towns
in Westchester. It is thus doubly a “ private or local
Act,” but the prohibition of the Constitution is got round.

CHAP. 556.

AN ACT to amend chapter two hundred and ninety-one of the
laws of eighteen hundred and seventy, entitled “ An Act for the In-
corporation of Villages.”

Passed June 4, 1886 ; three-fifths being present.
The People of the State of New York, repre-
sented in Senate and Assembly, do enact as
follows :—

Section 1.—Sectioh two of chapter four hun-
dred and fifty of the lawsof eighteen hundred and
eighty-five, is hereby amended so as to read as
Act of 1885, as to follows :—

Section 2.—All of the counties in this State
are hereby exempted from the provisions of this
Act except the county of Westchester, but
nothing in this Act contained shall be construed
Westchester County. so as to apply to the towns of Greenburgh and

Mount Pleasant in said county of Westchester.

Section 3.—This Act shall take effect
immediately.

Village Incorporation

bridges, to apply

only to parts of

Where evasions of this kind become frequent the con-
fusion of the statute-book is worse than ever, because

CHAP, XLV REMEDIES FOR THEIR FAULTS 179
a eS

you cannot tell without examination whether an Act is
general or special.

The reader will have noticed in the heading of the
Act just quoted the words “ three-fifths being present.”
This is one of the numerous safeguards imposed on the
procedure of the State legislatures. Among others we
find provisions that every bill shall be passed by a
certain proportional majority, that it shall be read
“fully and distinctly” (whatever that may be deemed
to mean), on three different days (Ohio, and other
States); that it “shall include only one subject which
shall be expressed in its title” (nearly all States) ;
that “no Act shall be revised or amended by mere refer-
ence to its title, but the Act revised or section amended
shall be set forth at full length” (many States) ; that
“no Act shall be passed which shall provide that any
existing law, or any part thereof, shall be made or
deemed a part of such Act, or which shall enact that
any existing law, or any part thereof, shall be applic-
able except by inserting it in such Act” (New York
and other States’). Sometimes it is provided that no
bill shall be introduced into either house within a
certain period after the beginning or before the end of
the session, so as to prevent bills from being smuggled
through in the hurry of the last days.

1 All these practices which American Constitutions condemn exist
in the British Parliament, though the standing orders and the traditions
of both Houses prevent them from being seriously harmful, However,
the habit of incorporating an earlier statute with a later one by mere
reference, certainly tends to confuse the law; and sometimes the inclusion
in one statute of wholly different matters operates harshly on persons who
have failed to note the minor contents of a bill whose principal purpose
does not affect them. The commoners of the New Forest in Hampshire
were, some years ago, much surprised to wake up one morning and find
that the Crown had smuggled through Parliament, in an Act relating to
foreshores in Scotland, a clause which seriously affected their interests.

2 « A practice has sprung up of evading this constitutional provision
by introducing a new bill after the time has expired when it may consti-

180 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

The inventive genius of American legislators finds
or makes many holes in the net which the people
have tried to throw over them by the Constitution. ,
Yet, though there be none of the restrictions and regu-
lations mentioned which is not sometimes violated or
evaded, they have, on the whole, worked well. The
enemy is held at bay, and a great deal of bad legislation
is prevented. Some bills have to be dropped, because
too plainly repugnant to the Constitution to be worth
carrying farther. The more ignorant members do not
always apprehend where the difficulty lies. They can
barely read the Constitution, and the nature of its legal
operation is as far beyond them as the cause of thunder
is beyond cats. A friend of mine who sat for some years
in the New York Assembly was once importuned by
an Irish member (now in Congress) to support that
particular member’s little bill. He answered that he
could not, because the bill was against the Constitution.
“Och, Mr. Robert,” was the reply, “shure the Constitoo-
tion should never be allowed to come between frinds.”

Some bills again it is the duty of the governor to
veto, because they violate a Constitutional restriction ;
while of those that pass him unscathed, a fair number
tutionally be done, as an amendment to some pending bill, the whole of
which, except the enacting clause, is struck out to make way forit. Thus,
the member who thinks he may have occasion for the introduction of a
new bill after the constitutional period has expired, takes care to intro-
duce sham bills in due season, which he can use as stocks to graft upon,
and which he uses irrespective of their character or contents. The sham
bill is perhaps a bill to incorporate the city of Siam, One of the mem-
ber’s constituents applies to him for legislative permission to construct a
dam across the Wild Cat River. Forthwith, by amendment, the bill,
entitled a bill to incorporate the city of Siam, has all after the enacting
clause stricken out, and it is made to provide, as its sole object, that John
Doe may construct a dam across the Wild Cat. With this title, and in
this form it is passed ; but the house then considerately amends the title

to correspond with the purpose of the bill, and the law is passed, and the
Constitution at the same time saved !”—Cooley, Constit. Limit. p. 169 note,

CHAP. XLV REMEDIES: FOR THEIR FAULTS “181
SS eS
fall victims to the courts of law. After the explanations
given in an earlier chapter, I need only say here that the
enforcement of the limitations imposed by a State Con-
stitution necessarily rests with the judges, since it is they
who pronounce whether or no a statute has transgressed
the bounds which the fundamental instrument sets,
or whether a Constitutional amendment has been duly
carried."

Some one may remark that there are two material
differences between the position of these State judges
and that of the Federal judges. The latter are not
appointed by a State, and are therefore in a more inde-
pendent position when any question of conflict between
State laws or Constitutions and the Federal Constitution
or statutes comes before them. Moreover they hold office
for life, whereas the State judge usually holds for a term
of years, and has his re-election to think of. Can the
State judge then be expected to show himself equally
bold in declaring a State statute to be unconstitutional ?
Will he not offend the legislature, and the party managers
who control it, by flying in their faces ?

The answer is that although the judge may displease
the legislature if he decides against the validity of an
unconstitutional statute, he may displease the people if
he decides for it; and it is safer to please the people

1 A remarkable instance of the technical literalism with which the
Courts sometimes enforce Constitutional restrictions is afforded by the
fate of a recent liquor Prohibition amendment to the Constitution of
Towa. This amendment had been passed by both Houses of the State legis-
lature in two successive legislatures, had been submitted to the people
and enacted by a large majority, had been proclaimed by the governor
and gone into force. It was subsequently discovered that one House of
the first legislature had, through the carelessness of a clerk, neglected to
“spread the Amendment in full on its journal,” as prescribed by the
Constitution. The point being brought before the Supreme Court of
Iowa, it was held that the Amendment, owing to this informality, had
not heen duly passed, and was wholly void—Dr. A. Shaw, ut supra.

182 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART IT

than the legislature. The people at large may know
little about the matter, but the legal profession know, and
are sure to express their opinion. The profession look
to the courts to save them and their clients from the
heedlessness or improbity of the legislature, and will
condemn a judge who fails in this duty. Accordingly,
the judges seldom fail. They knock about State statutes
most unceremoniously, and they seldom suffer for doing
so. In one case only is their position a dangerous one.
When the people, possessed by some strong desire or
sentiment, have either by thé provisions of a new
Constitution, or by the force of clamour, driven the
legislature to enact some measure meant to cure a
pressing ill, they may turn angrily upon the judge who
holds that measure to have been unconstitutional. This
has several times happened, and is always liable to
happen where elective judges hold office for short
terms, with the unfortunate result of weakening
the fortitude of the judges. .In 1786 the supreme
court of Rhode, Island decided that an Act passed by
the legislature was invalid, because contravening the
provisions of the Colonial Charter (which was then still
the Constitution of the State), securing to every accused
person the benefit of trial by jury.1. The legislature were
furious, and, proceeded to impeach the judges for dis-
obeying their will. The impeachment failed, but the
judges were not re-elected by the legislature when
their term of office expired at the end of the year, and

1 See Vol. I. p. 333. The Act was one for forcing State paper money
into circulation by imposing a penalty, recoverable on summary conviction
without a jury, on whoever should refuse to receive on the same terms as
specie the bills of a State-chartered bank. No question of the United
States Constitution could arise, because it did not yet exist. To these
Rhode Island judges belongs the credit not only of having resisted a

reckless multitude, but of having set the first example in American history
of the exercise of a salutary function.

CHAP, XLV REMEDIES FOR THEIR FAULTS 183
ke ee re eA er ene ON re ee
were replaced by a more subservient bench, which held
the statute valid. In Ohio, the legislature passed in
1805 an Act which Judge Pease, in a case arising under it,

held to be repugnant to the Constitution of Ohio, as well
as to the Federal Constitution, and accordingly declined
to enforce. In 1808, he and another judge of the supreme
court of the State who had concurred with him, were
impeached by the House before the Senate of Ohio, but
were acquitted. In 1871, the legislature of Illinois passed
a law, intending to carry out a provision of the Consti-
tution of 1870, which was held unconstitutional by
Judge Lawrence, greatly to the disappointment of the
farmers, who had expected valuable results from it. He
was not impeached, but when shortly afterwards he
sought re-election, he was defeated solely on the ground
of this decision.! These instances show that the courts
have had to fight for their freedom in the discharge of
the duty which the Constitutions throw on them. But
the paucity of such conflicts shows that this freedom
is now generally recognized, and may be deemed, at

1 [ quote from Mr. Hadley’s book on railroad transportation (through
Dr. Hitchcock’s essay already referred to) the following account of the
circumstances :—“ The Constitutional Convention of Illinois in 1870
made an important declaration concerning State control of railway rates,
on the basis of which a law was passed in 1871 establishing a system of
maxima, ‘This law was pronounced unconstitutional by Judge Lawrence.
The result was that he immediately afterwards failed of re-election, solely
on this ground. The defeat of Judge Lawrence showed the true signi-
ficance of the farmers’ movement [the so-called Granger movement].
They were concerned in securing what they felt to be their rights, and
were unwilling that any constitutional barrier should be made to defeat
the popular will. They had reached the point where they regarded
many of the forms of law as mere technicalities. They were dangerously
near the point where revolutions begin. But they did not pass the point.
The law of 1873 avoided the issue raised by Judge Lawrence against that
of 1871. Instead of directly fixing maxima, it provided that rates must
be reasonable, and then provided for a commission to fix reasonable
rates,” The courage of Judge Lawrence was therefore not thrown away ;
it cost him his place, but it served the people and vindicated the law.

184 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

least for the present, to be placed above the storms of
popular passion.!

It will be seen from what has been said that the
judges are an essential part of the machinery of State
government. But they are so simply as judges, and
not as invested with political powers or duties. They
have not received, any more than the Federal judges,
a special commission to restrain the legislature or
pronounce on thé validity of its acts. There is nota
word in the State Constitutions, any more than in the
Federal Constitutions, conferring any such right upon
the courts, or indeed conferring any other right than
all courts of law must necessarily enjoy. When they
declare a statute unconstitutional they do so merely in
their ordinary function of expounding the law of the
State, its fundamental law as well as its laws of inferior
authority, just as an English judge might hold an order
made by the Queen in Council to be invalid, because in
excess of the powers granted by the Act of Parliament
under which it was made. It would be as clearly the
duty of an English county court judge so to hold as of
the highest court of appeal. So it is the duty of the
humblest American State judge to decide on the consti-
tutionality of a statute.

So far we have been considering restrictions im-
posed on the competence of the legislature, or on the
methods of its procedure. We now come to the fourth
and last of the checks which the prudence of American
States imposes. It is a very simple, not to say naive,
one. It consists in limiting the time during which the
legislature may sit. Formerly these bodies sat, like the

1 There have of course been other instances in which judges have
been impeached or removed; but I am here dealing only with those in

which the ground of complaint was the declaring a legislative act to be
invalid.

CHAP. XLV REMEDIES FOR THEIR FAULTS 185

English Parliament, so long as they had business to do.
The business seldom took long. When it was done, the
farmers and lawyers naturally wished to go home, and
home they went. But when the class of professional
politicians grew up, these wholesome tendencies lost
their power over a section of the members. Politics
was their business, and they had none other to call
them back to the domestic hearth.1 They had even a
motive for prolonging the session, because they pro-
longed their legislative salary, which was usually paid
by the day. Thus it became the interest of the tax-
payer to shorten the session. His interest, however,
was still stronger in cutting short the jobs and im-
provident bestowal of moneys and franchises in which
he found his representatives employed. Accordingly
twenty-two States have fixed a number of days beyond
which the legislature may not sit. Most of these
fix it absolutely; but a few prefer.the method of
cutting off the pay of their legislators after the pre-
scribed number of days has expired, so that if they do
continue to devote themselves still longer to the work
of law-making, their’ virtue shall be its own reward.?

1 The English Parliament found the tendency of members to slip
away so strong that in the sixteenth century it passed an Act “that no
knight of the shire or burgess do depart before the end of Parliament,”
which inflicted on the member leaving without the permission of Mr.
Speaker, the penalty of losing “all those sums of money which he should
or ought to have had for his wages.”

2 Thus the Constitution of Oregon, for instance, gives its members
$3 a day, but provides that they shall never receive more than $120
in all, thus practically limiting the session to forty days. Texas is a
little more liberal, for her Constitution is content to reduce the pay after
sixty days from $5 to $2 per day, at which reduced rate members may
apparently go on as long as they please, All the States which fix a fimit
of time are Southern or Western, except Pennsylvania and Maryland,
whose legislatures certainly need every check that can be applied. The
forty days session of Georgia may be extended by a two-thirds vote of an
absolute majority of each House.

186 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

Experience has, however, disclosed a danger in these
absolutely limited sessions. It is that of haste and
recklessness in rushing bills through without due dis-
cussion. Sometimes it happens that a bill introduced in
response to a vehement popular demand is carried with
a run (so to speak), because the time for considering
it cannot be extended, whereas longer consideration
would have disclosed its dangers, An ill-framed rail-
way bill was thus lately lost in the Iowa legislature
because full discussion (there being no time-limit)
brought out its weak points. Hence some States have
largely extended their sessions.1 Thus California has
recently lengthened the days during which her legisla-
tors may receive pay from 60 to 100; and Colorado in
1885 extended the maximum of her session from 40 to 90
days, also raising legislative pay from $4 to $7 per diem.
Many recent Constitutions have tried another and
probably a better expedient than that of limiting the
length of sessions. They have made sessions less fre-
quent. At one time every legislature met once a year.
Now in all the States but six (all of these six belong-
ing to the original thirteen) it is permitted to meet only
once in two years. Within the last ten years, at least
six States have changed their annual sessions to biennial.
It does not, appear that the interests of the common-
wealths suffer by this suspension of the action of. their
chief organ of government. On the contrary, they get
on so much better without a legislature that certain
bold spirits ask whether the principle might not with
advantage be pushed farther. As Mr. Butler says—
“For a people claiming pre-eminence in the sphere

1 I give what I have been able to ascertain, but may say in passing
that it is not easy even in America, and very difficult in Europe, to
discover exactly what amendments have been made in the Constitutions
of the States.

CHAP. XLV REMEDIES FOR THEIR FAULT. 5 187

of popular government, it seems hardly creditable that
in their seeming despair of a cure for the chronic evils
of legislation, they should be able to mitigate them only
by making them intermittent. Under the biennial
.system the relief enjoyed in what are called the ‘off-
years’ seems to have reconciled the body politic of
the several States which have adopted it to the risk of
an aggravation of the malady when the legislative year
comes round and the old symptoms recur.

“The secretaries of State (of the several States)
with whom I have communicated concur in certifying
that no public inconvenience is caused by the biennial
system; and one of them, of the State of Nebraska, in
answer to my query if biennial sessions occasion any
public inconvenience, writes ‘None whatever. The
public interests would be better subserved by having
legislative sessions held only once in four years.’”

The Americans seem to reason thus: “Since a
legislature is very far gone from righteousness, and of
its own nature inclined to do evil, the less chance it
has of doing evil the better. If it meets, it will pass
bad laws. Let us therefore prevent it from meeting.”

They are no doubt right as practical men. _ They are
consistent, as sons of the Puritans, in their application of
the doctrine of original sin. But this is a rather pitiful
result for self-governing democracy to have arrived at.

The European reader will ask, “ Why all these
efforts to deal with the symptoms of the malady, in-
stead of striking at the root of the malady itself?
Why not reform the legislatures by inducing good men
to enter them; and keeping a more constantly vigilant
public opinion fixed upon them ?”

The answer to this very pertinent question will be
found in the chapters of Part III. which follow. I will

188 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

only so far anticipate what is there stated as to observe
that the better citizens have found it so difficult and
troublesome to reform the legislatures that they have .
concluded to be content with curing such and so many
symptoms as they can find iiedinines for, and waiting,
to see in what new direction the virus will work:
“ After all,” they say, “the disease, though it is painful
and vexing, does not endanger the life of the patient,
does not even diminish his strength. The worst that
the legislatures can do is to waste some money, and try
some foolish experiments from which the good sense of
the people will presently withdraw. Every one has his
crosses to bear, and ours are comparatively light.” All
which is true enough, but ignores one important feature
in the situation, viz. the fact that the tremendous in-
fluence exerted by wealth and the misuse of public
rights permitted to capitalists, and especially to com-
panies, have created among the masses of the people
ideas which may break out in demands for legislation of
a new and dangerous kind.

The survey of the State governments which we have
now completed suggests several reflections.

One of these is “that the political importance of the
States is no longer what it was in the early days of the
Republic. Although the States have grown enormously
in wealth and population, they have declined relatively to
the central government. The excellence of State laws
and the merits of a State administration make less differ-
ence to the inhabitants than formerly, because the hand
of the National government is more frequently felt. The
questions which the State deals with, largely as they
influence the welfare of the citizen, do not touch his
imagination like those which Congress handles, because
the latter determine the relations of the Republic to

CHAP. XLV REMEDIES FOR THEIR FAULTS 189
a
the rest of the world, and affect all the area that lies
between the two oceans. The State set out as an isolated
and self-suflicing commonwealth. It is now merely a
part of a far grander whole, which seems to be slowly
absorbing its functions and stunting its growth, as the
‘great tree stunts the shrubs over which its spreading
boughs have begun to cast their shade.

I do not mean to say that the people have ceased
to care for their States; far from it. They are proud
of their States, even where there may be little to be
proud of. That passionate love of competition which
possesses English-speaking men, makes them eager that
their State should surpass, in the number of the clocks
it makes, the hogs it kills, the pumpkins it rears, the
neighbouring States, that their particular star should
shine at least as brightly as the other thirty-seven in the
national flag. But if these commonwealths meant to their
citizens what they did in the days of the Revolution, if
they commanded an equal measure of their loyalty, and
influenced as largely their individual welfare, the State
legislatures would not be left to professionals or third-
rate men. The truth is that the State has shrivelled
up. It retains its old legal powers over the citizens, its
old legal rights as against the central government. But
it does not interest its citizens as it once did.1 And as
the central government overshadows it in one direction,
so the great cities have encroached upon it in another.
The population of a single city is sometimes a fourth or
a fifth part of the whole population of the State; and

1 In 1782 Fisher Ames wrote: “Instead of feeling as a nation, a
State is our country. We look with indifference, often with hatred, fear,
and aversion to the other States.’ Works, i. p. 113 (quoted by Von Holst).
Even in 1811 Josiah Quincy said in Congress: “ Sir, I confess it, the first
public love of my heart is the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. There is
my fireside: there are the tombs of my ancestors,”—Putnam’s American
Orations, i, p. 168. No one would speak in that strain now.

190 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART Il

city questions interest this population more than State
questions do, city officials have begun to rival or even
to dwarf State officials.

Observe, however, that while the growth of the Union
has relatively dwarfed the State, the absolute increase of
the State in population has changed the character of the
State itself. In 1790 seven of the thirteen original
States had each of them less than 300,000, only one
more than 500,000 inhabitants. Now at least twenty-
three have more than 1,000,000, and six of these
more than 2,000,000. We must expect to find that, in
spite of railroads and telegraphs, the individual citizens
will know less of one another, will have less personal
acquaintance with their leading men, and less personal
interest in the affairs of the community than in the
old days when the State was no more populous than
an English county like Bedford or Somerset. Thus the
special advantages of local government have to a large
extent vanished from the American States of to-day.
They are local bodies in the sense of having no great
imperial interests to fire men’s minds. They are not
local in the sense of giving their members a familiar’
knowledge and a lively interest in the management of
their affairs. Hamilton may have been right in think-
ing that the large States ought to be subdivided.’ At
any rate it is to this want of direct local interest on the
part of the people, that some of the faults of their
legislatures may be ascribed.

The chief lesson which a study of the more vicious

1 On the other hand I have heard it argued that there are some large
States in which the mischievous action of the multitude of a great city is
held in check by the steadier rural voters. If such States had been
subdivided, the subdivision which happened to contain the great city
would lie at the mercy of this multitude.

Hamilton’s reason seems to have been a fear that the States would be
too strong for the National government.

CHAP. XLV REMEDIES FOR THEIR FAULTS 191
i Se

among the State legislatures teaches, is that power does
not necessarily bring responsibility in its train. I should
be ashamed to write down so bald a platitude, were it
not that it is one of those platitudes which are constantly
forgotten or ignored. People who know well enough
that, in private life, wealth or rank or any other kind of
power is as likely to mar a man as to make him, to lower
as to raise his sense of duty, have nevertheless con-
tracted the habit of talking as if human nature changed
when it entered public life, as if the mere possession
of public functions, whether of voting or of legislating,
tended of itself to secure their proper exercise. We
know that power does not purify men in despotic
governments, but we talk as if it did so in free
governments. very one would of course admit, if
the point were put flatly to him, that power alone is
not enough, but that there must be added to power, in
the case of the voter, a direct interest in the choice of
good men, in the case of the legislator, responsibility to
the voters, in the case of both, a measure of enlightenment
and honour. What the legislatures of the worst States
show is not merely the need for the existence of a sound
public opinion, for such a public opinion exists, but the
need for methods by which it can be brought into
efficient action upon representatives, who, if they are
left to themselves, and are not individually persons with
a sense of honour and a character to lose, will be at least
as bad in public life as they could be in private. The
greatness of the scale on which they act, and of the
material interests they control, will do little to inspire
them. New York and Pennsylvania are by far the
largest and wealthiest States in the Union. Their
legislatures are confessedly the worst.

CHAPTER XLVI
STATE POLITICS

In the last preceding chapters I have attempted to
describe first the structure of the machinery of State
governments, and then this machinery in motion as
well as at rest,—that is to say, the actual working
of the various departments in their relations to one
another. We may now ask, What is the motive power
which sets and keeps these wheels and pistons going ?
What is the steam that drives the machine ?

The steam is supplied by the political parties. In
speaking of the parties I must, to some slight extent,
anticipate what will be more fully‘ explained in the later
part of this volume: but it seems worth while to incur
this inconvenience for the sake of bringing together all
that refers specially to the States, and of completing the
picture of their political life.

The States evidently present some singular conditions
for the development of a party system. They are
self-governing communities with large legislative and
administrative powers, existing inside a much greater
community of which they are for many purposes inde-

1 Many readers may find it better to skip this chapter until they have

read those which follow (Chapters LIIT-LV1,) upon the history, tenets, and
present condition of the great national parties.

CHAP, XLVI STATE POLITICS ., 193
Se ee
‘pendent. They must have parties, and this community,
the Federal Union, has also parties. What is the rela-
tion of the one’set of parties to the other ?

There are three kinds of relations possible, viz.—

Each State might have a party of its own, entirely
unconnected with the national parties, but created by
State issues—t.e. advocating or opposing measures which
fall within the exclusive competence of the State.

Each State might have parties which, while based
upon State issues, were influenced by the national parties,
and in some sort of affiliation with the latter.

The parties in each State might be merely local
subdivisions of the national parties, the national issues
and organizations swallowing up, or rather pushing
aside, the State issues and the organizations formed to
deal with them.

The nature of the State governments would lead us
to expect to find the first of these relations existing.
The sphere of the State is different, some few topics
of concurrent jurisdiction excepted, from that of the
National government. What the State can deal with, the
National government tannot touch. What the National
government can deal with lies beyond the province of
the State. The State governor and legislature are
elected without relation to the President and Con-
gress, and when elected have nothing to do with those
authorities. Hence a question fit to be debated and
voted upon in Congress can seldom be a question
fit to be also debated and voted upon in a State
legislature, and the party formed for advocating its
passage through Congress will have no scope for
similar action within a State, while on the other
hand a State party, seeking to carry some State law,
will have no motive for approaching Congress, which

VOL. II 0

194 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

ean neither help it nor hurt it. The great questions
which have divided the Union since its foundation,
and on which national parties have been based, have
been questions of foreign policy, of the creation of a
national bank, of a protective tariff, of the extension
of slavery, of the reconstruction of the South after
the war. With none of these had a State legislature
any title to deal: all lay within the Federal sphere. So
at this moment the questions of currency and of the
disposal of the surplus, which are among the most im-
portant questions before the country, are outside the
province of the State governments. We might there-
fore expect that the State parties would be as dis-
tinct from the national parties as are the State govern-
ments from the Federal.

The contrary has happened. The national parties
have engulfed the State parties. The latter have
disappeared absolutely as independent bodies, and sur-
vive merely as branches of the national parties, working
each in its own State for the tenets and purposes
which a national party professes and seeks to attain.
So much is this the case that ‘one may say that a
State party has rarely any marked local colour, that it
is seldom and then but slightly the result of a com-
promise between State issues and national issues, such
as I have indicated in suggesting the second form of
possible relation. The national issues have thrown
matters of State competence entirely into the shade,
and have done so almost from the foundation of
the Republic. The local parties which existed in 1789
in most or all of the States were soon absorbed
into the Federalists and Democratic Republicans who
sprang into life after the adoption of the Federal Con-
stitution.

CHAP. XLVI STATE POLITICS 195

The results of this phenomenon have been so im-
portant that we may stop to examine its causes.

Within four years from their origin, the strife of the
two great national parties became intense over the whole
Union. From 1793 till 1815 grave issues of foreign
policy, complicated with issues of domestic policy, stirred
men to fierce passion and strenuous effort. State business,
being more commonplace, exciting less feeling, awakening
no interest outside State boundaries, fell into the back-
ground. The leaders who won fame and followers were
national leaders; and a leader came to care for his influence
within his State chiefly as a means of gaining strength
in the wider national field. Even so restlessly active and
versatile a people as the Americans cannot feel warmly
about two sets of diverse interests at the same time, can-
not create and work simultaneously two distinct and un-
connected party organizations. The State, therefore, had,
to use the transatlantic phrase, “ to take the back seat.”
Before 1815 the process was complete; the dividing
lines between parties in every State were those drawn
by national questions. And from 1827 down to 1877 the
renewed keenness of party warfare kept these parties
constantly on the stretch, and forced them to use all the
support they could win in a State for the purposes of the
national struggle.

There was one way in which predominance in a
State could be so directly used. The Federal senators
are chosen by the State legislatures. The party there-
fore which gains a majority in the State legislature gains
two seats in the smaller and more powerful branch of
Congress. As parties in Congress are generally pretty
equally balanced, this advantage is well worth fighting
for, and is a constant spur to the efforts of national
politicians to carry the State elections in a particular

196 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

State. Besides, in America, above all countries, nothing
succeeds like success; and in each State the party
which carries the State elections is held likely to carry
the elections for the national House of Representatives,
and for the President also,

Mordover, there are the offices. The Federal offices
in each State are very numerous. They are in the gift of
whichever national party happens to be in power, 1.
counts among its)members the President for the time
being. He bestows them upon those who in each State
have worked hardest for the national party there. Thus
the influence of Washington and its presiding deities
ig everywhere felt, and even the party which is in a
minority in a particular State, and therefore loses its
share of the State offices, is cheered and fed by morsels
of patronage from the national table. The national
parties are in fact all-pervasive, and leave little room
for the growth of any other groupings or organizations,
A purely State party, indifferent to national issues,
would, if it were started now, have no support from
outside, would have few posts to bestow, because the
State offices are neither numerous nor well paid, could
have no pledge of permanence such as the vast mech-
anism of the national parties provides, would offer little
prospect of aiding its leaders to win wealth or fame in
the wider theatre of Congress.

Accordingly the national parties have complete posses-
sion of the field. In every State from Maine to Texas
all State elections for the governorship and other offices
are fought on their lines; all State legislatures are
divided into members belonging to one or other of
them. very trial of strength in a State election is
assumed to presage a similar result in a national elec-
tion. Every State office is deemed as fitting a reward

CHAP, XLVI STATE POLITICS 197

for services to the national party as for services in State
contests. In fact the whole machinery is worked
exactly as if the State were merely a subdivision of
the Union for electoral purposes. Yet nearly all the
questions which come before State legislatures have
nothing whatever to do with the tenets of the national
parties, while votes of State legislatures, except in
respect of the choice of senators, can neither advance
nor retard the progress of any cause which. lies within
the competence of Congress.

How has this system affected the working of the
State governments, and especially of their legislatures ?

It has prevented the growth within a State of State
parties addressing themselves to the questions which
belong to its legislature, and really affect its welfare.

The natural source of a party is a common belief,
a common aim and purpose. For this men league
themselves together, and agree to act in concert. A
State party ought therefore to be formed out of persons
who desire the State to do something, or not to do it;
to pass such and such a law, to grant money to such
and such an object. ‘It is, however, formed with refer-
ence to no such aim or purpose, but to matters which
the State cannot influence. Hence a singular unreality
in the State parties. In the legislatures as well as
through the electoral districts they cohere very closely.
But this cohesion is of no service or significance for
nine-tenths of the questions that come before the
legislature for its decision, seeing that such questions
are not touched by the platform of either party. Party
therefore, does not fulfil its legitimate ends. It does
not produce the co-operation of leaders in preparing,
of followers in supporting, a measure or line of policy.
It does not secure the keen criticism by either side

198 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART It

of the measures or policy advocated by the other. It
is an artificial aggregation of persons linked together
for purposes unconnected with the work they have
to do.

This state of things may seem to possess the ad-
vantage of permitting questions to be considered on their
merits, apart from that spirit of faction which in England,
for instance, disposes the men on one side to reject
a proposal of the other side on the score, not of its
demerits, but of the quarter it proceeds from. Such
an advantage would certainly exist if members were
elected to the State legislatures irrespective of party, if
the, practice was to look out for good men who would
manage State business prudently and pass useful laws.
This, however, is not the practice. The strength of the
national parties prevents it. Livery member is elected
as a party man; and the experiment of legislatures
working without parties has as little chance of being
tried in the several States as in Congress itself. There
is yet another benefit which the plan seems to promise.
The State legislatures may seem a narrow sphere for an
enterprising genius, and their work uninteresting to a
superior mind. But if they lead into the larger field of
national politics, if distinction in them opens the door
to a fame and power extending over the country, able
men will seek to enter and to shine in the legislatures of
the States. This is the same argument as is used by
those who defend the practice, now general in England,
of fighting municipal and other local elections on party
lines. Better men, it is said, are glad to enter the town
councils than could otherwise be induced to do so, because
in doing so they serve the party, and establish a claim on
it, they commend themselves to their fellow-citizens as
fit candidates for Parliament. The possible loss of not

CHAP. XLVI STATE POLITICS 199
ee ee

getting a good set of town councillors irrespective of
party lines is thought to be more than compensated by
the certain gain of men whose ambition would overlook
a town council, were it not thus made a stage in their
political career. This case is the more like that of
America because these English municipal bodies have
rarely anything to do with the issues which divide the
two great English parties. Men are elected to them as
Tories or Liberals whose Toryism or Liberalism is utterly
indifferent so far as the business of the council goes.

Whether or no this reasoning be sound as regards
England, I doubt if the American legislatures gain in
efficiency by having only party men in them; and
whether the elections would be any worse cared for if
party was a secondary idea in the voters’ minds. Al-
ready these elections are entirely in the hands of party
managers, and the people have little say in the matter.
Experience in a State legislature certainly gives a politi-
cian good chances of seeing behind the scenes, and makes
him familiar with the methods employed by professionals.
But it affords few opportunities for distinction in the
higher walks of public life, and it is as likely to lower as
to raise his aptitude for them. However, a good many
men find their way into Congress through the State
legislatures—though it is no longer the rule that persons
chosen Federal senators by those bodies must have served
in them—and perhaps the average capacity of members
is kept up by the presence of persons who seek to use
the State legislature as a stepping-stone to something
further. The question is purely speculative. Party has
dominated and will dominate all State elections. Under
existing conditions the thing cannot be otherwise.

It is, however, obviously-impossible to treat as party
matters many of the questions that come before the

200 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

‘legislatures. Local and personal bills, which, it will be
remembered, occupy by far the larger part of the time
and labours of these bodies, do not fall within party lines
at all, The only difference the party system makes to
‘them is that a party leader who takes up such a bill has
exceptional facilities for putting it through, and that
a district which returns a member belonging to the
majority has some advantage when trying to secure a
benefit for itself. It is the same with appropriations of
State funds to any local purpose. Members use their
party influence and party affiliations ; but the advocacy
of such schemes and opposition to them have compara-
tively little to do with party divisions, and it constantly
happens that men of both parties are found combining
to carry some project by which they or their constitu-
ents will gain. Of course the less reputable a member
is, the more apt will he be to enter into “rings” which
have nothing to do with politics in their proper sense,
the more ready to scheme with any trickster, to which-
ever party he adheres. Of measures belonging to what
may be called genuine legislation, 2.e. measures for im-
-proving the general law and administration of the State,
some are so remote from any party issue, and so un-
‘likely to enure to the credit of either party, that they are
considered on their merits. A bill, for instance, for im-
proving the State lunatic asylums, or forbidding lotteries,
‘or restricting the freedom of divorce, would have no-
thing either to hope or to fear from party action. It
“would be introduced hy some member who desired reform
for its own sake, and would be passed if this member,
having convinced the more enlightened among his col-
leagues that it would do good, or his colleagues generally
that the people wished it, eould overcome the difficulties
-which the pressure of a crowd of competing bills is sure

CHAP. XLVI STATE POLITICS 201
a ee ee

to place in its way. Other public measures, however,
may excite popular feeling, may be demanded by one class
or section of opinion and resisted by another. Bills
dealing with the sale of intoxicants, or regulating the
hours of labour, or attacking railway companies, or
prohibiting the sale of oleomargarine as butter, are
matters of such keen interest to some one section of
the population, that a party will gain support from many
citizens by espousing them, and may possibly estrange
others. Hence, though such bills have rarely any con-
nection with the tenets of either party, it is worth the
while of a party to win votes by throwing its weight for
or against them, according as it judges that there is more
to gain by taking the one course or the other. In the
case of oleomargarine, for instance, there is clearly more
to be gained by supporting than by opposing, because
the farmers, especially in the agricultural North-West,
constitute a much stronger vote than any persons who
could suffer by restricting the sale of the substance.
We should accordingly expect to find, and should find,
both parties competing for the honour of passing such a
bill. There would be a race between a number of mem-
bers, anxious to gain credit for themselves and their
friends. Intoxicants open up a more difficult problem.
Strong as the Prohibitionists and local option men are in
all the northern and western, as well as in some of the
southern States, the Germans, not to speak of the Irish and
the liquor dealers, are in many States also so strong, and
so fond of their beer, that it is a hazardous thing for a
party to hoist the anti-liquor flag. Accordingly both
parties are apt to fence with this question. Speaking
broadly, therefore, these questions of general State legis-
lation are not party questions, though liable at any
moment to become s0, if one or other party takes them up.

202 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

Is there then no such thing as a real State party,
agitating or working solely within State limits, and in-
scribing on its banner a principle or project which State
legislation can advance? |

Such, a party does sometimes arise. In California,
for instance, there has long been a strong feeling against
the Chinese, and a desire to exclude them. Both Re-
publicans and Democrats were affected by the feeling,
and fell in with it. But there sprang up ten or fifteen
years ago a third party, which claimed to be specially
“ anti-Mongolian,” while also attacking capitalists and
railways; and it lasted for some time, confusing the
politics of the State. Questions affecting the canals of
the State became at one time a powerful factor in the
parties of New York. In Virginia the question of re-
pudiating the State debt gave birth a few years ago to
a party which called itself the “ Readjusters,” and by the
help of negro votes carried the State at several elections.
In some of the North-western States the farmers associ-
ated themselves in societies called “‘ Granges,” purporting
to be formed for the promotion of agriculture, and created
a Granger party, which secured drastic legislation against
the railroad companies and other so-called monopolists,
And in most States there now exists an active Prohibi-
tionist party, which agitates for the strengthening and
better enforcement of | laws restricting or forbidding the
sale of intoxicants. It deems itself also a national party,
since it has an organization which covers a great part
of the Union. But its operations are far more active in
the States, because the liquor traffic belongs to State
legislation.’ Since, however, it can rarely secure many
members in a State legislature, it acts chiefly by in-

1 Congress has of course power to impose, and has imposed, an excise upon
liquor, but this is far from meeting the demands of the temperance party.

CHAP. XLVI STATE POLITICS 203
cee care need ee eee ee
fluencing the existing parties, and frightening them
into pretending to meet its wishes.

All these groups or factions were or are associated
on the basis of some doctrine or practical proposal which
they put forward. But it sometimes also happens that,
without any such basis, a party is formed in a State in-
side one of the regular national parties; or, in other
words, that the national party in the State splits up into
two factions, probably more embittered against each other
than against the other regular party. Such State factions,
for they hardly deserve to be called parties, generally
arise from, or soon become coloured by, the rivalries of
leaders, each of whom draws a certain number of poli-
ticians with him. New York is the State that has seen
most of them; and in it they have tended of late years
to grow more: distinctly personal. The Hunkers and
Barnburners who divided the Democratic party forty
years ago, and subsequently passed into the “ Hards”
and the “Softs,” began in genuine differences of opinion
about canal management and other State questions.’
The “Stalwart” and “ Half-breed” sections of the
Republican party in the same State, whose bitter feuds
amused the country a few years ago, were mere factions,
each attached to a leader, or group of leaders, but
without distinctive principles.

It will be seen from this fact, as well as from
others given in the preceding chapter, that the dignity
and magnitude of State politics have declined. They
have become more pacific in methods, but less serious
and more personal in their aims. In old days the State

1 The names of these factions, the changes they pass through, and the
way in which they immediately get involved with the ambitions and
antipathies of particular leaders, recall the factions in the Italian cities of

the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, such as the White and Black
Guelfs of Florence in the time of Dante.

204 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

had real political struggles, in which men sometimes
took up arms. There was a rebellion in Massachusetts
in 1786-87, which it needed some smart fighting to put
down, and another in Rhode Island in 1842, due to the
discontent of the masses with the then existing Con-
stitution.’ The battles of this generation are fought at
the polling-booths, though sometimes won in the rooms
where the votes are counted by partisan officials. That
heads are counted instead of being broken is no doubt an
improvement. But these struggles do not always stir
the blood of the people as those of the old time did,
they seem to evoke less patriotic interest in the State,
less public spirit for securing her good government.

This change does not necessarily indicate a feebler
sense of political duty. It is due to that shrivelling up
of the State to which I referred in last chapter. A
century ago the State was a commonwealth comparable
to an Italian republic like Bologna or Siena, or one of
the German free imperial cities of the middle ages, to
Liibeck, for instance, or to Niirnberg, which, though it
formed part of the Empire, had a genuine and vigorous
political life of its own, in which the faiths, hopes,
passions of the citizens were involved. Nowadays the
facilities of communication, the movements of trade, the
unprecedented diffusion of literature, and, perhaps not
least, the dominance of the great national parties, whose

1 In these miniature civil wars there was a tendency for the city folk to
be on one side and the agriculturists on the other, a phenomenon which
was observed long ago in Greece, where the aristocratic party lived in the
city and the poor in the fields, In the sixth century B.c. the oligarchic
poet Theognis mourned over the degradation of political life which had
followed the intrusion of the country churls, The hostility of the urban
and rural population sometimes recurs in Switzerland. The country
people of the canton of Basil fought a bloody battle some years ago with
the people of the city, and the little commonwealth had to be subdivided
into two, Basil City and Basil Country.

CHAP. XLVI STATE POLITICS 205
Sen ee
full tide swells all the creeks and inlets of a State no less
than the mid channel of national politics at Washington,
have drawn the minds of the masses as well as of the
more enlightened citizens away from the State legis-
latures, whose functions have come to seem trivial and
their strifes petty.

In saying this I do not mean to withdraw or modify
what was said, in an earlier chapter, of the greatness of
an American State, and the attachment of its inhabitants
to it. Those propositions are, I believe, true of a State
as compared to any local division of any European
country, the cantons of Switzerland excepted. I am here
speaking of a State as compared with the nation, and of
men’s feelings towards their State to-day as compared
with the feelings of a century ago, I am, moreover,
speaking not so much of sentimental loyalty to the
State, considered as a whole, for this is still strong, but
of the practical interest taken in its government. Even in
Great Britain many a man is proud of his city, of Edin-
burgh say, or of Manchester, who takes only the slender-
est interest in the management of its current business.

There is indeed’ some resemblance between the
attitude of the inhabitants of a great English town
towards their municipal government and that of the
people of a State to their State government. The pro-
ceedings of English town councils are little followed or
regarded either by the wealthier or the poorer residents.
The humble voter does not know or care who is mayor.
The head of a great mercantile house never thinks of
offering himself for such a post. In London the
Metropolitan Board of Works raised and spent a vast
revenue; but its discussions were commented on in the
newspapers only four or five times a year, and very few
persons of good social standing were to be found among

206 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

its members. Allowing for the contrast between the
English bodies, with their strictly limited powers, and
the immense competence of an American State legis-
lature, this English phenomenon is sufficiently like those
of America to be worth taking as an illustration.

We may accordingly say that the average American
voter, belonging to the labouring or farming or shop-
keeping class, troubles himself little about the conduct
of State business. He votes the party ticket at elections
as a good party man, and is pleased when his party
wins. When a question comes up which interests him,
like that of canal management, or the regulation of
railway rates, or a limitation of the hours of labour,
he is eager to use his vote, and watches what passes in
the legislature. He is sometimes excited over a con-
test for the governorship, and if the candidate of the
other party is a stronger and more honest man, may
possibly desert his party on that one issue. But in
ordinary times he does not follow the proceedings of the
legislature, as ale how could he? seeing that they
are most scantily reported. The politics which he reads
by preference are national politics ; and especially what-
ever touches the next presidential election. In State con-
tests that which chiefly fixes his attention is the influence
of a State victory on an approaching national contest.

The more educated and thoughtful citizen, especially
in great States, like New York and Pennsylvania, is
apt to be disgusted by the sordidness of many State
politicians and the pettiness of most. He regards
Albany and Harrisburg much as he regards a wasps’
nest in one of the trees of his suburban garden. The
insects eat his fruit, and may sting his children; but
it is too much trouble to set up a ladder and try to
reach them. Some public-spirited young men have,

CHAP, XLVI STATE POLITICS 207

however, thrown themselves into the muddy whirlpool
of the New York legislature, chiefly for the sake of
carrying Acts for the better government of cities. If
their tenacity proves equal to their courage, they will
gain in time the active support of those who have
hitherto stood aloof, regarding State politics as a
squabble over offices and jobs. But the prevalence
of the rule that a man can be elected only in the
district where he lives, renders it difficult to create a
reforming party in a legislature, so the men who, in-
stead of shrugging their shoulders put them to the
wheel, generally prefer to carry their energies into the
field of national politics, thinking that larger and swifter
results are to be obtained there, because victories
achieved in and through the National government have
an immediate moral influence upon many States at once,
whereas reforms in New York make no great difference
to Pennsylvania or Ohio.

A European observer, sympathetic with the aims of
the reformers, is inclined to think that the battle for
honest government ought to be fought everywhere, in
State legislatures and city councils as well as in the
national elections and in the press, and is at first sur-
prised that so much effort should be needed to secure
what all good citizens, to whichever party they belong,
might be expected to work for. But he would be
indeed a self-confident European who should fancy he
had discovered anything which had not already occurred
to his shrewd American friends; and the longer such
an observer studies the problem, the better does he learn
to appreciate the difficulties which the system of party
organization, which I must presently proceed to describe,
throws in the way of all reforming efforts.

CHAPTER XLVII
THE TERRITORIES

Or the 3,501,404 square miles which constitute the
area of the United States, 2,040,780 are included within
the bounds of the thirty-eight States whose government
has been described in the last preceding chapters. The
1,460,624 square miles which remain fall into the three
following divisions :—

Eight. organized Territories, viz. Dakota, Wyoming,
Montana, Idaho, Washington, Utah, Arizona, New

Mexico. ‘ . 859,325 square miles.
Two unorganized Territories, viz. ,
Alaska : . . 581,409 do.
Indian territory W. of Arkansas 69,830 do.
The Federal district of Columbia 70 do.

Of these is three latter may be dismissed in a word
or two. The District of Columbia is a piece of land
set apart to contain the city of Washington, which is the
seat of the Federal government. It is governed by
three commissioners appointed by the President, and has
no local legislature nor municipal government, the only
legislative authority being Congress,

Alaska (population in 1880, 30,178, of whom 392
were whites) and the Indian territory are also under

CHAP, XLVIL THE TERRITORIES 209
a ee
the direct authority of officers appointed by the Presi-
dent and of laws passed by Congress. Both are chiefly
inhakged by Indian tribes, some of which, however,
in the Indian Territory, and particularly the Cherokees,
have made considerable progress in _ civilization.’
Neither region is likely for a long time to come to
receive regular political institutions.

The eight organized Territories form a broad belt of
country extending from Canada on the north to Mexico
on the south, and separating the States of the Mississippi
valley from those of the Pacific slope. They require a
somewhat fuller description, because they present an
interesting form of autonomy or local self-government,
differing from that which exists in the several States,
and in some points more akin to that of the self-govern-
ing colonies of Great Britain. This form has in each
Territory been created by Federal statutes, beginning
with the great Ordinance for the Government of the
Territory of the United States north-west of the River
Ohio, passed by the Congress of the Confederation in
1787. Since that year many Territories have been
organized under differént statutes and on different plans
out of the western dominions of the United States, under
the general power conferred upon Congress by the
Federal Constitution (Art. iv. § 3). Most of these
Territories have now become States, but there remain

1 There are five civilized tribes in this territory, Cherokees, Choctaws,
Chickasaws, Creeks, and Seminoles. “Each tribe manages its own affairs
under a constitution modelled upon that of the United States. Each has a
common school system, including schools for advanced instruction, all
supported by the Indians themselves. The agent of the National Indian
Defence Association says that there is not in the Cherokee Nation a
single Indian of either sex over fifteen years of age who cannot read or

*write.”——Report of the U.S. Commissioner of Education, 1886. The total
population of the Indian Territory is estimated at from 60,000 to 75,000 ;
the total number of tribal Indians in the United States (excluding Alaska)
at 250,000 besides 66,407 non-tribal (census of 1880).

VOL. II P

210 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

the eight already mentioned. At first local legislative
power was vested in the Governor and the judges; it is
now exercised by an elective legislature. The present
organization of these eight is in most respects identical ;
and in describing it I shall for the sake of breyity ignore
minor differences.

The fundamental law of every Territory, as of every
State, is the Federal Constitution; but whereas every
State has also its own popularly enacted State Constitu-
tion, the Territories are not regulated by any similar
instruments, which for them are replaced by the Federal
statutes passed by Congress establishing their govern-
ment and prescribing its form. However, some Terri-
tories have created a sort of rudimentary constitution
for themselves by enacting a Bill of Rights.?

In every Territory, as in every State, the executive
legislative and judicial departments are kept distinct.
The Executive consists of a governor, appointed for four
years by the President of the United States, with the con-
sent of the Senate, and removable by the President, to-
gether with a secretary, treasurer, auditor,and usually also
a superintendent of public instruction, and a librarian.
The governor commands the militia, and has a veto upon
the acts of the legislature, which, however, may (except
in Utah and Arizona) be overriden by a two-thirds
majority in each house. He is responsible to the
Federal government, and reports yearly to the President
on the condition of the Territory, often making his
report a sort of prospectus in which the advantages
which his dominions offer to intending immigrants are
fondly set forth. He also sends a message to the

1 Arizona in providing that her Bill of Rights shall be changeable

only by the vote of a majority of all the members elected to the Terri-
torial legislature gives it a species of rigidity.

CHAP. XLVI! THE TERRITORIES 211
ee et
legislature at the beginning of each session. Important
as the post of Governor is, it is often bestowed as a
mere piece of party patronage, with no great regard
to the fitness of the appointee,

The Legislature is composed of two Houses, a Council,
consisting of twelve persons (in Dakota of twenty-four),
and a House of Representatives of twenty-four persons
(in Dakota of forty-eight), elected by districts. Each
is elected by the voters of the Territory for two years,
and sits only once in that period. The session is
limited (by Federal statutes) to sixty days, and the
salary of a member is $4 per day. The Houses work
much like those in the States, doing the bulk of their
business by standing committees, and frequently sus-
pending their rules to run measures through with little
or no debate. The electoral franchise is left to be fixed
by Territorial statute, but Federal statutes prescribe that
every member shall be resident in the district he repre-
sents. The sphere of legislation allowed to the legislature
is wide, indeed practically as wide as that enjoyed by the
legislature of a State, but subject to certain Federal re-
strictions.’ It is subjéct also to the still more important
right of Congress to annul or modify by its own statutes
any Territorial act. In some Territories every act must

1 Revised Statutes of U.S. of 1878, § 1851.—“ The legislative power
of every Territory shall extend to all rightful subjects of legislation not
inconsistent with the Constitution and laws of the United States. But
no law shall be passed interfering with the primary disposal of the soil ;
no tax shall be imposed on the property of the United States, nor shall
the lands or other property of non-residents be taxed higher than the
lands or other property of residents.”

§ 1889.—“ The legislative assemblies of the several Territories shall
not grant private charters or especial privileges, but they may, by general
incorporation acts, permit persons to associate themselves together” for
various industrial and benevolent purposes specified. Other restrictions
have been imposed by subsequent statutes. See especially Acts of
1886, chap. 818, § 5.

212 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

be submitted to Congress for its approval, and, if dis-
approved, is of no effect; in others submission is not
required. But in all Congress may exercise without stint
its power to override the statutes passed: by a Territorial
legislature, as the British Parliament may override those
of a self-governing colony. This power is not largely or
often exercised. The most remarkable instance has been
furnished by Utah, where congressional legislation has
had a hard fight in breaking down polygamy, finding it
necessary even to impose a test oath upon voters.

The Judiciary consists of three or more judges of a
Supreme Court, appointed for four years by the Presi-
dent, with the consent of the Senate (salary $3000), to-
gether with a U.S. district attorney and a U.S. marshal.
The law they administer is partly Federal, all Federal
statutes being construed to take effect, where properly
applicable, in the Territories, partly local, created in each
Territory by its own statutes; and appeals, where the
sum in dispute is above a certain value, go to the
Supreme Federal Court. Although these courts are
created by Congress in pursuance of its general sover-
eignty—they do not fall within the provisions of the
Constitution for a Federal judiciary—the Territorial
legislature is allowed to regulate their practice and
procedure, The expenses of Territorial governments
are borne by the Federal treasury.

The Territories send neither senators nor represen-
tatives to Congress, nor do they take part in presidential
elections. The House of Representatives, under a
statute, admits a delegate from each of them to sit and
speak, but of course not to vote, because the right of
voting in Congress depends on the Federal Constitution.
The position of a citizen in a Territory is therefore a
peculiar one. What may be called his private or passive

CHAP, XLVII THE TERRITORIES 213
So a fe Ss

citizenship is complete: he has all the immunities and
benefits which any other American citizen enjoys.
But the public or active side is wanting, so far as the
National government is concerned, although complete for
local purposes. He is in the position of an Australian
subject of the British Crown, who has full British citizen-
ship as respects private civil rights, and a share in the
government of his own colony, but does not participate
in the government of the British empire at large.’ It
may seem inconsistent with principle that citizens should
be taxed by a government in whose legislature they are
not represented ; but the practical objections to giving
the full rights of States to these comparatively rude com-
munities outweigh any such theoretical difficulties. It
must moreover be remembered that a Territory, which
may be called an inchoate or rudimentary State, looks
forward to become a complete State. When its popula-
tion becomes equal to that of an average congressional
district, its claim to be admitted as a State is strong,
and in the absence of specific objections will be granted.
Congress, however, hag absolute discretion in the matter,
and often uses its discretion under party political
motives. Nevada was admitted to be a State when
its population was only about 20,000. It subsequently
rose to 62,000, but has now declined to about 40,000.
Utah and New Mexico, the former with 143,968, the
latter with 119,565 inhabitants, at the last census
(1880), have been refused admission, the population of
the latter being largely of Mexican blood, while the
former is deemed, on account of the strength and pecu-
lar institutions of the Mormon Church, not fit for that

1 The Romans drew a somewhat similar distinction between the

private rights of citizenship and the public rights, which included the
suffrage and eligibility to office.

214 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART Il

emancipation from the tutelage of Congress which its
erection into a State would confer. When Congress
resolves to turn a Territory into a State, it usually
passes an enabling act, under which the inhabitants
elect 4 Constitutional Convention, which frames a draft
constitution ; and when this has been submitted to and
accepted by the voters of the Territory, the act of
Congress takes effect: the Territory is transformed into
a State, and proceeds to send its senators and represen-
tatives to Congress in the usual way. The enabling
act may prescribe conditions to be fulfilled by the State
constitution, but cannot legally narrow the right which
the citizens of the newly-formed State will enjoy of sub-
sequently modifying that instrument in any way not in-
consistent with the provisions of the Federal Constitution.

The arrangemerits above described seem to work
well. Self-government is practically enjoyed by the
Territories, despite the supreme authority of Congress,
just as it is enjoyed by Canada and the Australian
colonies of Great Britain despite the legal right of the
British Parliament to legislate for every part of the
Queen’s dominions. The want of a voice in Congress
and presidential elections, and the fact that the governor
is set over them by an external power, are not felt to be
practical grievances, partly of course because these young
communities are too small and too much absorbed in the
work of developing the country to be keenly interested
in national politics. Their local political life much
resembles that of the newer Western States. Both
Democrats and Republicans have their regular party
organizations, but the business of a Territorial legislature
gives little opportunity for any real political contro-
versies, though abundant opportunities for local jobbing.

Before we pass away from the Territories, it may

CHAP, XLVII THE TERRITORIES 215
ee ee a er ee

be proper to say a few words regarding the character
and probable future of some among them, because they
are the raw material out of which several new States
will presently be shaped ; and a contemplation of their
future suggests some interesting problems.

The largest, the most populous, and in every way
the most advanced is Dakota, which lies west of Min-
nesota, and south of the Canadian province of Manitoba.
Its area is 147,700 square miles, greater than that of
Prussia, and much greater than that of the United
Kingdom (120,500 square miles). Its eastern and
southern parts are becoming rapidly filled by an
intelligent farming population, largely Scandinavian in
blood. The southern half has recently applied to be
organized and admitted as a State, and is likely soon to
have its wishes gratified.’ Possessing a vast area of
undulating prairie land, well fitted for wheat crops, and
at least the eastern part of which receives enough rain to
make tillage easy without irrigation, Dakota is evidently
destined to be one of the wealthiest and most powerful
commonwealths in the Union. Out of it may be carved
three States, each equal to Illinois or New York.

Very different is the character of the three Territories
of Montana, Wyoming, and Idaho, which lie farther to
the west, and are traversed by a number of lofty ranges
belonging to the Rocky Mountain system. A compara-
tively small part of these regions is suited for agriculture,
not merely because the surface is mountainous, but owing
to the dryness of the climate. There is, however,
plenty of pasture land; there are rich mineral deposits,

1 A poll taken in 1887 showed, however, only a small majority of
the inhabitants for the sundering of Dakota with a view to the admission
of the southern half as a State, so that it is possible that the Territory
may not be divided but admitted as a whole. The southern half has
already a population of nearly half a million.

216 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART I

especially in Montana and Idaho, there are in some
places extensive forests, though of trees inferior in size
to those of the Pacific coast. The population of these
Territories is therefore certain to increase rapidly,
especially when the fertile lands of Dakota have been
filled up.* But that population is likely to remain
less dense, and less stable in its character, than the
Dakotan. It may therefore be doubted whether even
Montana, which has the largest area and much the
largest. quantity of good land, will Re fit to become a
State for many years to come.

Washington Territory, situated on the shores of the
Pacific between Oregon and British Columbia, is in these
respects more fortunate. That part of it which lies west
of the Cascade Range has a moist and equable climate,
much resembling the climate of western England, though
somewhat less variable. Many of the familiar genera
and even species of British plants reappear on its hill-
sides. The forests are by far the finest which the
United States possess, and will, though they are being
sadly squandered, remain a source of wealth for a century
or more to come. I have travelled through many miles
of woodland where nearly every tree was over 250 feet
high. The eastern half of the Territory, lying on the
inland sidé of the mountains, is very much drier, and
with greater extremes of heat and cold; but it is in
parts extremely fertile. To all appearances Washing-
ton, which had in 1880 a population of 75,000, having
more than trebled since 1870, will by the end of this
century have at least 800,000, and long before then
have been admitted as a State.

Utah was, before the arrival of the Mormons in 1848,

1 In 1880 these three Territories had only about 92,000 people
between them,

CHAP, XLVII THE TERRITORIES 217
I Se aes

a desert, and indeed an arid desert, whose lower grounds
were covered with that growth of alkaline plants which
the Americans call sage-brush.’ The patient labour of
the Saints, directed, at least during the pontificate of
Brigham Young, by an able and vigilant autocracy, has
transformed the tracts lying along the banks of streams
into fertile grain, vegetable, and fruit farms. The water
which descends from the mountains is turned over the
level ground; the alkaline substances are soon washed
out of the soil, and nothing more than irrigation is
needed to produce excellent crops. After this process
had advanced some way the discovery of rich silver
mines drew in a swarm of Gentile colonists, and the non-
Mormon population of some districts is now consider-
able. As Utah had in 1880, 144,000 inhabitants, it
would long ago have been admitted as a State but for the
desire of Congress to retain complete legislative control,
and thereby to stamp out polygamy. This object seems
at last not unlikely to be attained, and although much
of the Territory is likely to remain barren and unin-
habited, enough is fit for tillage and for dairy-farming to
give it a prospect of supporting a large settled population.
New Mexico, with an area larger than the United
Kingdom (population in 1880, 120,000), is still largely
peopled by Indo-Spanish Mexicans,? who speak Spanish,
and are obviously ill fitted for the self-government which
organization as a State implies. Water is too scarce and
the soil too hilly to make agriculture generally available.
The same remark applies to Arizona, the sides of whose
1 The so-called sage-brush plants are not species of what in England
is called sage (Salvia) but mostly belong to the order Compositae, which is
unusually strong in America, Something like a third of the total phaeno-
gamous genera of the United States have been estimated to belong to it.
2 There are also about 10,000 Indians, some of them settled and com-

paratively civilized. It is here that the so-called “ pueblos” are found, so
interesting to the ethnologist.

218 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

splendid mountain groups are barren, and most of whose
plains support only a scanty vegetation. Both Territories
are rich in minerals, but a mining population is not only
apt to be disorderly, but is fluctuating, moving from camp
to camp as richer deposits are discovered or old veins
worked out. It seems doubtful, therefore, whether any
one of the five mining and ranching Territories (Mon-
tana, Idaho, Wyoming, New Mexico, Arizona) is likely
to be formed into a State at any presently assignable
date. The time must come when the increase of
population in the region immediately to the east of
the Rocky Mountains will turn a fuller stream of immi-
gration into these less promising regions, and bring
under irrigation culture large tracts which are now not
worth working. No one can yet say when that time
will arrive. Till it arrives it will be for the benefit of
these Territories themselves that they should remain
content with that limited and qualified form of self-
government which they now enjoy, and under which
they can practically legislate for their own peculiar
conditions with sufficient freedom.

Europeans may, however, ask why the theory of
American democracy, which deems all citizens entitled
to a voice in the National government, should not at least
so far prevail as to give the inhabitants of the Territories
the right of suffrage in congressional and presidential
elections. “Does not,” he may say, “the fact that each
sends a delegate, though a voteless delegate, to the House
of Representatives and two delegates to the National
Nominating Conventions (to be hereafter described) im-
ply that the unenfranchised position of the residents in
a Territory is felt to be indefensible in theory ?”

Thisis true. Ifit were possible under the Federal Con-
stitution to admit Territorial residents to active Federal

CHAP. XLVII THE TERRITORIES 219
I a fe

citizenship—that is to say, to Federal suffrage—admitted
they would bé. But the Union is a union of States. It
knows no representatives in Congress, no electors for the
Presidency, except those chosen in States by State voters.
The only means of granting Federal suffrage to citizens
ina Territory would be to turn the Territory into a State.
This would confer a power of self-government, guar-
anteed by the Federal Constitution, for which the Terri-
tory might be still unfit. But it would do still more.
It would entitle this possibly small and rude community
to send two senators to the Federal Senate who would
there have as much weight as the two senators from New
York with its six millions of people. This is a result from
which Congress may fairly recoil. And a practical illus-
tration of the evils to be feared has been afforded by the
case of Nevada, a State whose inhabitants number only
about 40,000, and which is really a group of burnt-out
mining camps. Its population is obviously unworthy of
the privilege of sending two men to the Senate, and has
in fact allowed itself to sink, for political purposes, into a
sort of rotten borough which can be controlled or pur-
chased by the leaders of a Silver Ring. It would evi-
dently have been better to allow Nevada to remain in
the condition of a Territory till a large settled and
orderly community had occupied her surface, which is
at present a parched and dismal desert, in which the
streams descending from the eastern slope of the Sierra
Nevada soon lose themselves in lakes or marshes. On
a review of the whole matter it may safely be said that
the American scheme of Territorial government, though
it suffers from the occasional incompetence of the Gover-
nor, and is inconsistent with democratic theory, has in
practice worked well, and gives little ground for discon-
tent even to the inhabitants of the Territories themselves.

CHAPTER XLVIII
LOCAL GOVERNMENT

Tuts is the place for an account of local government in
the United States, because it is a matter regulated not
by Federal law but by the several States and Territories,
each of which establishes such local authorities, rural
and urban, as the people of the State or Territory desire,
and invests them with the requisite powers. But this
very fact indicates the immensity of the subject. Each
State has its own system of local areas and authorities,
created and worked under its own laws ; and though these
systems agree ii many points, they differ in so many
others, that a whole volume would be needed to give
even a summary view of their peculiarities. All I can
here attempt is to distinguish the leading types of local
government to be found in the United States, to describe
the prominent features of each type, and to explain the
influence which the large scope and popular character of
local administration exercise upon the general life and
well-being of the American people.

Three types of rural local government are discernible
in America. The first is characterized by its unit, the
Town or Township, and exists in the six New England
States. The second is characterized by a much larger
unit, the county, and prevails in the southern States. The
third combines some features of the first with some of

CHAP. XLVIII LOCAL GOVERNMENT 221
a

the second, and may be called the mixed system, It is
found, under a considerable variety of forms, in the
middle and north-western States, The differences of
these three types are interesting, not only because of
the practical instruction they afford, but also because
they spring from original differences in the character of
the colonists who settled along the American coast, and
in the conditions under which the communities there
founded were developed.

The first New England settlers were Puritans in reli-
gion, and sometimes inclined to republicanism in politics,
They were largely townsfolk, accustomed to municipal
life and to vestry meetings. They planted their tiny
communities along the sea-shore and the banks of rivers,
enclosing them with stockades for protection against the
warlike Indians. Each was obliged to be self-sufficing,
because divided by rocks and woods from the others,
Kach had its common pasture on which the inhabitants
turned out their cattle, and which officers were elected
to manage. Each was a religious as well as a civil body
politic, gathered round the church as its centre ; and the
equality which prevaited in the congregation prevailed
also in civil affairs, the whole community meeting under
a president or moderator to discuss affairs of common
interest. Each such settlement was called a Town or
Township, and was in fact a miniature commonwealth,
exercising a practical sovereignty over the property and
persons of its members—for there was as yet no State,
and the distant home government scarcely cared
to interfere— but exercising it on thoroughly demo-
cratic principles. Its centre was a group of dwellings,
often surrounded by a fence or wall, but it included a
rural area of several square miles, over which farmhouses
and clusters of houses began to spring up when the

222 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART Il

Indians retired. The name “town” covered the whole
of this area, which was never too large for all the in-
habitants to come together to a central place of meeting.
This town organization remained strong and close, the
colonists being men of narrow means, and held together
in each settlement by the needs of defence. And though
presently the towns became aggregated into counties,
and the legislature and governor, first of the whole
colony, and, after 1776, of the State, began to exert
their superior authority, the towns (which, be it re-
membered, remained rural communities, making up the
whole area of the State) held their ground, and are to
this day the true units of political life in New England,
the solid foundation of that well-compacted structure
of self-government which European philosophers have
admired and the new States of the West have sought to
reproduce. ‘Till 1821’ the towns were the only political
corporate bodies in Massachusetts, and till 1857 they
formed, as they still form in Connecticut, the basis
of representation in her Assembly, each town, how-
ever small, returning at least one member. Much
of that robust, if somewhat narrow, localism which
characterizes the representative system of America is due
to this originally distinct and self-sufficing corporate life
of the seventeenth-century towns. Nor is it without
interest to observe that although they owed much to the
conditions which surrounded the early colonists, forcing

1 Boston continued to be a town governed by a primary assembly of
all citizens tille1822; and even then the town-meeting was not quite
abolished, for a provision was introduced, intended to satisfy conservative
democratic feeling, into the city charter granted by statute in that year,
empowering the mayor and aldermen to call general meetings of the citizens
qualified to vote in city affairs “to consult upon the common good, to give
instructions to their representatives, and to take all lawful means to obtain

a redress of any grievances.” Such primary assemblies are, however, never
now convoked.

CHAP. XLVI LOCAL GOVERNMENT| 223

es

them to develop a civic patriotism resembling that of
the republics of ancient Greece and Italy, they owed
something also to those Teutonic traditions of semi-
independent local communities, owning common property,
and governing themselves by a primary assembly of all
free inhabitants, which the English had brought with
them from the Elbe and the Weser, and which had been
perpetuated in the practice of many parts of England
down till the days of the Stuart kings.’

Very different were the circumstances of the Southern
colonies. The men who went to Virginia and the
Carolinas were not Puritans, nor did they mostly go in
families and groups of families from the same neigh-
bourhood. Many were casual adventurers, often belong-
ing to the upper class, Episcopalians in religion, and
with no such experience of, or attachment to, local self-
government as the men of Massachusetts or Connecticut.
They settled in a region where the Indian tribes were
comparatively peaceable, and where therefore there was
little need of concentration for the purposes of defence.
The climate along the coast was somewhat too hot for
European labour, so slaves were imported to cultivate
the land. Population was thinly scattered; estates
were large; the soil was fertile and soon enriched
its owners. Thus a semi-feudal society grew up, in
which authority naturally fell to the landowners, each
of whom was the centre of a group of free dependants
as well as the master of an increasing crowd of slaves.
There were therefore comparatively few urban com-
munities, and the life of the colony took a rural type.
The houses of the planters lay miles apart from one

1 See upon this subject the essay of Prof. Herbert B, Adams on the

“Germanic Origin of New England Towns,” in Johns Hopkins University
Studies, First Series.

224 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

another; and when local divisions had to be created,
these were made large enough to include a considerable
area of territory and number of land-owning gentlemen.
They were therefore rural divisions, counties framed on
the model of English counties. Smaller circumscrip-
tions there were, such as hundreds and parishes, but the
hundred died out,’ the parish ultimately became a purely
ecclesiastical division, and the parish vestry was re-
stricted to ecclesiastical functions, while the county
remained the practically important unit of local admin-
istration,, the unit to which the various functions of
government were aggregated, and which, itself control-
ling minor authorities, was controlled by the State
government alone. The affairs of the county were usually
managed by a board of elective commissioners, and not,
like those of the New England towns, by a primary assem-
bly ; and in an aristocratic society the leading planters
had of course a predominating influence. Hence this
form of local government was not only less democratic,
but less stimulating and educative than that which pre-
vailed in the New England States. Nor was the Virginian
county, though so much larger than the New England
town, ever as important an organism over against the
State. It may almost be said, that while a New England
State ig a combination of towns, a Southern State is
from the first an administkative as well as political whole,
whose subdivisions, the counties, had never any truly inde-

1 In Maryland hundreds, which still exist in Delaware, were for
a long time the chief administrative divisions. We hear there also of
“baronies” and “town-lands,” as in Ireland; and Maryland is usually
ealled a “province,” while the other settlements are colonies. Among
its judicial establishments there were courts of pypowdry (pié poudré) and
“hustings.” See the interesting paper on “ Local Institutions in Mary-
land,” by Dr. Wilhelm, in Johns Hopkins University Studies, Third Series.

The hundred is a division of small consequence in southern England,
but in Lancashire it has some important duties. It repairs the bridges ;
it is liable for damage done in a-riot ; and it had its high constable,

CHAP. XLVIII LOCAL GOVERNMENT 225

pendent life, but were and are mere subdivisions for the
convenient dispatch of judicial and financial business.
In the middle States of the Union, Pennsylvania,
New Jersey, and New York, settled or conquered by
Englishmen some time later than New England, the
* town and town meeting did not as a rule exist, and the
county was the original basis of organization. But as
there grew up no planting aristocracy like that of Vir-
ginia or the Carolinas, the course of events took in the
middle States a different direction. As trade and manu-
factures grew, population became denser than in the
South. New England influenced them, and influenced
still more the newer commonwealths which arose. in the
North-west, such as Ohio and Michigan, into which the
surplus population of the Hast poured. And the result
of this influence is seen in the growth through the
middle and western States of a mixed system, which
presents a sort of compromise between the County
system of the South and the Town system of the North-
east. There are great differences between the arrange-
ments in one or other of these middle and western
States. But it may be said, speaking generally, that
in them the county is relatively less important than
in the southern States, the township less important
than in New England. The county is perhaps to be
regarded, at least in New York, Pennsylvania, and
Ohio, as the true unit, and the townships (for so
they are usually called) as its subdivisions. But the
townships are vigorous organisms, which largely restrict
the functions of the county authority, and give to local
government, especially in the North-west, a character
generally similar to that which it wears in New England.
So much for the history of the subject; a history
far more interesting in its details than will be supposed
VOL, II Q

226 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART It

from the rough sketch to which limits of space restrict
me. Let us now look at the actual constitution and work-
ing of the organs of local government in the three several
regions mentioned, beginning with New England and the
town system.’ J will first set forth the dry but necessary
outline, reserving comments for the following chapter.
The Town is in rural districts the smallest local
circumscription. English readers must be reminded
. . ' ¥ .
that it is a rural, not an urban community, and that
the largest group of houses it contains may .be only
what would be called in England a hamlet or small
village.? Its area seldom exceeds five square miles; its
population is usually small, averaging less than 3000, but
occasionally ranges up to 13,000, and sometimes falls
below 200. It is governed by an assembly of
all qualified voters resident within its limits, which
meets at least once a year, in the spring (a reminiscence
of the Easter vestry of England), and from time to time
as summoned. There are usually three or four meetings
each year. Notice is required to be given at least ten
days previously, not only of the hour and place of meet-
ing, but of the business to be brought forward. This
assembly has, like the Roman Comitia and the Landes-

1 In New England the word “town” is the legal and usual one ; in the
rest of the gountry “township.” I find in Massachusetts one town (Gosnold)
with only 152 inhabitants, and one (Brockton) with 13,608. But both
in this and other New England States most towns have a population of
from 1200 to 2500.

2 The word Town, which I write with a capital when using it in the
American sense, is the Icelandic tén, Anglo-Saxon tdén, German zaun, and
geems originally fo have meant a hedge, then a hedged or fenced plot or
enclosure. In Scotland (where it is pronounced “toon ”) it still denotes
the farmhouse and buildings ; in Iceland the manured grass plot, enclosed
within a low green bank or raised dyke, which surrounds the baer or farm-
house. In parts of eastern England the chief cluster of houses in a parish
is still often called “the town.” In the North of England, where the

,parishes are more frequently larger than they are in the South, the civil
divisions of a parish are called townships.

CHAP, XLVIII LOCAL GOVERNMENT 227

gemeinde in four of the’ older Swiss Cantons, the power
both of electing officials and of legislating. It chooses the
selectmen, school committee, and executive officers for
the coming year; it enacts bye-laws and ordinances for
the regulation of all local affairs ; it receives the reports
of the selectmen and the several committees, passes their
accounts, hears what sums they propose to raise for the
expenses of next year, and votes the necessary taxation
accordingly, appropriating to the various local purposes
—schools, aid to the poor, the repair of highways, and
so forth—the sums directed to be levied. Its powers
cover the management of the town lands and other pro-
perty, and all local matters whatsoever, including police
and sanitation. Every resident has the right to make,
and to support by speech, any proposal, The meeting,
which is presided over by a chairman called the Moderator
—a nanfe recalling the ecclesiastical assemblies of the
English Commonwealth’—is held in the town hall, if
the Town possesses one, or in the principal church or
schoolhouse, but sometimes in the open air. The attend-
ance is usually good; the debates sensible and practical.
Much of course depends on the character and size of the
population, Where it is of native American stock, and
the number of voting citizens is not too great for thorough
and calm discussion, no better school of politics can be
imagined, nor any method of managing local affairs more
certain to prevent jobbery and waste, to stimulate vigil-
ance and breed contentment.?, When, however, the

1 The presiding officer in the synods and assemblies of the Scottish
Presbyterian Churches is still called the Moderator. This is also the
president’s title in the synods of the American Presbyterian churches,
and in the councils of the Congregationalist churches,

2 See an interesting account of the town meeting thirty years ago in
Mr. J. K. Hosmer’s Life of Samuel Adams, chap. xxiii. An instructive
description of a typical New England Town may be found in a pamphlet
entitled The Town of Groton, by Dr. S. Green, late Mayor of Boston.

228 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

town meeting has grown to exceéd seven or eight hundred
persons, and still more when any considerable section are
strangers, such as the Irish or French Canadians who
have latterly poured into New England, the institution
works less perfectly, because the multitude is too large
for debate, factions are likely to spring up, and the
new immigrants, untrained in self-government, become
the prey of wire-pullers or petty demagogues. Yet even
under these drawbacks those who know the system com-
mend its working, and echo the famous eulogism of
Jefferson, who seventy years ago desired to see it trans-
planted to his own Virginia:

“Those wards called townships in New England are
the vital principle of their governments, and have proved
themselves the wisest invention ever devised by the wit
of man for the perfect exercise of self-government, and
for its preservation. . . . As Cato then concluded every
speech with the words ‘ Carthago delenda est,’ so do I
every opinion with the injunction “ Divide the counties
into wards.”

The executive of a Town consists of the selectmen,
from three to nine in number, usually either three, five,
orseven. They are elected annually, and manage all the
ordinary business, of course under the directions given
them by the last preceding meeting. There is also a
Town-clerk, who keeps the records, and minutes the pro-
ceedings of the meeting, and is generally also registrar of
births and deaths; a treasurer; assessors, who make a
valuation of property within the Town for the purposes
of taxation; the collector, who gathers the taxes, and
divers minor officers, such as. hog-reeves’ (now usually

1 Mr. R. W. Emerson served in this capacity in his Town, fulfilling

the duty understood to devolve on every citizen of faccepting an office to
which the Town appoints him,

CHAP, XLVIII LOCAL GOVERNMENT 229

called field drivers), cemetery trustees, library trustees,
and so forth, according to local needs, There is always
a school committee, with sometimes sub-committees for
minor school districts if the Town be a largeone. Asa
rule, these officers and committees are unpaid, though
allowed to charge their expenses actually incurred in
Town work; and there has generally been no difficulty
in getting respectable and competent men to under-
take the duties. Town elections are not professedly
political, 7.e. they are not usually fought on party lines,
though occasionally party spirit affects them, and a man
prominent in his party is more likely to obtain support.’

1 When a Town reaches a certain population it is usually transformed
by law into a City; but occasionally, while the City is created as a
municipal corporation within the limits of a Town, the Town continues
to exist as a distinct organization. A remarkable instance is furnished by
the Town and City of New Haven, in Connecticut. New Haven was
incorporated as a city in 1784. But it continued to be and is still a
town also, Three-fouzths of the area of the town and seventeen-
eighteenths of its population are within the limits of the city. But
the two governments remain completely distinct. The city has its
mayor, aldermen, and common council, and its large executive staff.
The town meeting elects its selectmen and other officers, 152 in all,
receives their reports, orders and appropriates taxes, and so forth.
Practically, however, it is smuch dwarfed by the city as to attract little
attention, Says Mr. Levermore : “This most venerable institution appears
to-day in the guise of a gathering of a few citizens, who do the work of as
many thousands. The few individuals who are or have been officially
interested in the government of the town, meet together, talk over matters
in a friendly way, decide what the rate of taxation for the coming year
shall be, and adjourn. If others are present, it is generally as spectators
rather than as participants. Even if Demos should be present in greater
force, he would almost inevitably obey the voice of some well-informed
and influential member of the town government of his own party, But
citizens of all parties and of all shades of respectability ignore the town
meeting and school meeting alike. Not one-seventieth part of the citizens
of the town has attended an annual town meeting; they hardly know
when it is held, The newspapers give its transactions a scant notice,
which some of their subscribers probably read. The actual governing
force of the town is therefore an oligarchy in the bosom of a slumbering
democracy. But the town is well governed. Its government carries too
little spoil to attract those unreliable politicians who infest the city
council. If the ruling junto should venture on too lavish a use of the

230 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

Next above the Town stands the county. Its area
and population vary a good deal. Massachusetts with
an area of 8040 square miles has fourteen counties ;
Rhode Island with 1085 square miles has five; the more
thinly peopled Maine, with 29,985 square miles, has
sixteen, giving an average of about 1100 square miles
to each county on these three States, though in Rhode
Island the average is only 217 square miles. Similarly
the populations of the counties vary from 4000 to
216,000 ; the average population being, where there are
no large cities, from 20,000 to 40,000.1 The county
was originally an aggregation of Towns for judicial pur-
poses, and is still in the main a judicial district in and
for which civil and criminal courts are held, some by
county judges, some by State judges, and in and for
which certain judicial officers are elected by the people
at the polls, who also choose a sheriff and a clerk.
Police belongs to the Towns and cities, not to the county
within which they lie. The chief administrative officers
are the county commissioners, of whom there are three
in Massachusetts (elected for three years, one in each
year), and county treasurer.? Théy are salaried officers,
and have the management of county buildings, such as
town’s money, an irresistible check would appear at once, Any twenty
citizens couJd force the selectmen to summon the town together, and the
apparent oligarchy would doubtless go down before the awakened people.
-——-“The Town and City Government of New Haven,” in Johns Hopkins
University Studies, Fourth Series.

The student of Roman history will find in this quaint survival of an
ancient assembly some resemblance to the comitia curtata of Rome under
the later Republic, when the lictors met as representatives of the ancient
curte to constitute an assembly for the passing of wills and adoptions.
But the American survival is the more vigorous of the two.

1 The average population of a Massachusetts county is 127,000,
the smallest county having only 4300.

2 In Rhode Island there are none but judicial officers for the counties.

In Vermont I find besides judges, a state attorney, high bailiff, and county
clerk. In Massachusetts all judges are appointed by the governor.

CHAP, XLVIII LOCAL GOVERNMENT 231
a a ee

court-houses and prisons, with power to lay out new
highways from town to town, to grant licences, estimate
the amount of taxation needed to defray county charges,"
and apportion the county tax among the towns and
cities by whom it is to be levied. But except in this
last-mentioned respect the county authority has no
power over the Towns, and it will be perceived that
while the county commissioners are controlled by the
legislature, being limited by statute to certain well-
defined administrative functions, there exists nothing in
the nature of a county board or other assembly with
legislative functions. The functions of the county are
in fact of small consequence: it is a judicial district
and a highway district and little more.

This New England system resembles that ie Old
England as the latter stood during the centuries that
elapsed between the practical disappearance of the old
County Court or Shire Moot and the creation by com-
paratively recent statutes of such intermediate bodies
and authorities as poor-law unions, highway districts
and boards, local sanitary authorities. If we compare
the New England stheme with that of the England
of to-day, we are struck not only by the greater
simplicity of the former, but also by the fact that
it is the smaller organisms, the Towns, that are most
powerful and most highly vitalized. Nearly everything
belongs to them, only those duties devolving on the
counties which a small organism obviously cannot under-
take.. An Englishman may remark that the system of
self-governing Towns works under the supervision of a
body, the State legislature, which can give far closer
attention to local affairs than the English parliament

1 The chief items of county expenditure are those for judicial pur-
poses, including the maintenance of buildings, and for roads and bridges.

232 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

can give to English local business. This is true. But
in point of fact the State legislature interferes but little
(less, I think, than the Local Government Board inter-
feres in England) with the conduct of rural local busi-
ness, though often required to deal with the applications
which Towns make to be divided or have their boundaries
altered, and which are frequently resisted by a part of
the inhabitants.

The system which prevails in the southern States
need not long detain us, for it is less instructive and
has proved less successful. Here the unit is the
county, except in Louisiana, where the equivalent
division is called a parish. The county was originally
a judicial division, established for the purposes of
local courts, and a financial one, for the collection of
State taxes. It has now, however, generally received
some other functions, such as the superintendence of
public schools, the care of the poor, and the management
of roads. In the South counties are larger than in
New England, but not more populous, for the country
is thinly peopled. The county officers, whose titles and
powers vary somewhat in different States, are usually the
Board or Court of county commissioners, an assessor
(who prepares the valuation), a collector (who gathers
the taxes”), a treasurer, a superintendent of education,
an overseer of roads—all of course salaried, and now, as
a rule, elected by the people, mostly for one or two
years.> These county officers have, besides the functions

1 Georgia, with 59,475 square miles, has 137 counties ; Alabama, with
52,250 square miles, has 66. Speaking generally, the newer States have
the larger counties, just as in England the smallest parishes are in the
first settled parts of England, or rather in those parts where population
was comparatively dense at the time when parishes sprang up.

2 Sometimes, as in Louisiana, the sheriff is also tax collector.

3 In some States some of these officials are nominated by the governor.
In Florida the governor appoints even the board of five county commis-

CHAP, XLVIII LOCAL GOVERNMENT 233
a a ee,

indicated by their names, the charge of the police and
the poor of the county, and of the construction of
public works, such as bridges and prisons. The county
judges and the sheriff, and frequently the coroner, are
also chosen by the people. The sheriff is everywhere in
America neither an ornamental person, as he has be-
come in England, nor a judge, with certain executive
functions, as in Scotland, but the chief executive officer
of the judicial machinery of the county.

In these southern States there exist various local
divisions smaller than the counties." Their names and
their attributions vary from State to State, but they have
no legislative authority like that of the Town meeting
of New England, and their officers have very limited
powers, being for most purposes controlled by the county
authorities. The most important local body is the
school committee for each school district. In several
States, such as Virginia and North Carolina, we now
find townships, and the present tendency seems in
these States to be towards the development of some-
thing resembling the New England Town. It is a ten-
dency which grows with the growth of population, with
the progress of manufactures and of the middle and indus-
trious working class occupied therein, and especially with
the increased desire for education. The school, some
one truly says, is becoming the nucleus of local self-
government in the South now, as the church was in
New England two centuries ago. Nowhere, however,

sioners. Constit. of 1886, Art. viii. § 5. The other county officers, viz.
clerk of circuit court, sheriff, constables, assessor of taxes, tax-collector,
treasurer, superintendent of public instruction, and surveyor, are elected
by the people for two or four years (&§ 6).

1 In South Carolina the parish was originally a pretty strong local
unit, but it withered away as the county grew under the influence of the
plantation system. The word “parish” is in America now practically
equivalent to “ congregation,” and does not denote a local area.

234 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART It

has there appeared either a primary assembly or a repre-
sentative local assembly. All local authorities in the
South, and in the States which, like Nevada, Nebraska,!
and Oregon, may be said to have adopted the county
system, are executive officers and nothing more.

The third type is less easy to characterize than either
of the two preceding, and the forms under which it
appears in the middle and north-western States are
even more various than those referable to the second
type. Two features mark it. One is the importance
and power of the county, which in the history of most
of these States appears before any smaller division ; the
other is the activity of the township, which has more
independence and a larger range of competence than
under the system of the South. Now of these two
features the former is the more conspicuous in one
group of States— Pennsylvania, New Jersey, New
York, Ohio, Indiana, Iowa; the latter in another group
—Michigan, Illinois, Wisconsin, Minnesota, the reason
being that the New Englanders, who were often the
largest and always the most intelligent and energetic
element among the settlers in the more northern of
these two State groups, carried with them their’ attach-
ment to the Town system and their sense of its value,
and succ¢eded, though sometimes not without a struggle,
in establishing it in the four great and prosperous
commonwealths which form that group. On the other
hand, while Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and New York
had not (from the causes already stated) started with the
Town system, they never adopted it completely ; while
in Ohio and Indiana the influx of settlers from the
Slave States, as well as from New York and Pennsyl-

1 Nebraska, however, is now beginning to introduce the township
system.

CHAP, XLVIII LOCAL GOVERNMENT 235
bs ae a en Nips ae sn es

vania, gave to the county an early preponderance, which
it has since retained. The conflict of the New England
element with the Southern element is best seen in
Illinois, the northern half of which State was settled by
men of New England blood, the southern half by
pioneers from Kentucky and Tennessee. The latter,
coming first, established the county system, but the New
Englanders fought against it, and in the constitutional
convention of 1848 carried a provision, embodied in the
constitution of that year, and repeated in the present
constitution of 1870, whereby any county may adopt a
system of township organization “‘ whenever the majority
of the legal voters of the county voting at any general
election shall so determine.”? Under this power four-
fifths of the 102 counties have now adopted the town-
ship system.?

Illinois furnishes so good a sample of that system
in its newer form that I cannot do better than extract,
from a clear and trustworthy writer, the following
account of the whole scheme of local self-government in
that State, which is fairly typical of the North-west :—

“When the people of a county have voted to adopt the town-
ship system, the commissioners proceed to divide the county into
towns, making them conform with the congressional or school town-
ships, except in special cases, Every town is invested with corporate
capacity to be a party in legal suits, to own and control property, and
to make contracts. The annual town meeting of the whole voting
population, held on the first Tuesday in April, for the election of

1 See Constitution of 1870, Art. x. § 5, where a provision is added
that any county desiring to forsake township organization may do so by a
vote of the electors in the county, in which case it comes under the
county system prescribed in the following sections of that article.

2 Tllinois has 102 counties, with an average population, in 1880, of
30,000 ; Iowa 99 counties, with an average population, in 1880, of
16,500. England (excluding Wales) has 40 counties, with an average
population, in 1881, of 615,000.

236 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

town officers and the transaction of miscellaneous business, is the
central fact in the town government. The following is a summary
of what the people may do in town meeting. They may make any
orders concerning the acquisition, use, or sale of town property ;
direct officers in the exercise of their duties ; vote taxes for roads
and bridges, and for other lawful purposes; vote to institute or
defend suits at law; legislate on the subject of noxious weeds, and
offer rewards to encourage the extermination of noxious plants and
vermin ; regulate the running at large of cattle and other animals ;
establish pounds, and provide for the impounding and sale of
stray and trespassing animals; provide public wells and watering-
places; enact bye-laws and rules to carry their powers into effect ;
impose fines and penalties, and apply such fines in any manner con-
ducive to the interests of the town.!

“The town officers are a supervisor, who is ex officio overseer of
the poor, a clerk, an assessor, and a collector, all of whom are
chosen annually ; three commissioners of highways elected for three
years, one retiring every year; and two justices of the peace and
two constables, who hold office for four years.

“On the morning appointed for the town meeting the voters
assemble, and proceed to choose a moderator, who presides for the
day. Balloting for town officers at once begins, the supervisor, col-
lector, and assessor acting as election judges. Every male citizen
of the United States who is twenty-one years old, who has resided
in the State a year, in the county ninety, days, and in the township
thirty days, is entitled to vote at town meeting ; but a year’s resi-
dence in the town is required for eligibility to office. At two
o'clock the moderator calls the meeting to order for the considera-
tion of Business pertaining to those subjects already enumerated.
Everything 'i is done by the usual rules and methods of parliamentary
bodies. The clerk of the town is secretary of the meeting, and
preserves a record of all the proceedings. Special town meetings
may be held whenever the supervisor, clerk, or justices, or any two
of them, together-with fifteen voters, shall have filed with the clerk
a statement that a meeting is necessary, for objects which they
specify. The clerk then gives public notice in a prescribed way.

1 There are English analogies to all these powers, but in England
some of them are or were exercised in the Manor court and not in the
Vestry.

CHAP, XLVIII LOCAL GOVERNMENT 237
a
Such special meetings act only upon the subjects named in the
call.

“The supervisor is both a town and a county officer. He: is
general manager of town business, and is also a member of the
county board, which is composed of the supervisors of the several
towns, and which has general control of the county business, As
a town officer, he receives and pays out all town money, excepting
the highway and school funds. His financial report is presented
by the clerk at town meeting. The latter officer is the custodian of
the town’s records, books, and papers. The highway commissioners, in
their oversight of roads and bridges, are controlled by a large body
of statute law, and by the enactments of the town meeting. High-
ways are maintained by taxes levied on real and personal property,
and by a poll-tax of two dollars, exacted from every able-bodied
citizen between the ages of twenty-one and fifty. It may be paid
in money or in labour under the direction of the commissibners.
One of the commissioners is constituted treasurer, and he receives
and pays out all road moneys.

“The supervisor acts as overseer of the poor. The law leaves
it to be determined by the people of a county whether the separate
towns or the county at large shall assume the care of paupers.
When the town has the matter in charge, the overseer generally
provides for the indigent by a system of out-door relief. If the
county supports the poor, the county board is authorised to establish
a poor-house and farm for the permanent care of the destitute, and
temporary relief is afforded by the overseers in their respective towns,
at the county’s expense.

“The board of town auditors, composed of the supervisor, the
clerk, and the justices, examine all accounts of the supervisor, over-
seer of poor, and highway commissioners ; pass upon all claims and
charges against the town, and audit all bills for compensation pre-
sented by town officers. The accounts thus audited are kept on
file by the clerk for public inspection, and are reported at the next
town meeting. The supervisor, assessor, and clerk constitute a
Board of Health. The clerk records their doings, and reports them
at the meetings of the town.

“No stated salaries are paid to town officers. They are compen-
sated according to a schedule of fixed fees for specific services, or
else receive certain per diem wages for time actually employed in
official duties. The tax collector's emolument is a percentage.

238 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

“For school purposes, the township is made a separate and dis-
tinct corporation, with the legal style, ‘Trustees of Schools of
Township , Range , according to the number by which
the township is designated in the Congressional Survey. The
school trustees, three in number, are usually elected with the
Officers of the civil township at town meetings, and hold office for
three years. They organize by choosing one of their number pre-
sident, and by selecting some fourth person for school treasurer,
who shall also be, ex officio, their secretary. They have authority
to divide the township into school districts. It must be remem-
bered that the township is exactly six miles square. It is the
custom to divide it into nine districts, two miles square, and to erect
a schoolhouse near the centre of each. As the county roads are,
in most instances, constructed on the section lines—-and therefore
run north and south, east and west, at intervals of a mile—the
traveller expects to find a schoolhouse at every alternate crossing.
The people who live in these sub-districts elect three school direc-
tors, who control the school in their neighbourhood. They are
obliged to maintain a free school for not less than five nor more
than nine months in every year, are empowered to build and furnish
schoolhouses, hire teachers and fix their salaries, and determine
what studies shall be taught. They may levy taxes on all the tax-
able property in their district, but are forbidden to exceed a rate of
two per cent for educational or three per cent for building purposes.
They certify to the township school treasurer the amount they
require, and it is collected as hereafter described. This last-named
officer holds all school funds belonging to the township, and pays
out on the order of the directors of the several districts.

“The township funds for the support of schools arise from three
sources. (1) The proceeds of the school lands given by the United
States Government, the interest from which alone may be expended.
(2) The State annually levies on all property a tax of one-fifth of
one per cent, which constitutes a State school fund, and is divided
among the counties in the ratio of their school population, and is.
further distributed athong the townships in the same ratio. (3)
Any amount needed in addition to these sums is raised by taxation
in the districts under authority of the directors.

“ All persons between the ages of six and twenty-one years are
entitled to free school privileges. Women are eligible to every
school office in the State, and are frequently chosen directors, The

CHAP. XLVIII LOCAL GOVERNMENT 239
we
average Illinois county contains sixteen townships. The county
government is established at some place designated by the voters,
and called the ‘county seat.’ The corporate powers of the county
are exercised by the county board, which, in counties under town-
ship organization, is composed of the several town supervisors,
while in other counties it consists of three commissioners elected by
the people of the whole county. The board manage all county
property, funds, and business; erect a court-house, jail, poorhouse,
and any necessary buildings ; levy county taxes, audit all accounts
and claims against the county, and, in counties not under township
organization, have general oversight of highways and paupers.
Even in counties which have given the care of highways to the
townships, the county board may appropriate funds to aid in con-
structing the more important roads and expensive bridges. The
treasurer, sheriff,! coroner, and surveyor are county functionaries,
who perform the duties usually pertaining to their offices.”

“The county superintendent of schools has oversight of all
educational matters, advises town trustees and district directors, and
collects complete school statistics, which he reports to the county
board, and transmits to the State superintendent of public instruction.

“Every county elects a judge, who has full probate jurisdic-
tion, and appoints, administrators and guardians. He also has
jurisdiction in civil suits at law, involving not more than $1000,
in such minor criminal cases as are cognizable by a justice of
the peace, and may entertain appeals from justices or police courts.
The State is divided into thirteen judicial districts, in each of which
the people elect three judges, who constitute a circuit court. The
tribunal holds two or more sessions annually in each county within
the circuit, and is attended at every term by a grand or petit jury.
It has a general original jurisdiction, and hears appeals from the
county judge and from justices’ courts.

“To complete the judicial system of the State there are four
appellate courts and one supreme court of last resort. Taxes

1 The sheriff is the executive officer of the higher courts, with responsi-
bility for the peace of the county. In case of riot he may call out the
county militia.

2 Ordinary police work, other than judicial, is not a county matter,
but left to the township with its constables. In cities, police belongs to
the municipal authority, unless committed by some State statute to a
special boards

249 . THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

whether for State, county, or town purposes are computed on the
basis of the assessment made by the town assessor, and are collected
by the town collector. The assessor views and values all real estate,
and requires from all persons a true list of their personal property.
The assessor, clerk, and supervisor, constitute a town equalizing
board, to hear complaints and to adjust and correct the assessment.

“The assessors’ books from all the towns then go before the
county board, who make such corrections as cause valuations in one
town to bear just relation to valuations in the others. The county
clerk transmits an abstract of the corrected assessment to theauditor of
the State, who places it in the hands of a State board of equalization.

“This board adjust valuations between counties, Aliséaxes are
estimated and collected on this finally corrected assessment. The
State authorities, the county board, the town supervisors, the high-
way commissioners, the township school trustees, and the proper
officers of incorporated cities and villages, all certify to the county
clerk a statement of the amount they require for their several
purposes. The clerk prepares a collection-book for each town
explaining therein the sum to be raised for each purpose. Having
collected the total amount the collector disburses to each proper
authority its respective quota. In all elections, whether for
President of the United States, representatives in Congress, State
officers or county officers, the township constitutes an ele¢tion
precinct, and the supervisor, assessor, and collector sit as the
election judges.

“The words ‘town’ and ‘township’ signify 4 territorial division
of the county, incorporated for purposes of local government. There
remains to be mentioned a very numerous class of municipal cor-
porations known in Illinois statutes as ‘villages’ and ‘cities.’ A
minimum pdpulation of three hundred, occupying not more than
two square miles in extent, may by popular vote become incor-
porated as a ‘village,’ under provisions of the general law. Six
village trustees are chosen, and they make one of their number pre-
sident, thereby conferring on him the general duties of a mayor.
At their discretion the trustees appoint a clerk, a treasurer, a street
commissioner, a village constable, and other officers as they deem
necessary. The people may elect a police magistrate whose jurisdic-
tion is equal to that of a justice of the peace.” !

1 «ZLocal Government in Illinois,” by Albert Shaw, LL.D., in Johns
Hopkins University Studies, Baltimore, 1883.

CHAP. XLVIII LOCAL GOVERNMENT 241

A similar picture of the town meeting in Michigan
is given by another recent authority,—

“The first Monday in April of each year every citizen of the
United States twenty-one years of age and upwards who has resided
in the State six months, and in the township the ten days preced-
ing, has the right of attending and participating in the meeting.
The supervisor, the chief executive officer of the township, presides.
He and the justice of the peace whose term of office soonest
expires, and the township clerk, constitute the inspectors of election.
After the choice of officers for the ensuing year the electors proceed.
from twetve to one, or three, as the case may require, to the discus-
sion of town business. Complaint is perhaps made that the cattle
in a certain part of the township are doing damage by running at
large, a bye-law is passed forbidding the same under penalty not
exceeding ten dollars.

“A bridge may be wanted in another part of the township, but
the inhabitants of that road district cannot bear the expense ; the
town meeting votes the necessary amount not exceeding the limits
of law, for the laws restricting the amount of taxation and indebted-
ness are very particular in their provisions.

“The electors may regulate the keeping and sale of gunpowder,
the licensing of dogs and the maintenance of hospitals, and may
order the vaccination of all inhabitants. The voters in town
meeting are also to decide,how much of the one-mil tax on every
dollar of the valuation shall be applied to the purchase of books for
the township library, the residue going to schools.

“The annual reports of the various township officers charged
with the disbursement of public moneys are also submitted at this
time. In short, whatever is local in character and affecting the
township only is subject to the control of the people assembled
in town meeting.

“Yet we may notice some minor differences between the
New England town meeting and its sister in Michigan. In the
latter the bye-laws and regulations are less varied in character.

“This is due to the fact that in the West that part of the
township where the inhabitants are most numerous, the village, and
for whose regulation many laws are necessary, is set off as an in-
corporated village, just as in nearly all the central and western
States. These villages have the privilege, either directly in

VOL. IT R

242 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

village meeting or more often through a council of five or more
trustees, of managing their own local affairs, their police, fire
department, streets and waterworks. In some States, however,
they are considered parts of the township, and as such vote in
town meeting on all questions touching township roads, bridges, the
poor and schools.” ?

The conspicuous feature of this system is the reap-
pearance of the New England Town meeting, though in
a somewhat les$ primitive and at the same time less
perfect form, because the township of the West is a more
artificial organism than the rural Town of Massachusetts
or Rhode Island, where, until lately, everybody was
of English blood, everybody knew everybody else, every-
body was educated not only in book learning, but in
the traditions of self-government. However, such as
it is, the Illinois and Michigan system is spreading.
Recent legislation in California, Nebraska, and other
.western States permits its adoption. It is already
established in the magnificent Territory of Dakota, and
seems destined to prevail over the whole North-west.’

In the proportion to the extent in which a State
has adopted the township system the county has
tended to decline in importance. It is nevertheless of
more consequence in the West than in New England.
It has frequently an educational official who inspects
the schools, and it raises a tax for aiding schools in the
poorer townships. It has duties, which are naturally

1 Local Government in Michigan, by E. W. Bemis, in J. H. U. Studies,
Baltimore, 1883. _

2 In Switzerland the rural Gemeinde or Commune is the basis of the
whole republican system of the Canton. It has charge of the police, the
poor, and schools, and owns lands. It has a primary assembly, meeting
several times a year, which discusses communal business and elects an
administrative council. It resembles in these respects an American Town
or Township, but is subject for some purposes to the jurisdiction of an

official called the Statthalter, appointed by the Canton for a district com-
prising a number of communes.

CHAP, XLVIII LOCAL GOVERNMENT 243
SR a en eee eee ota Seer ee ey Can eee

more important in a new than in an old State, of laying
out main roads and erecting bridges and other public
works. And sometimes it has the oversight of town-
ship expenditure.’ The board of county commissioners
consists in Michigan and Illinois of the supervisors
of all the townships within the county; in Wisconsin
and Minnesota the commissioners are directly chosen at
a county election.

I pass to the mixed or compromise system as it ap-
pears in the other group of States, of which Pennsylvania,
Ohio, Indiana, and Iowa may be taken as samples.
In these States we find no Town meeting. Their
township may have greater or less power, but its
members do not come together in a primary assembly ;
it elects its local officers, and acts only through and
by them. In Ohio there are three township trustees
with the entire charge of local affairs, a clerk and a
treasurer. In Pennsylvania the township is governed
by two or three supervisors, elected for three years,
one each year, together with an assessor (for valua-
tion purposes), a town clerk, three auditors, and (where
the poor are a township charge) two overseers of

1 Mr. Bemis says :—“ Inasmuch as many of the thousand or more
townships of a State lack the political education and conservatism neces-
sary for perfect self-control, since also many through lack of means cannot
raise sutlicient money for roads, bridges, schools, and the poor, a higher
authority is needed, with the power of equalizing the valuation of several
contiguous towns, of taxing the whole number for the benefit of the
poorer, and of exercising a general oversight over township expenses. . .
The importance of this power is not fully appreciated. For lack of
similar provision in Massachusetts, there is scarcely any State or county
aid or control of schools. Every town is left to its own resources with
poor results [7] All educators earnestly advocate county and State con-
trol of schools, that there may be uniformity of methods, and that the
country districts, the nurseries of our great men in the past, may not
degenerate, But two influences oppose : the fear of centralization on the
part of the small towns which need it most, and the dislike of the rich
cities to tax themselves for the country districts.”—Local Government in
Michigan, ut supra, p. 18.

244 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART It

the poor. The supervisors may lay a rate on the
township not exceeding one per cent on the valuation
of the property within its limits for the repair of roads,
highways, and bridges, and the overseers of the poor
may, with the consent of two justices,’ levy a similar
tax for the poor. But as the poor are usually a county
charge, and as any ratepayer may work out his road tax
in labour, township rates amount to very little.

“Tn Iowa,” says Mr. Macy, “the civil township, which is usually
six miles square, is a local government for holding elections, repair-
ing roads, testing property, giving relief to the poor, and other
business of local interest. Its officers are three trustees, one clerk,
a road supervisor for each road district, one assessor, two or more
justices of the peace, and two or more constables. The justices and
constables are in a sense county officers. Yet they are elected by
townships, and if they remove from the township in which they are
chosen, they cease to be officers, The trustees are chosen for three
years, but their terms of office are so arranged that one is chosen
each year. The other officers are chosen for two years. If there
is within the limits of the township an incorporated town or city,
the law requires that at least one of the justices shall live within
the town or city. The voters within the town or city choose a
separate assessor. The voters of the city are not allowed to vote
for road, supervisors nor for the township assessor; they vote for
‘all other township officers. . . .

“The trustees of the township have various duties in the admin-
istration of the poor laws. An able-bodied person applying for aid
may be required to work upon the streets or highways. If a person
who has acquired a legal settlement in the county, and who has no
near relatives able to support him, applies to the trustees for aid, it is
their duty to look into the case and furnish or refuse relief. If
they decide to furni8h it, they may do so by sending the person to
the county poorhouse, or by giving him what they think needful in
food, clothing, medical attendance, or money. If they refuse aid
the applicant may go to the county supervisors, and they may order

1 Justices are elected by the people for five years, and commissioned
by the governor of the State.

CHAP, XLVIII LOCAL GOVERNMENT 245

the trustees to furnish aid; or if the supervisors think the trustees
are giving aid unwisely, they may order them to withhold it, In
all cases where aid is furnished directly by the trustees to the
applicant they are required to send a statement of the expense
incurred to the auditor of the county, who presents the bills to the
board of supervisors. All bills for the relief of the poor are paid
by the county, and the supervisors if they choose may take the
entire business out of the hands of the trustees. But in counties
where no poorhouse is provided, and where the supervisors make
no provision for the poor, the trustees are required to take entire
charge of the business. Yet in any case the county must meet the
expenses. The trustees are the health officers of the township.
They may require persons to be vaccinated ; they may require the
removal of filth injurious to health; they may adopt bye-laws for
preserving the health of the community and ‘enforce them by fine
and imprisonment.” }

In most of these States the county overshadows the
township. Taking Pennsylvania as an example, we find
each county governed by a board of three commissioners,
elected for three years, upon a minority vote system,
the elector being allowed to vote for two candidates
only. Besides these there are officers, also chosen by
popular vote for three years, viz. a sheriff, coroner,
prothonotary, registrar of wills, recorder of deeds,
treasurer, surveyor, three auditors, clerk of the court,
district attorney. Some of these officers are paid by
fees, except in counties whose population exceeds
50,000, where all are paid by salary. A county with
at least 40,000 inhabitants is a judicial district, and
elects its judge for a term of ten years. No new county
is to contain less than 400 square miles or 20,000
inhabitants.” The county, besides its judicial business
and the management of the prisons incident thereto,

1 A Government Text-Book for Iowa Schools, pp. 21-23.

2 See Constitution of Pennsylvania of 1873, Arts. xiv. xiii. and v.

The average population of a county in Pennsylvania was in 1880
64,000. There are sixty-seven.

246 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

besides its duties as respects highways and bridges, has
educational and usually also poor-law functions; and it
levies its county tax and the State taxes through a
collector for each township whom it and not the town-
shipi appoints. It audits the accounts of townships, and
has other rights of control over these minor communities
exceeding those allowed by Michigan or Illinois. I
must not omit to remark that where any local area
is not governed by a primary assembly? of all its
citizens, as in those States where there is no Town
meeting, and in all States in respect to counties, a
method is frequently provided for taking the judgment
of the citizens of the local area, be it township or
county, by popular vote at the polls upon a specific
question, usually the borrowing of money or the levy-
ing of a rate beyond the regular amount. This is
an extension to local divisions of the so-called “ plebi-
scitary” or referendum method, whose application to
State legislation has been discussed in a preceding
chapter. It seems to work well, for by providing an
exceptional method of meeting ,exceptional cases, it
enables the ordinary powers of executive officials,
whether in township or county, to be kept within
narrow limits.

Want of space has compelled me to omit from this
sketch many details which might interest European

1 See “Local Government in Pennsylvania,” in J. H. U, Studies, by
E. RB. L. Gould, Baltimore, 1883,

2 As the primary meeting is in England dying out in the form of the
parish vestry, so the plebiscitary method seems to be coming in to meet the
now more democratic conditions of the country. It is recognized in the Free
Library Acts, which provide for taking a poll of all the ratepayers within
a given local area to determine whether or no a local rate shall be levied
to provide a free public library. And see above (Chapter XX XIX.) as to
the proposal to submit to popular vote the question of granting licences
for the sale of intoxicating liquors.

CHAP, XLVIII LOCAL GOVERNMENT 247
i es

students of local government, nor can I attempt to
indicate the relations of the rural areas, townships and
counties, to the incorporated villages and cities which
lie within their compass further than by observing
that cities, even the smaller ones, are usually separated
from the townships, that is to say, the township govern-
ment is superseded by the city government, while cities
of all grades remain members of the counties, bear their
share in county taxation, and join in county elections.
Often, however, the constitution of a State contains
special provisions to meet the case of a city so large as
practically to overshadow or absorb the county, as Chicago
does the county of Cook, and Cincinnati the county of
Hamilton, and sometimes the city is made a county by
itself. Of these villages and other minor municipalities
there are various forms in different States. Ohio, for
instance, divides her municipal corporations into (a) cities,
of which there are two classes, the first class containing
three grades, the second class four grades ; (b) villages, also
with two classes, the first of from 3000 to 5000 inhabit-
ants, the second of frgm 200 to 3000; and (c) hamlets,
incorporated places with less than 200 inhabitants.! The
principles which govern these organizations are generally
the same; the details are infinite, and incapable of
being summarized here. Of minor incorporated bodies
therefore I say no more. But the larger cities furnish a
wide and instructive field of inquiry ; and to them three
chapters must be devoted.

1 Ohio Voters’ Manual, Appendix K. Ohio contains: Cities—1 first
class, first grade, 1 first class, second grade, 1 first class, third grade,
2 second class, first grade, 1 second class, second grade, 9 second class,
third grade, 23 second class, fourth grade; Villages—-34 first class,
395 second class ; Hamlets—32, besides 785 unincorporate places or towns
mentioned in Secretary of State’s Report for 1881.

CHAPTER XLIX
OBSERVATIONS ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT

It may serve to clear up a necessarily intricate description
if I add here a few general remarks applicable to all, or
nearly all, of the various systems of local government
that prevail in the several States of the Union.

I. Following American authorities, I have treated
the New England type or system as a distinct one, and
referred the North-western States to the mixed type.
But the European reader may perhaps figure the three
systems most vividly to his mind if he will divide the
Union into three zones—Northern, Middle, and Southern.
In the northern, which, beginning at the confluence of
the Yellowstone and Missouri, stretches east to the Bay of
Fundy, and includes the Territory of Dakota and the
States of Minnesota, Wisconsin, Illinois, Michigan, and
the six New England States, he will find a primary
assembly, the Town or township meeting, in preponder-
ant activity as the unit of local government. In the
middle zone, stretching from California to New Jersey
and New York, inclusive, along the fortieth parallel of
latitude, he will find the township dividing with the
county the interests and energy of the people. In some
States of this zone the county is the more important
organism and dwarfs the township; in some the township

CHAP. XLIX OBSERVATIONS ON LOCAL GOVBRNMENT 249

seems to be gaining on the county; but all are alike in
this, that you cannot lose sight for a moment of either
the smaller or the larger area, and that both areas are
governed by elected executive officers. The third zone
includes all the southern States ; in which the county is
the predominant organism, though here and there school
districts and even townships are growing in significance.

II. Both county and township are, like nearly
everything else in America, English institutions which
have suffered a sea change. “The Southern county is
an attenuated English shire with the towns left out.”?
The northern township is an English parish, a parish of
the old seventeenth-century form, in which it was still
in full working order as a civil no less than an ecclesias-
tical organization, holding common property, and often
co-extensive with a town. The Town meeting is the
English vestry, the selectmen are the churchwardens,
or select vestrymen, called back by the conditions of
colonial life into an activity fuller than they exerted in
England even in the seventeenth century, and far fuller
than they now retain.? In England local self-govern-
ment, except as regards the poor law, tended to decay
in the smaller (ze. parish or township) areas; the
greater part of such administration as these latter
needed, fell either to the justices in petty sessions

1 Professor Macy, “Our Government,” an admirable elementary
sketch for school use of the structure and functions of the Federal and
States governments.

2 Few things in English history are better worth studying, or have
exercised a more pervading influence on the progress of events, than the
practical disappearance from rural England of that Commune or Gemeinde
which has remained so potent a factor in the economic and social as well
as the political life of France and Italy, of Germany (including Austrian
Germany) and of Switzerland. If Englishmen were half as active in the
study of their own local institutions as Americans have begun to be in

that of theirs, we should have had a copious literature upon this interesting
subject.

250 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

or to officials appointed by the county or by the
central government, until the legislation of the present
century began to create new districts, especially poor
law and sanitary districts, for local administration.’ In
the larger English area, the county, true self-government
died out with the ancient Shire Moot, and fell into the
hands of persons (the justices assembled in Quarter
Sessions) nominated by the Crown, on the recommenda-
tion of the lord-lieutenant. It is only to-day that a
system of elective county councils is being created by
statute. In the American colonies the governor filled
the place which the Crown held in England ; but even in
colonial days there was a tendency to substitute popular
election for gubernatorial nomination; and county govern-
ment, obeying the universal impulse, is now everywhere
democratic in form ; though in the South, while slavery
and the plantation system lasted, it was practically aristo-
cratic in its spirit and working. ,
III. In England the control of the central govern-
ment—that is, of Parliament—is now maintained not
only by statutes defining the duties and limiting the
powers of the various local bodies, but also by the
powers vested in sundry departments of the executive,
the Local Government Board, Home Office, and Treasury,
of disallowing certain acts of these bodies, and especially
of supervising their expenditure and checking their bor-
rowing. In American States the executive departments
have no similar functions. The local authorities are

1 However, the parish constables and way-wardens in some places con-
tinue to be elected by popular vote ; and the manor courts and courts leet
were semi-popular institutions. Even now the parish vestry has some
civil powers.

In counties the coroner continued to be elected by the freeholders,
but as these pages are passing through the press, a provision transferring
the appointment to the newly-created county councils has been enacted
by Parliament (51 & 52 Vict. ch. xli, § 5).

cHap, xLIxX OBSERVATIONS ON LOCAL GO VERNMENT 251
ee}

restrained partly by the State legislature, whose statutes
of course bind them, but still more effectively, because
legislatures are not always to be trusted, by the State
Constitutions. These instruments usually—the more
recent ones I think invariably — contain provisions
limiting the amount which a county, township, village,
school district, or other local area may borrow, and
often also the amount of tax it may levy, by refer-
ence to the valuation of the property contained within
its limits. Specimens of these provisions will be found
in a note at the end of this volume. They have
been found valuable in checking the growth of local
indebtedness, which had become, even in rural dis-
tricts, a serious danger.! The total local debt was
in 1880 :—
Counties . . $125,452,100 (£25,090,000)

Townships i 30,190,861  (£6,038,000)
School Districts . 17,493,110 (£3,498,000)

Total .  . $173,136,071 (£34,626,000)

This sum bears a comparatively small proportion to
the total debt of the several States and of the cities,
which was then—

States : ‘ . - $260,377,310 (£52,000,000)
Cities over 7500 inhabitants - 710,535,924 (£142,100,000)

Other municipal bodies under
7500 inhabitants . «~~ 56,310,209 (£11,200,000)
Total . . $1,027,223,443 (£205,300,000)

It is also a diminishing amount, having fallen eight per

1 See also Chapter XLIIL. on “State Finance.” These provisions are
of course applied to cities also, which need them even more. They vary
very much in their details, and in some cases a special popular vote is
allowed to extend the limit.

252 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

cent between 1870 and 1880,’ whereas city indebtedness
was then still increasing.

IV. County and township of school district taxes
are direct taxes, there being no octroc in America, and
are collected along with State taxes in the smallest tax-
gathering area, ze. the township, where townships exist.
Local rates are not, however, as in England, levied on
immovable property only, but also on personal property,
according to the valuation made by the assessors. Much
the larger’part of taxable personalty escapes because its
owners conceal it, and there may be no means of ascer-
taining what they possess. Lands and houses are often
assessed far below their true value, because the township
assessors have an interest in diminishing the share of
the county tax which will fall upon their township ; and
similarly the county assessors have an interest in dimin-
ishing the share of the State tax to be borne by their
county.? Real property is taxed in the place where it
is situate ; personalty only in the place where the owner
resides. But the suffrage, in local as well as in State
and National elections, is irrespective of property, and
no citizen can vote in more than one place. A man
may have a dozen houses or farms in as many cities,
counties, or townships: he will vote, even for local
purposes, only in the spot where he is held to reside.

The great bulk of local expenditure is borne by local
taxes. But in some States a portion of the county taxes
is allotted to the aid of school districts, so as to make
the wealthier districts relieve the burden of the poorer,

1 See article “Debts,” by Mr. R. P. Porter in American Cyclopedia
of Political Science.

2 As to this and the Boards of Equalization see Chapter XLIII. ante.

3 Of course what is really the same property may be taxed in more
than one place, eg. a mining company may be taxed us a company in
Montana, and the shares held by individual proprietors be possibly also
taxed in the several States in which these shareholders reside.

cnap. xLIx OBSERVATIONS ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT 253

and often a similar subvention is made from State
revenues. The public schools, which are everywhere
and in all grades gratuitous, absorb a very large part
of the whole revenue locally raised,) and in addition
to what taxation provides they receive.a large revenue
from the lands which, under Federal or State legislation,
have been set apart for educational purposes.? On the
whole, the burden of taxation in rural districts is not
heavy, nor is the expenditure often wasteful, because
the inhabitants, especially under the Town meeting
system, look closely after it.

V. It is noteworthy that the Americans, who are
supposed to be especially fond of representative assemblies,
have made very little use of representation in their local
government. The township is governed either by a
primary assembly of all citizens or else, as in such
States as Ohio and Iowa, by a very small board, not
exceeding three, with, in both sets of cases, several
purely executive officers. In the county there is seldom
or never a county board possessing legislative fune-
tions ;* usually only three commissioners or supervisors
with some few executive or judicial officers. Local
legislation (except in so far as it appears in the petty
bye-laws of the ‘Town meeting) is discouraged. The
people seem jealous of their county officials, electing

1 The total. expenditure on public schools in the United States is
stated by the U.S. Commissioner of Education (Report for 1885-86) at
$111,304,927 (£22,260,000). The National government has no autho-
rity over educational matters, but has, since 1867, had a Bureau which
collects statistics from the States and issues valuable reports.

2 The student of economic science may be interested to hear that in
some of the States which have the largest permanent school fund the effect
on the efficiency of the schools, and on the interest of the people in them,
has been pernicious. In education, as well as in eleemosynary and ecclesi-
astical matters, endowments would seem to be a very doubtful benefit.

3 In New York, however, there is said to be some tendency in this
direction,

254 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

them for short terms, and restricting each to a special
range of duties. This is perhaps only another way of
saying that the county, even in the South, has continued
to be an artificial entity, and has drawn to itself no great
part of the interest and affections of the citizens. Over five-
sixths of the Union each county presents a square figure
on the map, with nothing distinctive about it, nothing
“natural” about it, in the sense in which such English
counties as Kent or Cornwall are natural entities. It is
too large for the personal interest of the citizens: that
goes to the township. It is too small to have traditions
which command the respect or touch the affections of its
inhabitants: these belong to the State.’

VI. The chief functions local government has to dis-
charge in the United States are the following :—

Making and repairing roads and bridges.—These
prime necessities of rural life are provided for by the
township, county, or State, according to the class to which
a road or bridge belongs. That the roads of America
are proverbially ill-built and ill-kept is due partly to
the climate, with its alternations of severe frost, occa-
sional torrential rains (in the middle and sputhern States),
and long droughts; partly to the hasty habits of the
people, who are too busy with other things, and too
eager to use their capital in private enterprises to be
willing to spend freely on highways; partly also to the
thinness of population, which is, except in a few manu-
facturing districts, much less dense than in western
Europe. In many districts railways have come before
roads, so roads have been the less used and cared for.

The administration of justice was one of the first
needs which caused the formation of the county: and

1 In Virginia there used to be in old days a sort of county feeling re-
sembling that of England, but this has vanished in the social revolution
that has transformed the South.

cHaP. xLIX OBSERVATIONS ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT 255
pe ee ee ee eee

matters connected with it still form a large part of county
business. The voters elect a judge or judges, and the
local prosecuting officer, called the district attorney, and
the chief executive officer, the sheriff.! Prisons are a
matter of county concern. Police is always locally
regulated, but in the northern States more usually by
the township than by the county. However, this branch
of government, so momentous in continental Europe,
is in America comparatively unimportant outside the
cities, The rural districts get on nearly everywhere
with no guardians of the peace, beyond the township
constable ;? nor does the State government, except, of
course, through statutes, exercise any control over local
police administration.* In the rural parts of the eastern
and middle States property is as safe as anywhere in
the world. In such parts of the West as are dis-
turbed by dacoits, or by solitary highwaymen, travellers
defend themselves, and, if the sheriff is distant or
slack, lynch law may usefully be invoked. The care
of the poor is thrown almost everywhere upon local
and not upon State authorities,* and defrayed out of
local funds, sometimes by the county, sometimes by
the township. The poor laws of the several States differ
in so many particulars that it is impossible to give even
an outline of them here. Little out-door relief is given,
though in most States the relieving authority may, at

1 The American sheriff remains something like what the English
sheriff was before his wings were clipped by legislation some seventy years
ago. Even then he mostly acted by deputy. The justices and the county
‘police have since that legislation largely superseded his action,

2 Or, in States where there are no townships, some corresponding
officer.

8 Michigan is now (1888) said to be instituting a sort of State police
for the enforcement of her anti-liquor legislation.

4 In some States there are State poor-law superintendents, and
frequently certain State institutions for the benefit of particular classes of
paupers, eg. pauper lunatics.

256 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

his or their discretion, bestow it; and pauperism is
not, and has never been, a serious malady, except in
some five or six great cities, where it is now vigor-
ously combated by volunteer organizations largely com-
posed of ladies. The total number of persons returned
as paupers in the whole Union in 1880 was 88,665,
of whom 67,067 were inmates of alms-houses, and
21,598 in receipt of out-door relief. This was only
1 to 565 of thé whole population.’ In England and
Wales in 1881 there were 803,126 paupers, to a popula-
tion of 25,974,439, or 1 to 32 of pupulation.

Sanitation, which has become sd important a depart-
ment of English local administration, plays a small part
in the rural districts of America, because their popula-
tion is so much more thinly spread over the surface
that the need for drainage and the removal of nuisances
is less pressing ; moreover, as the humbler classes are
better off, unhealthy dwellings are far less common.
Public health officers and sanitary inspectors would, over
the larger part of the county, have little occupation.”

Education, on the other hand, has hitherto been not
only a more distinctively local maiter, but one relatively
far more important than in England, France, or Italy.
And there is usually a special administrative body, often
a special administrative area, created for its purposes—
the school committee and the school district. The vast

1 New York had 15,217 paupers (of whom 2810 were out-door),
Colorado 47 (1 out-door), Arizona 4, Louisiana makes no return of in-
door paupers, because the parishes (= counties) provide for the mainten-
ance of their poor in private institutions.

2 Sanitation, however, has occupied much attention in the cities.
Cleveland on Lake Erie claims to have the lowest death rate of any large
city in the world.

3 Though the school district frequently coincides with the township,
it has generally (outside of New England) administrative officers distinct

from those of the township, and when it coincides it is often subdivided
into lesser districts.

cHaPp. xLIX OBSERVATIONS ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT 257

sum éxpended on public instruction has been already
mentioned. Though primarily dealt with by the smallest
local circumscription, there is a growing tendency for
both the county and the State to interest themselves in
the work of instruction by way of inspection, and to
some extent of pecuniary subventions. Not only does
the county often appoint a county superintendent, but
there are in some States county high schools and (in
most) county boards of education, besides a State Board
of Commissioners.’ I need hardly add that the schools
of all grades are more numerous and efficient in the
northern and western than in the southern States.?
In old colonial days, when the English Commissioners
for Foreign Plantations asked for information on the
subject of education from the governors of Virginia and
Connecticut, the former replied, “I thank God there are
no free schools or printing presses, and I hope we shall not
have any these hundred years ;”* and the latter, “ One-
fourth of the annual revenue of the colony is laid out
in maintaining free schools for the education of our
children.” The disparity was prolonged and intensified
in the South by the existence of slavery. Now that
slavery has gone, the South makes rapid advances ; but
the proportion of illiteracy, especially of course among
the negroes, is still high.*

1 In some States provision is made for the combination of several
school districts to maintain a superior school at a central spot.

2 The differences between the school arrangements of different States
are so numerous that I cannot attempt to describe them.

3 Governor Sir William Berkeley, however, was among the Virginians
who in 1660 subscribed for the erection in Virginia of a ‘‘a colledge of
students of the liberal arts and sciences.” As to elementary instruction
he said that Virginia pursued “the same course that is taken in England
out of towns, every man according to his ability instructing his children.
We have forty-eight parishes, and our ministry are well paid, and, by
consent, should be better if they would pray oftener and preach less.”—
The College of William and Mary, by Dr. H. B, Adams.

+ The percentage of persons unable to read to the whole population

VOL. II Ss

258 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

It will be observed that of the general functions of
local government above described, three, viz. police,
sanitation, and poor relief, are simpler and less costly
than in England, and indeed in most parts of western
and central Europe. It has therefore proved easier to
vest the management of all in the same local authority,
and to get on with a smaller number of special executive
officers. Education is indeed almost-the only matter
which has been deemed to demand a special body to
handle it. Nevertheless, even in America the increasing
complexity of civilization, and the growing tendency
to invoke governmental aid for the satisfaction of wants
which were not previously felt, or if felt, were met by
voluntary action, tend to enlarge the sphere and
multiply the functions of local government.

VII. How far has the spirit of political party per-
meated rural local government? I have myself asked
this question a hundred times in travelling through
America, yet I find it hard to give any general answer,
because there are great diversities in this regard not
only between different States, but between different
parts of the same State, diversities due sometimes to
the character of the population, sometimes to the vary-
ing intensity of party feeling, sometimes to the greater
or less degree in which the areas of local government
coincide with the election districts for the election
of State senators or representatives. On the whole

of the United States was, in 1880, 13°4; it was lowest in Iowa (2°4),
highest in South Carolipa (48°2) and Louisiana (45°8), The percentage
of persons unable to write was in the whole United States, 17% lowest in
Nebraska (3°6), highest in South Carolina (55:4) and Alabama (50°9).

It has recently been proposed in Congress to reduce the surplus in
the U.S. treasury by distributing sums among the States in aid of educa-
tion, in proportion to the need which exists for schools, ie to their
illiteracy. The objections on the score of economic policy, as well as of
constitutional law, are so obvious as to have stimulated a warm resistance
to the bill,

cHap. xuIx OBSERVATIONS ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT 259
pape at eS ee
it would seem that county officials are apt to be
chosen on political lines, not so much because any
political questions come before them, or because they
can exert much influence on State or Federal elections,
as because these paid offices afford a means of reward-
ing political services and securing political adhesions.
Each of the great parties usually holds its county con-
vention and runs its “county ticket,” with the unfor-
tunate result of intruding national politics into matters
with which they have nothing to do, and of making it
more difficult for good citizens outside the class of
professional politicians to find their way into county
administration. However, the party candidates are
seldom bad men, and the ordinary voter is less apt to
vote blindly for the party nominee than he would be in
Federal or State elections. In the township and rural
school district party spirit is much less active. The
offices are often unpaid, and the personal merits of the
candidates are better known to the voters than are those
of the politicians who seek for county office.’ Rings and
Bosses (of whom more anon) are not unknown even in
rural New England. School committee elections are
often influenced by party affiliations. But on the whole,
the township and its government keep themselves pretty
generally out of the political whirlpool: their posts are
filled by honest and reasonably competent men.

VIII. The apparent complexity of the system of local
government sketched in the last preceding chapter is due
entirely to the variations between the several States. In
each State it is, as compared with that of rural England,
eminently simple. There are few local divisions, few
authorities ; the divisions and authorities rarely overlap.

1 Sometimes the party “ticket” leaves a blank space for the voter
to insert the name of the candidates for whom he votes for township
offices. See the specimen Jowa ticket at the end of Chapter LXVI,

260 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

No third local area and local authority intermediate
between township and county, and similar to the English
poor law Union, or District with its Council recently pro-
posed in England, has been found necessary. Especially
simple is the method of levying taxes. A citizen pays
at the same time, to the same officer, upon the same
paper of demand, all his local taxes, and not only these,
but also his State tax ; in fact, all the direct taxes which
he is required to pay. The State is spared the expense
of maintaining a separate collecting staff, for it leans
upon and uses the local officials who do the purely local
work. The tax-payer has not the worry of repeated
ealls upon his cheque-book.’ Nor is this simplicity and
activity of local administration due to its undertaking
fewer duties, as compared with the State, than is the
case in Europe. On the contrary, the sphere of local
government is in America unusually wide,? and widest
in what may be called the most characteristically
American and democratic regions, New England and
the North-west. Americans constantly reply to the
criticisms which Europeans pass on the faults of their
State legislatures and the shortcomings of Congress by
pointing to the healthy efficiency of their rural adminis-
tration, which enables them to bear with composure the
defects of the, higher organs of government, defects
which would be less tolerable in a centralized country,
where the national government deals directly with local
affairs, or where local authorities await an initiative
from above.

1 Some States, however, give a man the option of paying half-yearly
or quarterly. In many a discount is allowed upon payment in advance.

2 The functions are not perhaps so numerous as in England, but this
is because fewer functions are needed. The practical competence of local
authorities for undertaking any new functions that may become needed, and
which the State may entrust to them, is great.

cuap. xLIx OBSERVATIONS ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT 261
ee a Ee Ee

Of the three or four types or systems of local
government which I have described, that of the Town
or township with its popular primary assembly is
admittedly the best. It is the cheapest and the most
efficient ; it is the most educative to the citizens who
bear a part in it. The Town meeting has been
not only the source but the school of democracy.’
The action of so small a unit needs, however, to be
supplemented, perhaps also in some points supervised,
by that of the county, and in this respect the mixed
system of the middle States is deemed to have borne
its part in the creation of a perfect type. For some
time past an assimilative process has been going on
over the United States tending to the evolution of such
a type? In adopting the township system of New
England, the north-western States have borrowed some of
the attributes of the middle States county system. The
middle States have developed the township into a
higher vitality than it formerly possessed there. Some
of the southern States are introducing the township,
and others are likely to follow as they advance in
population and education. It is possible that by the
middle of next century there will prevail one system,
uniform in its outlines, over the whole country, with
the township for its basis, and the county as the organ
called to deal with those matters which, while they
are too large for township management, it seems inex-
pedient to remit to the unhealthy atmosphere of a State
capital.

1 In Rhode Island it was the Towns that made the State.

2 This tendency is visible not least as regards the systems of educa-
tional administration. The National Teachers’ Association of the U.S.
not long since prepared an elaborate report on the various existing systems,

and the more progressive States are on the alert to profit by one another's
experience,

CHAPTER L
THE GOVERNMENT OF CITIES

THE growth of great cities has been among the most
significant and least fortunate changes in the character
of the population of the United States during the
century that has passed since 1787. The census of
1790 showed only thirteen cities with more than 5000,
and none with more than 40,000 inhabitants. In 1880
there were 494 exceeding 5000, forty exceeding 40,000,
twenty exceeding 100,000. There are probably to-day
(1888) at least thirty exceeding 100,000. The ratio of
persons living in cities exceeding 8000 inhabitants to the
total population was, in 1790, 3°3 to every 100, in 1840,
8°5, in 1880, 22°5. And this change has gone on with
accelerated speed notwithstanding the enormous exten-
sion of settlement over the vast regions of the West.
Needless to say that a still larger and increasing propor-
tion of the wealth of the country is gathered into the
larger cities. Their government is therefore a matter
of high concern to America, and one which cannot be
omitted from a discussion of transatlantic politics, Such
a discussion is, however, exposed to two difficulties. One
is that the actual working of municipal government in
the United States is so inextricably involved with the
party system that it is hard to understand or judge it

CHAP. L THE GOVERNMENT OF CITIES 263
a

without a comprehension of that system, an account of
which I am, nevertheless, forced to reserve for sub-
sequent chapters. The other is that the laws which
regulate municipal government are even more diverse
from one another than those whence I have drawn the
account already given of State governments and rural
local government. For not only has each State its own
system of laws for the government of cities, but within
a State there is, as regards the cities, little uniformity
in municipal arrangements. Larger cities are often
governed differently from the smaller ones; and one
large city is differently organized from another. So far
as the legal arrangements go, no general description,
such as might be given of English municipal govern-
ments under the Municipal Corporation Acts, is possible
in America, I am therefore obliged to confine myself
to a few features common to most city governments,
occasionally taking illustrations from the constitution or
history of some one or other of the leading municipalities.

The history of American cities, though striking and
instructive, has been short. Of the ten greatest cities of
to-day only four—Baltimore, New Orleans, New York,
and Philadelphia—were municipal corporations in 1820.1
Every city has received its form of government from
the State in which it stands, and this form has been
repeatedly modified. Formerly each city obtained a
special charter ; now in nearly all States there are general
laws under which a population of a certain size and
density may be incorporated. Yet, as observed above,
special legislation for particular cities, especially the
greater ones, continues to be very frequent.

1 The term “city” denotes in America what is called in England a
municipal borough, and has nothing to do with either size or antiquity.
The constitution or frame of government of a city, which is always given
by a State statute, general or special, is called its charter.

264 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

Although American city governments have a general
resemblance to those English municipalities which were
their first model,! their present structure shows them to
have been much influenced by that of the State govern-
ments. We find in all the larger cities—

A mayor, head of the executive, and elected directly

by the voters within the city.

Certain executive officers or boards, some directly
elected by the city voters, others nominated by
the mayor or chosen by the city legislature.

A legislature, consisting usually of two, but some-
times of one chamber, directly elected by the
city voters.

Judges, usually elected by the city voters, but some-
times appointed by the State.

What is this but the frame of a State government
applied to the smaller area of a city? The mayor
corresponds to the Governor, the officers or boards to the
various State officials and boards (described in Chapter
XLLI.) elected, in most cases, by the people ; the aldermen
and common council (as they are generally called) to the
State Senate and Assembly ; the city elective judiciary
to the State elective judiciary.’

A few words on each of these municipal authorities.
The mayor is by far the most conspicuous figure in city
governments, much more important than the mayor of
an English or Irish borough, or the provost of a Scotch
one. He holds office, sometimes for one year,* but now

1 American municipalities have, of course, never been, since the Revolu-
tion, close corporations like most English boroughs before the Act of 1835.

2 American municipal governments are of course subject to three
general rules: that they have no powers other than those conferred on
them by the State, that they cannot delegate their powers, and that
their legislation and action generally is subject to the constitution and

statutes as well of the United States as of the State to which they belong.
3 Generally in the cities of the second rank and in Boston.

CHAP. L THE GOVERNMENT OF CITIES 265

more frequently for two,’ three, or even five? years.
In some cities he is not re-eligible. He is directly
elected by the people of the whole city, and is usually
not a member of the city legislature.* He has, almost
everywhere, a veto on all ordinances passed by that
legislature, which, however, can be overriden by a two-
thirds majority. In many cities he appoints some among
the heads of departments and administrative boards,
though usually the approval of the legislature or of one
branch of it* is required. Quite recently some city
charters have gone so far as to make him generally
responsible for all the departments, though limiting his
initiative by the right of the legislature to give or with-
hoid supplies, and making him liable to impeachment for
misfeasance. He receives a considerable salary, varying
with the size of the city, but sometimes reaching $10,000,
the same salary as that allotted to the justices of the
Supreme Federal Court. It rests with him, as the chief
executive officer, to provide for the public peace, to
quell riots, and, if necessary, to call out the militia.’
He often exerts a pretty wide discretion as to the en-

1 New York, Brooklyn, Chicago, Baltimore, San Francisco, Cincinnati,
and generally in the larger cities. 2 Philadelphia, St. Louis.

3 In Chicago and San Francisco the mayor sits in the legislature.

4 The Brooklyn charter allows the mayor to appoint heads of depart-
ments without any concurrence of the council, in the belief that thus
responsibility can be better fixed upon him; and New York has lately
(1884) taken the same course.

5 Some idea of the complexity due to the practice of giving special
charters to particular cities, or passing special bills relating to them, may
be gathered from the fact that in Ohio, for instance, the duties of the
mayor vary greatly in the six chief’ cities of the State. There are duties
which a mayor has in Cincinnati only, out of all the cities of the State ;
others which he has in all the cities except Cincinnati; others in Cin-
cinnati and Toledo only; others in Cleveland, Toledo, Columbus, Dayton,
and Springfield only ; others in Cleveland and Toledo only; others in
Cleveland only ; others in Toledo only ; others in Columbus and Dayton

only. These variations are the result not of ordinances made by each
city for itself, but of State legislation.

266 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

forcement of the law; he may, for instance, put in force
Sunday Closing Acts or regulations, or omit to do so.
The practical work of administration is carried on
by a number of departments, sometimes under one
head, sometimes constituted as boards or commissions.
The most important of these are directly elected by
the people, for a term of one, two, three, or four years.
Some, however, are chosen by the city legislature, some
by the mayor with the approval of the legislature or its
upper chamber. In most cities the chief executive
officers have been disconnected from one another, owing
no common allegiance, except that which their financial
dependence on the city legislature involves, and com-
municating less with the city legislature as a whole
than with its committees, each charged with some one
branch of administration, and each apt to job it.
Education has been generally treated as a distinct
matter, with which neither the mayor nor the legislature
has been suffered to meddle. It is committed to a Board
of Education, whose members are separately elected by
the people, or, as in Brooklyn, appointed by the mayor,
levy (though they do not themselves collect) aseparate tax,
and have an executive staff of their own at their disposal.’
The city legislature usually consists in small cities of
one chamber, in large ones of two, the upper of which
generally bears ‘the name of the Board of Aldermen, the
lower that of the Common Council.? All are elected by

1 There are some points of resemblance in this system to the govern-
ment of English cities, and especially of London. The English common
councils elect certain officials and manage their business by committees,
In London the sheriffs and chamberlain are elected by the liverymen.
Note, however, that in no English borough or city do we find a two-
chambered legislature, nor (except as last aforesaid in London) officials
elected by popular vote, nor a veto on legislation vested in the mayor.

2 Some large cities, however (eg. New York and Brooklyn, Chicago
with its 36 aldermen, San Francisco with its 12 supervisors), have only
one chamber,

CHAP. L THE GOVERNMENT OF CITIES 267
ee eee

the citizens, generally in wards, but the upper house
occasionally by districts or on what is called a “ general
ticket,” 2.e. a vote over the whole city.’ Usually the
common council is elected for one year, or at most for two
years, the upper chamber frequently for a longer period.?
Both are usually unpaid in the smaller cities, sometimes
paid in the larger.* All city legislation, that is to say,
ordinances, bye-laws, and votes of money from the city
treasury, are passed by the council or councils, subject
in many cases to the mayor’s veto. Except in a few cities
governed by very recent charters, the councils have some
control over at least the minor officials. Such control is
exercised by committees, a method borrowed from the
State and National legislatures, and suggested by the
same reasons of convenience which have established it
there, but proved by experience to have the evils of
secrecy and irresponsibility as well as that of discon-
necting the departments from one another.

The city judges are only in so far a part of the
municipal government that in most of the larger cities
they are elected by the citizens, like the other chief
officers. There are usually several superior judges,
chosen for terms of five years and upwards, and a larger
number of police judges or justices,* generally for shorter
terms. Occasionally, however, the State has prudently

1 In some few cities, among which is Chicago, the plan of minority
representation has been to some extent adopted by allowing the voter
to cast his vote for two candidates only when there are three places to be
filled. It was tried in New York, but the State Court of Appeals held
the statute creating it to be unconstitutional.

2 Sometimes the councilman is required by statute to be a resident
in the ward he represents.

3 Boston and Cincinnati give no salary, St. Louis pays members of both
its councils $300 (£60) a year, Baltimore, $1000 (£200), New York pays
and Brooklyn does not.

* Sometimes (as in St. Louis) the police justices are nominated by the
mayor.

268 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

reserved to itself the appointment of judges. Thus in
New Haven, Connecticut (population in 1880, 62,882)—

“Constables, justices of the peace, and a sheriff, are elected by
the citizens, but the city courts derive existence directly from the
State legislature. .. . The mode of selecting judges is this: the
New Haven county delegation to the dominant party in the legisla-
ture assembles in caucus and nominates two of the same political
faith to be respectively judge and assistant judge of the New Haven
city court. Their choice is adopted by their party, and the
nominations are duly ‘ratified, often by a strict party vote. Inas-
much as the legislature is usually Republican, and the city of New
Haven is unfailingly Democratic, these usages amount to a reserva-
tion of judicial offices from the ‘hungry and thirsty’ local majority,
and the maintenance of a certain control by the Republican country
towns over the Democratic city.” }

It need hardly be said that all the above officers, from
the mayor and judges downwards, are, like State officers,
elected by manhood suffrage. Their election is usually
made to coincide with that of State officers, perhaps also
of Federal congressmen. This saves expense and trouble.
But as it not only bewilders the voter in his choice of
men by distracting his attention between a large number

1 “During the session of the legislature in March 1886 this argument
was put forward in answer to a Democratic plea for representation upon
the city court bench. ‘The Democrats possess all the other offices in
New Haven. It’s only fair that the Republicans should have the city
court. Each party accepted the statement as a conclusive reason for
political action. It would be gratifying to find the subject discussed
upon a higher plane, and the incumbents of the offices who had done
well continued from term to term without regard to party applications.
But in the present condition of political morals, the existing arrangements
are probably the most practicable that could be made. It goes without
saying that country districts are, as a rule, more deserving of political
power than are cities. The method of selecting the judiciary is every-
where a moral question, but it seems to me that the State authority
should designate every judge of a rank higher than a justice of the peace.
If the city judges were locally elected upon the general party ticket, the
successful candidates would often be under obligations to elements in the
community which are the chief source and nurse of the criminal class—
an unseemly position for a judge.”—-Mr. Charles H. Levermore in his inter-
esting sketch of the “Town and City Government of New Haven” (p. 77).

CHAP. L THE GOVERNMENT OF CITIES 269

of candidates and places, but also confirms the tendency,
already strong, to vote for city officers on party lines,
there has of late years been a movement in some few
spots to have the municipal elections fixed for a different
date from that of State or Federal elections, so that the
undistracted and non-partisan thought of the citizens
may be given to the former.’

At present the disposition to run and vote for
candidates according to party is practically universal,
although the duty of party loyalty is deemed less bind-
ing than in State or Federal elections. When both
the great parties put forward questionable men, a non-
partisan list, or so-called “ citizens’ ticket,” may be run
by a combination of respectable men of both parties.
Sometimes this attempt succeeds. However, though the
tenets of Republicans and Democrats have absolutely
nothing to do with the conduct of city affairs, though
the sole object of the election, say of a city comptroller
or auditor, may be to find an honest man of good busi-
ness habits, four-fifths of the electors in nearly all cities
give little thought to the personal qualifications of the
candidates, and vote the “straight out ticket.”

The functions of city governments may be distributed
into three groups—(a@) those which are delegated by
the State out of its general coercive and administrative
powers, including the police power, the granting of
licences, the execution of laws relating to adulteration
and explosives; (b) those which though done under
general laws are properly matters of local charge and
subject to local regulation, such as education and the care
of the poor ; and (c) those which are not so much of a

1 On the other hand, there are cities which hope to draw out a larger
vote, and therefore obtain a better choice, by putting their municipal
electigns at the same time as the State elections. This has just been done
by Minneapolis.

270 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART Il

political as of a purely business order, such as the paving
and cleansing of streets, the maintenance of proper drains,
the provision of water and light. In respect of the first,
and to some extent of the second of these groups, the
city may be properly deemed a political entity ; in re-
spect of the third it is rather to be compared to a
business corporation or company, in which the tax-
payers are shareholders, doing, through the agency of
the city officers, things which each might do for him-
self, though with more cost and trouble. All three
sets of functions are dealt with by American legislation
in the same way, and are alike given to officials and
a legislature elected by persons of whom a large part
pay no direct taxes. Education, however, is usually
detached from the general city government and en-
trusted to a separate authority,’ while in some cities
the control of the police has been withheld or withdrawn
from that government, and entrusted to the hands of a
separate board. The most remarkable instance is that
of Boston, in which city a Massachusetts statute of 1885
entrusts the police department and the power to license,
regulate, and restrain the sale of intoxicating liquors, to
a special board of three persons, to be appointed for five
years by the State governor and council. Both political
parties are ;directed by the statute to be represented on
the board. (This is a frequent provision in recent
charters.) The city pays on the board’s requisition all
the expenses of the police department. In New York
the police commissioners are appointed by the mayor,
but in order to “ take the department out of politics” an

1 Though sometimes, as in Baltimore, the city legislature appoints a
Board of Education. Unhappily, in some cities education is “ within
politics,” and, as may be supposed, with results unfavourable to the in-
dependence and even to the quality of the teachers.

2 So in Baltimore.

CHAP. L THE GOVERNMENT OF CITIES 271
a eS ee

unwritten understanding has been established that he,
though himself always a partisan, shall appoint two
Democratic and two Republican commissioners. The
post of policeman is “ spoils” of the humbler order, but
spoils equally divided between the parties.

Taxes in cities, as in rural districts, are levied upon
personal as well as real property; and the city tax is
collected along with the county tax and State tax by
the same collectors. There are, of course, endless
varieties in the practice of different States and cities as
to methods of assessment and to the minor imposts sub-
sidiary to the property tax. Both real and personal
property are usually assessed far below their true value,’
the latter because owners are reticent, the former because
the city assessors are anxious to take as little as possible
of the State and county burden on the shoulders of their
own community, though in this patriotic effort they are
checked by the county and State Boards of Equalization.
Taxes are usually so much higher in the larger cities
than in the country districts or smaller municipalities,
that there is a strong tendency for rich men to migrate
from the city to its suburbs in order to escape the city
collector. Perhaps the city overtakes them, extending
its limits and incorporating its suburbs; perhaps they
fly farther afield by the railway and make the prosperity
of country towns twenty or thirty miles away. The
unfortunate consequence follows, not only that the
taxes are heavier for those who remain in the city, but
that the philanthropic and political work of the city loses
the participation of those who ought to have shared in
it. For a man votes in one place only, the place where

1 In New York the assessor’s valuation of real estate is said to be

about 60 per cent of its true value, in Chicago between 20 and 30 per
cent of that value (City Government of Philadelphia, p. 323).

272 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

he resides, and is taxed on his personalty, although
he is taxed on his real property wherever it is situate,
perhaps in half a dozen cities or counties. And where
he has no vote, he is neither eligible for local office
nor deémed entitled to take a part in local political
agitation.

It may conduce to a better comprehension of the
newest frame of city government if I present an outline
of the municipal system in two recently reformed cities.
In both of them there had been serious maladministra-
tion, due to causes to be presently explained, and many
efforts had been made to apply drastic remedies. In
one, St. Louis, a completely new charter has been
enacted, embodying, in the main, the views of municipal
reformers. In the other, Boston, a number of specific
improvements have been effected in a charter dating
from 1854. I begin with the latter as the older city.’

Boston (population in 1880, 362,839) is divided into twenty-four
wards and twelve aldermanic districts, each ward being subdivided
into voting precincts, with about five hundred voters in each.
Municipal elections are held annually early in December.

The mayor is elected for one year by the people of the whole
city ; receives $10,000 a year (£2000) 3 appoints, subject to con-
firmation by the board of aldermen, the chief officers and boards
(except the police board and street commissioners), and may remove
any of them for cause. He summons the heads of departments
at least once a month for consultation. Every ordinance, order,
resolution, or vote of the city council, and every act of either branch
or of the school committee involving the expenditure of money, is
presented to him for approval, and if disapproved, falls to the
ground, unless reconsidered and passed by a two-thirds vote. He

1 This account of Boston government is abstracted from a valuable
paper by Mr. James M. Bugbee, entitled the “ City Government of Boston,”
in Johns Hopkins University Studies, fifth series (Baltimore, 1887). It
contains some interesting extracts from the Report of the Boston Com-
mission of 1884, suggesting reforms, some of which were adopted by the
State legislature.

CHAP. L THE GOVERNMENT OF CITIES 273
i ef
may veto separate items in a general appropriation bill. The
departments send their estimates to him, which he submits to the
council with his recommendations thereon, All drafts on the city
treasury, and all contracts exceeding $1000 (£200), require his
written approval. [Note that he is not himself a member of either
branch of the city legislature. |

The legislature, called collectively the City Council, consists of
two branches, viz. the Board of Aldermen, elected one from each of
twelve districts, and the Common Council of seventy-two members,
three for each ward. Both are elected annually. They are re-
stricted to purely legislative (including financial) functions.

The executive departments are the following :—

Elected by popular vote.—Three street commissioners, one each
year for a three years term, with power to lay out streets and assess
damages. When the estimated cost of a street exceeds $10,000 the
concurrence of the council is required.

Appointed by mayor and aldermen.—Superintendent of streets,
charged with paving, repairing, and watering the streets.

Fire department—three commissioners serving three years.

Head of department for the survey and inspection of buildings,
Term three years.

Health department—three commissioners, with large sanitation
powers for preserving public health and abating nuisances. Term
three years.

Overseers of the poor—four each year. Term three years.?
They manage out-door relief and the trust funds which the city
holds for that purpose. No salary.

Board of public institutions—nine directors, charged with the
care of the alms-houses, houses of correction, of industry, of reform-
ation, house for pauper children, and lunatic hospital. Term three
years. No salary. It is in these institutions that in-door relief is
given.

City hospital board—five persons. Term five years.

1 The mayor has a number of minor duties. “It appears from the
latest edition of the Ordinances that no one can climb a tree, or throw
stones, or lie on the grass on the Common, without getting a permit from
the mayor.”

2 Formerly the people, subsequently the council, elected the overseers,
As under both plans men sometimes got in who jobbed for their own
benefit, the present scheme was adopted in 1885.

VOL. IT T

274 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART 11

Public library, supported by money voted by the council, five
trustees. Term five years, No salary.

Park department—three commissioners. Term three years.
No salary.?

Water department—board of three which controls the water-
works and fixes price of water. Term three years.

Assessors’ department—five chief assessors, to value real and
personal property, and assess city, county, and State taxes. Term
three years. .

City collector, who levies tax bills delivered to him by the
assessors, Appointed annually.

The following further officers are appointed by the mayor and
aldermen. For five years—five commissioners of Cedar Grove
Cemetery (unpaid) ; for three years—three registrars of voters, six
sinking fund commissioners (unpaid) ; for one year—two record com-
missioners (unpaid), five directors of ferries (unpaid), five trustees of
Mount Hope Cemetery (unpaid), city treasurer, city auditor, corpor-
ation counsel, city solicitor, superintendent of public buildings, city
architect, superintendent of street lights, superintendent of sewers,
superintendent of printing, superintendent of Faneuil Hall Market,
superintendent of bridges, city surveyor, water registrar, registrar
of births, deaths, and marriages, harbour master and ten assistants,
commission for certain bridges, inspector of provisions, inspector
of milk and vinegar, sealer (and four deputy sealers) of weights
and measures, nine hundred and sixty-eight election officers and
their deputies.

The above (so far as paid) are paid by salary fixed by the council.
The following officers, also appointed annually by mayor and alder-
men, are paid by fees :—

Inspector pf lime, three inspectors of petroleum, fifteen in-
spectors of pressed hay, culler of hoops and staves, three fence
viewers, ten field drivers and pound keepers, three surveyors of
marble, nine superintendents of hay scales, four measurers of upper
leather, fifteen measurers of wood and bark, twenty measurers of
grain, three weighers of beef, thirty-eight weighers of coal, five
weighers of boilers and heavy machinery, four weighers of ballast and
lighters, ninety-two undertakers, one hundred and fifty constables.

1 This board supervises the suburban parks, the Common, and the
Public Garden (together with smaller open spaces), within the city, being
under the charge of a superintendent separately appointed.

CHAP. L THE GOVERNMENT OF CITIES 275
a a a]

In addition to these there is a city clerk, city messenger, and
clerk of committees elected by concurrent vote of the City Council,
a clerk of the common council elected by that body, and many
county officers elected by the voters of the county of Suffolk, in
which Boston stands, and of which Boston furnishes nearly the
whole population. The county judges, however, are not elected,
but, like all other judges in Massachusetts, are appointed by the
Governor and Council to hold office quam diu se bene gesserint.
Exclusive of election officers and fee-paid officers, the mayor and
aldermen appoint 107 persons, of whom 65 are appointed for one
year, 61 receive salaries, and 41 serve gratuitously. In the present
city administration there are forty separate departments and offices,
most of them with a large number of subordinates and workmen,
This “multiplicity of departments and departments not only in-
volves the city in expenses not to be measured merely by the
salaries paid to superfluous officials,”! but affords a large field for
the exercise of party patronage, a patronage partially limited, but
as regards subordinates only, by the Massachusetts Civil Service
Act of 1884, which is administered by a Civil Service Commission.

Distinct from the rest of the city government is the School
Committee of twenty-four members, elected on a general ticket over
the whole city, and serving for three years, eight retiring annually.

Also distinct is the Police Department, which, as already ob-
served, has by a statute of 1885 been entrusted to a Board of
Police, appointed by the Governor and Council, of three citizens of
Boston, with power to “ appoint, establish, and organize ” the police,
and to license, regulate, and restrain the sale of intoxicating liquors.?
In case of riot, the mayor can take command of the police force,

The city of St. Louis (population in 1880, 350,518)
is governed by a charter or scheme of government
which, in pursuance of a special provision for that pur-
pose in the new Constitution of Missouri (1875), was
‘prepared by a board of thirteen freeholders elected by

1 Report of the Commission of 1884.

2 In the cities and towns of Massachusetts the question of granting
licences for the sale of intoxicants is annually submitted to popular vote.
See note to Chapter LXVI. At present in Boston and most cities the
grant has been voted. The annual revenue derived from licences is in
Boston over $500,000 (£100,000) per annum.

276 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

the people of the city and county of St. Louis, and was
finally adopted and ratified by the people themselves
by a vote at the polls, August 22, 1876.1

St. Louis is divided into 28 wards and 244 voting precincts.
Elections are governed by a strict law, which generally prevents
frauds, and are quiet, all drinking saloons being closed till midnight.

The mayor is elected by the people for four years, receives
$5000 (£1000) salary, is not a member of the city Assembly, with
which he communicates by messages. He has the power of return-
ing any bill passed by the Assembly, subject to a power in them to
reconsider and pass by a two-thirds vote. He recommends measures
to the Assembly, submits reports from the heads of departments,
and has a great variety of minor executive duties. He appoints to
a large number of important offices, but in conjunction with the
Council (upper house of the Assembly). For the sake of protect-
ing him from the pressure of those to whom he owes his election,
these appointments are made by him at the beginning of the third
year of his own term, and for a term of four years.

The Assembly is composed of two houses. The Council con-
sists of thirteen members, elected for four years by “general
ticket”: one-third go out of office every second year. The House
of Delegates consists of twenty-eight members, one from each ward.
Each Assembly man receives $300 a year, besides his reasonable
expenses incurred in the city service. The Assembly has a general
legislative power and supervision over all departments, its borrow-
ing and taxing powers being, however, limited.

The administrative departments are the following, viz.:—Thirteen
officers elected by the people, viz. comptroller, treasurer, auditor,
registrar, collector, marshal, inspector of weights and measures,
president of board of assessors, coroner, sheriff, recorder of deeds,
public administrator, president of board of public improvements.

Twenty Boards or officers are appointed, most of them for four
years, by the mayor with the approval of the Council, viz— Board
of public improvements, consisting of street commissioner, water do.,
harbour do., park do., sewer do., assessor and collector of water

1 J abridge the following account from a valuable paper by Mr.
Marshall S. Snow (professor of history in Washington University, St.
Louis), on the “City Government of St, Louis,” in Johns Hopkins
University Studies, third series,

CHAP, L THE GOVERNMENT OF CITIES 277

rates, commissioner of public buildings, commissioner of supplies,
commissioner of health, inspector of boilers, city counsellor, jury
commissioner, recorder of votes, city attorney, two police court
judges, jailer, superintendent of workhouse, chief fire engineer, gas
inspector, assessors, and several city contractors and minor officers.

The four police commissioners who, along with the mayor, are
charged with the public safety of St. Louis, are appointed by the
Governor of Missouri, with the view of keeping this department
“out of city politics.” In 1886 the police force was 593 men
strong, besides 200 private watchmen, paid by their employers, but
wearing a uniform and sworn in by the police board.

The city School Board consists of 28 members, one from each
ward, elected for three years, one-third retiring annually. It is
independent of the mayor and Assembly, chooses its staff and all
teachers, has charge of the large school funds, and levies a school
tax, which, however, the city collector collects.

The strong points of this charter are deemed to be “the length
of term of its municipal officers ; the careful provisions for honest
registration and the party purity of elections; the checks on financial
administration and limitations of the debt, and the fact that the
important offices to which the mayor appoints are not vacant till
the beginning of his third year of office, so that as rewards of
political work done during a heated campaign they are too far in
the distance to prejudice seriously the merits of an election.”!

On the whole the charter has worked well. Never-
theless the European reader will feel some surprise at
the number of elective offices and at the limited terms
for which all important offices are held. He will note
that even in democratic America the control of the
police by city politicians has been deemed too dangerous
to be suffered to remain in their hands. And he will
contrast what may be called the political character of
the whole city constitution with the somewhat simpler
and less ambitious, though also less democratic arrange-
ments, which have been found sufficient for the manage-
ment of European cities.

1 Snow, ut supra.

CHAPTER LI
THE WORKING OF CITY GOVERNMENTS

Two tests of practical efficiency may be applied to the
government of a city: What does it provide for the
people, and what does it cost the people? Space fails
me to apply in detail the former of these tests, by
showing what each,city does or omits to do for its in-
habitants ; so I must be content with observing that in
the United States generally constant complaints are
directed against the bad paving and cleansing of the
streets, the non-ehforcement of the laws forbidding
gambling and illicit drinking, and-in some places against
the sanitary arrangements and management of public
buildings and parks. It would appear that in the
greatest cities there is far more dissatisfaction than
exists with the municipal administration in such cities
as Glasgow, Liverpool, Manchester, Leeds, Dublin.

The following indictment of the government of
Philadelphia is, however, exceptional in its severity, and
however well founded as to that city, must not be taken
to be typical. A memorial presented to the Pennsylvania
legislature in 1883 by a number of the leading citizens
of the Quaker City contained these words :—

“The affairs of the city of Philadelphia have fallen into a most
deplorable condition. The amounts required annually for the pay-

cHar.tt THE WORKING OF CITY GOVERNMENTS — 279

ment of interest upon the funded debt and current expenses render
it necessary to impose a rate of taxation which is as heavy as can
be borne.

“In the meantime the streets of the city have been allowed to
fall into such a state as to be a reproach and a disgrace. Phila-
delphia is now recognized as the worst-paved and worst-cleaned
city in the civilized world. ;

“The water supply is so bad that during many weeks of the last
winter it was not only distasteful and unwholesome for drinking,
but offensive for bathing purposes.

“The effort to clean the streets was abandoned for months, and
no attempt was made to that end until some public-spirited citizens,
at their own expense, cleaned a number of the principal thorough-
fares,

“The system of sewerage and the physical condition of the
sewers is notoriously bad—-so much so as to be dangerous to the
health and most offensive to the comfort of our people. ,

“Public work has been done so badly that structures have had
to be renewed almost as soon as finished. Others have been in part
constructed at enormous expense, and then permitted to fall to decay
without completion.

“Inefficiency, waste, badly-paved and filthy streets, unwhole-
some and offensive water, and slovenly and costly management, have
been the rule for years past throughout the city government.” ?

In most of the points comprised in the above state-
ment, Philadelphia was probably at that date—for her
government has since been reformed—among the least
fortunate of American cities. He, however, who should
interrogate one of the “ good citizens” of Baltimore, Cin-
cinnati, New Orleans, New York, Chicago, San Francisco,
would have heard then, and would hear now, similar
complaints, some relating more to the external condition
of the city, some to its police administration, but all
showing that the objects for which municipal govern-
ment exists have been very imperfectly attained.

1 The New York Commission of 1876 described in equally dark
colours the management of that city—Page 5 of Report.

280 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

The other test, that of expense, is easily applied.
Both the debt and the taxation of American cities have
risen with unprecedented rapidity, and now stand at an
alarming figure.

A table of the increase of population, valuation, tax-
ation, and debt, in fifteen of the largest cities of the
United States, from 1860 to 1875 shows the following
result :—

Increase in population . : 70°5 per cent.
3 taxable valuation . 1569,
5 debt. ; : 2709 =,
3 taxation ‘ : 363-21 ,,

Looking at some individual cases, we find that the
debt rose as follows :—

Philadelphia 1867, $35,000,000—1877, $64,000,000

Chicago. . 1867, $4,750,000—1877, $13,456,000

St. Louis . 1867, $5,500,000—1877, $16,500,000

Pittsburg . 1867, $3,000,000—1877, $13,000,000 2

As respects current expenditure, New York in 1884
spent on current city purposes, exclusive of payments on
account of interest on debt, sinking fund, and mainten-
ance of judiciary, the sum of $20,232,786—equal to
$16°76 (£3: 8s.) for each inhabitant (census of 1880).
In Boston, in the same year, the city expenditure was
$9,909,019—equal to $27°30 (£5:9:8) for each in-
habitant (census of 1880). It is of course true that
much of this debt is represented by permanent improve-
ments, yet for another large, and in some cities far
larger, part there is-nothing to show; it is due to simple
waste or (as in New York) to malversation on the part
of the municipal authorities.*

1 Municipal Development of Philadelphia, by Messrs, Allinson and
Penrose, p. 275.

2 Article “Cities” (by Mr. S. Stern) in Amer. Cyclop, of Polit, Science.

$ Mr. Stern observes: “The cost of opening or improving highways

CHAP. LI THE WORKING OF CITY GOVERNMENTS 281

There is no denying that the government of cities is
the one conspicuous failure of the United States. The
deficiencies of the National government tell but little
for evil on the welfare of the people. The faults of the
State governments are insignificant compared with the
extravagance, corruption, and mismanagement which
mark the administrations of most of the great cities. For
these evils are not confined to one or two cities. The
commonest mistake of Europeans who talk about America
is to assume that the political vices of New York are
found everywhere. The next most common is to sup-
pose that they are found nowhere else. In New York
they have revealed themselves on the largest scale.
They are “gross as a mountain, monstrous, palpable.”
But there is not a city with a population exceeding
200,000 where the poison germs have not sprung
into a vigorous life; and in some of the smaller
ones, down to 70,000, it needs no microscope to note
the results of their growth. Even. in cities of the
third rank similar phenomena may occasionally be dis-
cerned, though there, as some one has said, the jet black
of New York or San Francisco dies away into a harm-
less gray.

For evils which appear wherever a large popula-
tion is densely aggregated, there must be some general
and widespread causes. What are these causes? Ade-
quately to explain them would be to anticipate the
account of the party system to be given in the latter
part of this volume, for it is that party system which
has, not perhaps created, but certainly enormously aggra-
and of placing sewers in streets is of course not included in this vast
aggregate of moneys annually levied and debt rolled up, because the cost
of those improvements is levied directly upon the land by way of assess-

ments, and they never figure as part of the ordinary expenditure of the
city.”—Article “ Cities,” ué supra.

282 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

vated them, and impressed on them their specific type.’
I must therefore restrict myself for the present to a brief
enumeration of the chief sources of the malady, and the
chief remedies that have been suggested for or applied
to it. No political subject has been so copiously dis-
cussed of late years in America by able and experienced
publicists, nor can I do better than present the salient
facts in the words which some of these men, speaking in
a responsible position, have employed.

The New York commissioners of 1876 appointed “to
devise a plan for the government of cities in the State of
New York,” sum up the mischief as follows :—*

“1. The accumulation of permanent municipal debt: In New
York it was, in 1840, $10,000,000; in 1850, $12,000,000; in
1860, $18,000,000; in 1870, $73,000,000 ; in 1876, $113,000,000.%

“2. The excessive increase of the annual expenditure for ordinary

1 See Part III., and especially Chapters LXII. and LXIIL See also
the chapters in Vol. III. on the Tweed Ring in New York City, and the
Gas Ring in Philadelphia. The full account given in those chapters of
the phenomena of municipal misgovernment in the two largest cities in
the United States seems to dispense me from the duty of here describing
those phenomena in general. ;

2 The commission, of which Mr. W. M. Evarts (now senator from New
York) was chairman, included some of the ablest men in the State, and its
report, presented 6th March 1877, may be said to have become classical.

3 The New York commissioners say: “The magnitude and rapid
increase of this debt are not less remarkable than the poverty of the
results exhibited ag the return for so prodigious an expenditure. It was
abundantly sufficient for the construction of all the public works of a great
metropolis for a century to come, and to have adorned it besides with the
splendours of architecture and art. Instead of this, the wharves and piers
are for the most part temporary and perishable structures ; the streets are
poorly paved ; the sewers in great measure imperfect, insufficient, and in
bad order ; the public buildings shabby and inadequate ; and there is
little which the citizen can regard with satisfaction, save the aqueduct
and its appurtenances and the public park. Even these should not be
said to be the product of the public debt ; for the expense occasioned by
them is, or should have been, for the most part already extinguished. In
truth, the larger part of the city debt represents a vast aggregate of moneys
wasted, embezzled, or misapplied.”

CHAP. LI THE WORKING OF CITY GOVERNMENTS — 283

purposes: In 1816 the amount raised by taxation was less than
4 per cent on the taxable property; in 1850, 1:13 per cent; in
1860, 1°69 per cent; in 1870, 2:17 per cent; in 1876, 2°67 per
cent. . . . The increase in the annual expenditure since 1850, as
compared with the increase of population, is more than 400 per
cent, and as compared with the increase of taxable property, more
than 200 per cent.”

They suggest the following as the causes :—
1. Incompetent and unfaithful governing boards
and officers.

“ A large number of important offices have come to be filled by
men possessing little, if any, fitness for the important duties they are
called upon to discharge. .. . These unworthy holders of public
trusts gain their places by their own exertions. The voluntary
suffrage of their fellow-citizens would never have lifted them into
office. Animated by the expectation of unlawful emoluments, they
expend large sums to secure their places, and make promises before-
hand to supporters and retainers to furnish patronage or place.
The corrupt promises must be redeemed. Anticipated gains must
be realized. Hence old and educated subordinates must be dismissed
and new places created to satisfy the crowd of friends and retainers.
Profitable contracts must be awarded, and needless public works
undertaken. The amounts required to satisfy these illegitimate
objects enter into the estimates on which taxation is eventually
based, in fact they constitute in many instances a superior lien upon
the moneys appropriated for government, and not until they are in
some manner satisfied do the real wants of the public receive atten-
tion. It is speedily found that these unlawful demands, together
with the necessities of the public, call for a sum which, if taken at
once by taxation, would produce dissatisfaction and alarm in the
community, and bring public indignation upon the authors of such
burdens. For the purpose of averting such consequences divers
pretences are put forward suggesting the propriety of raising means
for alleged exceptional purposes by loans of money, and in the end
the taxes are reduced to a figure not calculated to arouse the public
to action, and any failure thus to raise a sufficient sum is supplied
by an issue of bonds. ... Yet this picture fails altogether to
convey an adequate notion of the elaborate systems of depredation
which, under the name of city governments, have from time to time

284 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

afflicted our principal cities ; and it is moreover a just indication of
tendencies in operation in all our cities, and which are certain, unless
arrested, to gather increased force. It would clearly be within
bounds to say that more than one-half of all the present city debts
are the direct results of the species of intentional and corrupt mis-
rule above déscribed.”

2. The introduction of State and national politics
into municipal affairs.

“The formation of general political parties upon differences as
to general principles or methods of State policy is useful, or at all
events inevitable. But it is rare indeed that any such questions, or
indeed any upon which good men ought to differ, arise in connec-
tion with the conduct of municipal affairs. Good men cannot and
do not differ as to whether municipal debt ought to be restricted,
extravagance checked, and municipal affairs lodged in the hands of
competent and faithful officers. There is no more reason why the
control of the public works of a great city should be lodged in the
hands of a Democrat or a Republican than there is why an adherent
of one or the other of the great parties should be made the super-
intendent of a business corporation. Good citizens interested in
honest municipal government can secure that object only by acting
together. Political divisions separate them at the start, and render
it impossible to secure the object desired equally by both... .
This obstacle to the union of good citizens paralyses all ordinary
efforts for good municipal government. . .. The great prizes
in the shape of place and power which are offered on the broad
fields of national and State politics offer the strongest incentives to
ambition. Personal advancement is in these fields naturally
associated with the achievement of great public objects, and neither
end can be secured except through the success of a political party to
which they are attached, The strife thus engendered develops into
a general battle in which each side feels that it cannot allow any
odds to the other. If oné seeks to turn to its advantage the patron-
age of municipal office, the other must carry the contest into the
same sphere. It is certain that the temptation will be withstood
by neither. Jt then becomes the direct interest of the foremost
men of the nation to constantly keep their forces in hostile array,
and these must be led by, among other ways, the patronage to be
secured by the control of local affairs, ... Next to this small

CHAP. LI THE WORKING OF CITY GOVERNMENTS — 285

number of leading men there is a large class who, though not dis-
honest or devoid of public spirit, are led by habit and temperament
to take a wholly partisan view of city affairs. Their enjoyment of
party struggles, their devotion to those who share with them the
triumphs and defeats of the political game, are so intense that they
gradually lose sight of the object for which parties exist or ought to
exist, and considerable proportions of them in their devotion to
politics suffer themselves to be driven from the walks of regular
industry, and at last become dependent for their livelihood on the
patronage in the hands of their chiefs. Mingled with them is
nearly as large a number to whom politics is simply a mode of
making a livelihood or a fortune, and who take part in political
contests without enthusiasm, and often without the pretence of an
interest in the public welfare, and devote themselves openly to the
organization of the vicious elements of society in combinations
strong enough to hold the balance in a closely-contested election,
overcome the political leaders, and secure a fair share of the muuni-
cipal patronage, or else extort immunity from the officers of the law.
. ..» The rest of the community, embracing the large majority of
the more thrifty classes, averse to engaging in what they deem
the ‘low business’ of politics, or hopeless of accomplishing any
substantial good in the face of such powerful opposing interests, for
the most part content themselves with acting in accordance with
their respective parties. . . . It is through the agency of the great
political parties, organized and operating as above described, that
our municipal officers are and have long been selected. It can
scarcely be matter of wonder then that the present condition of
municipal affairs should present an aspect so desperate.”

3. The assumption by the legislature of the direct
control of local affairs.

“This legislative intervention has necessarily involved a dis-
regard of one of the most fundamental principles of republican
government (the self-government of municipalities)... . The
representatives elected to the central (State) legislature have not
the requisite time to direct the local affairs of the municipalities.

. - They have not the requisite knowledge of details. .. .
When a local bill is under consideration in the legislature, its care
and explanation are left exclusively to the representatives of the
locality to which it is applicable; and sometimes by express, more

286 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

often by a tacit understanding, local bills are ‘log-rolled’ through
the houses. Thus legislative duty is delegated to the local repre-
sentatives, who, acting frequently in combination with the sinister
elements of their constituency, shift the responsibility for wrong-
doing from themselves to the legislature. But what is even more
important, the general representatives have not that sense of per-
sonal interest and personal responsibility to their constituents which
are indispensable to the intelligent administration of local affairs.
And yet the judgment of the local governing bodies in various parts
of the State, and the wishes of their constituents, are liable to be
overruled by the votes of legislators living at a distance of a hundred
miles. . . . To appreciate the extent of the mischief done by the
occupation of the central legislative body with the consideration of
a multitude of special measures relating to local affairs, some good,
probably the larger part bad, one has only to take up the session
laws of any year at random and notice the subjects to which they
relate. Of the 808 acts passed in 1870, for instance, 212 are acts
relating to cities and villages, 94 of which relate to cities, and 36
to the city of New York alone. A still larger number have
reference to the city of Brooklyn. These 212 acts occupy more
than three-fourths of the 2000 pages of the laws of that year.
. .. The multiplicity of laws relating to the same subjects thus
brought into existence is itself an evil of great magnitude. What
the law is concerning some of the most important interests of our
principal cities can be ascertained only by the exercise of the patient
research of professional lawyers. In many instances even pro-
fessional skill is baffled. Says Chief-Justice Church: ‘It is scarcely
safe for any one to speak confidently on the exact condition of the
law in respect to public improvements in the cities of New York
and Brooklyn. The enactments referring thereto have been modi-
fied, superseded, and repealed so often and to such an extent that it
is difficult to ascertain just what statutes are in force at any partic-
ular time. The uncertainties arising from such multiplied and con-
flicting legislation lead_to incessant litigation with its expensive
burdens, public and private.’ . . . But this is not all nor the worst.
It may be true that the first attempts to secure legislative interven-
tion in the local affairs of our principal cities were made by good
citizens in the supposed interest of reform and good government,
and to counteract the schemes of corrupt officials. The notion that
legislative control was the proper remedy was a serious mistake.

CHAP. LI THE WORKING OF CITY GOVERNMENTS 287

The corrupt cliques and rings thus sought to be baffled were quick
to perceive that in the business of procuring special laws concerning
local affairs they could easily outmatch the fitful and clumsy labours
of disinterested citizens. The transfer of the control of the muni-
cipal resources from the localities to the (State) capitol had no other
effect than to cause a like transfer of the methods and arts of
corruption, and to make the fortunes of our principal cities the traffic
of the lobbies. Municipal corruption, previously confined within
territorial limits, thenceforth escaped all bounds and spread to every
quarter of the State. Cities were compelled by legislation to buy
lands for parks and places because the owners wished to sell them ;
compelled to grade, pave, and sewer streets without inhabitants, and
for no other purpose than to award corrupt contracts for the work.
Cities were compelled to purchase, at the public expense, and at
extravagant prices, the property necessary for streets and avenues,
useless for any other purpose than to make a market for the adjoin-
ing property thus improved. Laws were enacted abolishing one
office and creating another with the same duties in order to transfer
official emoluments from one man to another, and laws to change
the functions of officers with a view only to a new distribution of
patronage, and to lengthen the terms of offices for no other purpose
than to retain in place officers who could not otherwise be elected
or appointed.”

This last-mentioned cause of evil is no doubt a
departure from the principle of local popular control and
responsibility on which State governments and rural
local governments have been based. It is a dereliction
which has brought its punishment with it. But the
resulting mischiefs have been immensely aggravated by
the vices of the legislatures in a few of the States, such
as New York and Pennsylvania. As regards the two
former causes, they are largely due to what is called the
Spoils system, whereby office becomes the reward of
party service, and the whole machinery of party govern-.
ment made to serve, as its main object, the getting and
keeping of places. Now the Spoils system, with the
party machinery which it keeps oiled and greased and

288 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART It

always working at high pressure, is far more potent and
pernicious in great cities than in country districts. For
in great cities we find an ignorant multitude, largely
composed of recent immigrants, untrained in self-
government ; we find a great proportion of the voters
paying no direct taxes, and therefore feeling no interest
in moderate taxation and economical administration ;
we find able citizens absorbed in their private busi-
nesses, cultivated citizens unusually sensitive to the
vulgarities of practical politics, and both sets therefore
specially unwilling to sacrifice their time and tastes and
comfort in the struggle with sordid wire-pullers and
noisy demagogues. In great cities the forces that attack
and pervert democratic government are exceptionally
numerous, the defensive forces that protect it exception-
ally ill-placed for resistance. Satan has turned his
heaviest batteries on the weakest part of the ramparts.
Besides these three causes on which the commis-
sioners dwell, and the effects of which are felt in the great
cities of other States as well as of New York, though
perhaps to a less degree, there are what may be called
mechanical defects in the structure of municipal govern-
ments, whose nature may be gathered from the account
given in last chapter. There is a want of methods for
fixing public responsibility on the governing persons
and bodies. If the mayor jobs his patronage he can
throw large part of the blame on the aldermen or other
confirming council, alleging that he would have selected
better men could he have hoped that the aldermen
would approve his selection. If he has failed to keep
the departments up to their work, he may argue that
the city legislature hampered him and would not pass
the requisite ordinances. Each house of a two-chambered
legislature can excuse itself by pointing to the action

CHAP. LI THE WORKING OF CITY GOVERNMENTS 289

of the other, or of its own committees, and among the
numerous members of the chambers—or even of one
chamber if there be but one—responsibility is so much
divided as to cease to come forcibly home to any one.
The various boards and officials have generally had little
intercommunication ;! and the fact that some were
directly elected by the people made these feel them-
selves independent both of the mayor and the city
legislature. The mere multiplication of elective posts
distracted the attention of the people, and deprived the
voting at the polls of its efficiency as a means of reproof
or commendation.?

To trace municipal misgovernment to its sources was
comparatively easy. .To show how these sources might
be dried up was more difficult, though as to some ob-
vious remedies all reformers ‘were agreed. What seemed
all but impracticable was to induce the men who had
produced these evils, who used them and profited by
them, who were so accustomed to them that even the
honester sort did not feel their turpitude, to consent to

1 In Philadelphia some gne has observed that there were four distinct
and independent authorities with power to tear up the streets, and that
there was no authority upon whom the duty was specifically laid to put
them in repair again.

2 Mr. Seth Low remarks :—“ Greatly to multiply important elective
officers is not to increase popular control, but to lessen it. The expression
of the popular will at the ballot-box is like a great blow struck by an
engine of enormous force. It can deliver a blow competent to overthrow
any officer, however powerful. But, as in mechanics, great power has to
be subdivided in order to do fine work, so in giving expression to the
popular will the necessity of choosing amid a multitude of unimportant
officers involves inevitably a loss of power to the people.”—Address on
Municipal Government, delivered at Rochester, N. Y., February 1885.

A trenchant criticism of the prevailing systems of city government
may be found in an article in Scribner's Magazine for October 1887 by
Mr. G. Bradford. He argues forcibly in favour of having only one
elective official, the mayor, of giving every executive function, not to a
Board, but to one official only, appointed by the mayor, without confirma-
tion by any one else, and of taking all share in executive administration
out of the hands of committees of the city legislature.

VOL. IT U

290 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

the measures needed for extinguishing their own abused
power and illicit gains. It was from the gangs of city
politicians and their allies in the State legislatures that
reforms had to be sought, and the enactment of their
own abolition obtained. In -vain would the net be
spread in the sight of such birds.

The remedies proposed by the New York commis-
sion were the following :—

(a) A restrictidn of the power of the State legis-
lature to interfere by special legislation with municipal
governments or the conduct of municipal affairs.’

(b) The holding. of municipal elections at a different
period of the year from State and National elections.

(c) The vesting of the legislative powers of muni-
cipalities in two bodies:—A board of aldermen, elected
by the ordinary (manhood) suffrage, to be the com-
mon council of each city. A board of finance of from
six to fifteen members, elected by voters who had for
two years paid an annual tax on property assessed at not
less than $500 (£100), or a rent (for premises occupied)
of not less than $250 (£50).? This board of finance was
to have a practically exclusive control of the taxation
and expenditure of each city, and of the exercise of its
borrowing powers, and was in some matters to act only
by a two-thirds majority.

(ad) Limitations on the borrowing powers of the
municipality, the concurrence of the mayor and two-
thirds of the State legislature, as well as of two-thirds of

1 The constitutions of eleven States now prescribe that cities shall be
incorporated by general laws. This prohibition of special legislation has
generally worked well, though it is sometimes evaded. See pp. 156 and
177 (Vol. IL), ante.

2 This was to apply to cities with a population exceeding 100,000.
In smaller cities the rent was to be $100 at least, and no mmimum for
the assessed value of the taxed property was to be fixed.

CHAP. LI THE WORKING OF CITY GOVERNMENTS 291

the board of finance being required for any loan except
in anticipation of current revenue.

(ec) An extension of the general control and appoint-
ing power of the mayor, the mayor being himself subject
to removal for cause by the governor of the State.

To introduce all of these reforms it became necessary
to amend the constitution of the State of New York; and
the commission drafted a series of amendments accord-
ingly. These went before the State legislature. But the
birds saw the net, and naturally omitted to submit the
amendments to the people. The report, in fact, fell to the
ground. But in the recent legislative charters of several
cities, and notably of Brooklyn (as to which see next
chapter), some of the commissioners’ suggestions have
been adopted, and with excellent results. The most
novel of them, however, and the one which excited
most hostile criticism, that of creating a council elected
by voters having a tax-paying (or rent-paying) qualifica-
tion, has never been tried in any great city. It is
deemed undemocratic ; pracueal men say there is no use
submitting it to a popular vote.’ Nevertheless, there are
still some who advocate it, appealing to the example of
Australia, where it is said to have worked well.

1 Though, as the commission pointed out (Report, p. 33), the principle
that no one should vote upon any proposition to raise a tax or appropriate
its proceeds unless himself liable to be assessed for such tax, was one
generally applied in the village charters of the State of New York, and
even in the charters of some of the smaller cities. The report repels
the charge that this proposal is inconsistent with the general recognition
of the value of universal suffrage by saying, “No surer method could be
devised to bring the principle of universal suffrage into discredit and
prepare the way for its overthrow than to pervert it to a use for which it
was never intended, and subject it to a service which it is incapable of
performing. . . . To expect frugality and economy in financial concerns
from its operation in great cities, where perhaps half of the inhabitants
feel no interest in these objects, is to subject the principle to a strain

Which it cannot bear. All the friends of the system should unite in
rescuing it from such perils.”—Page 40.

292 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

Among the other reforms in city government which
I find canvassed in America are the following :-—

(a) Civil service reform, ze. the establishment of
examinations as a test for admission to posts under
the city, and the bestowal of these posts for a fixed
term of years, or generally during good behaviour, in-
stead of leaving the civil servant at the mercy of a
partisan chief, who may displace him to make room for
a party adherent or personal friend.

(b) The lengthening of the terms of service of the
mayor and the heads of departments, so as to give them
a more assured position and diminish the frequency
of elections.—This has been done to some extent in
recent charters—witness St. Louis (see above, p. 276)
and Philadelphia.

(c) The vesting of almost autocratic executive power
in the mayor and restriction of the city legislature to
purely legislative work and the voting of supplies.—
This also finds place in recent charters, notably in
that of Brooklyn, and has worked, on the whole, well.
It is, of course, a remedy of the ‘‘cure or kill” order.
If the people are thoroughly roused to choose an able
and honest man, the more power he has the better; it
is safer in his hands than in those of city councils. If
the voters are apathetic and let a bad man snp in, all
may be lost till the next election. I do not say “all is
lost,” for there have been remarkable instances of men
who have been sobered and elevated by power and re-
sponsibility. The Greek proverb “ office will show the
man” was generally taken in an unfavourable sense.
The proverb of the steadier headed Germans, “ office
gives understanding ” (Amt gibt Verstand), represents a
more hopeful view of human nature, and one not seldom
justified in American experience.

CHAP, LI THE WORKING OF CITY GOVERNMENTS — 293

(d) The election of a city legislature, or one branch of
it, or of a school committee, on a general ticket instead of
by wards.—When aldermen or councilmen are chosen by
the voters of a small local area, it is assumed, in the
United States, that they must be residents within it;
thus the field of choice among good citizens generally is
limited. It follows also that their first duty is deemed
to be to get the most they can for their own ward;
they care little for the general interests of the city, and
carry on a game of barter in contracts and public im-
provements with the representatives of other wards.
Hence the general ticket system is preferable.

(e) The limitation of taxing powers and borrowing
powers by reference to the assessed value of the taxable
property within the city.—Restrictions of this nature
have been largely applied to cities as. well as to
counties and other local authorities. The results have
been usually good, yet not uniformly so, for evasions
may be practised. The New York commission say:
“The apparent prohibition, both as to taxation and the
percentage of debt, could be readily evaded by raising
the assessment. Such restrictions do not attempt to
prevent the wastefulness or embezzlement of the public
funds otherwise than by limiting the amount of the
funds subject to depredation. The effect of such
measures would simply be to leave the public necessities
without adequate provision.”1 And Messrs. Allinson
and Penrose observe—

“ By the Constitution of 1874 it is provided that the debt of a

county, city, borough, township, or school district shall never exceed
7 per cent on the assessed value of the taxable property therein.

1 Another disadvantage is that such restriction may sometimes compel
a public improvement to be executed piecemeal which could be executed
more cheaply if done all at once. See page 143 (Vol. IL), ante.

204 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II |

This provision was intended to prevent the encumbering of the
property of any citizen for public purposes to a greater extent than
7 per cent. In its workings it has been an absolute failure. In
every city of the State, except Philadelphia, the city is part of the
county government. The county has power to borrow to the extent
of 7 per cent: so has the city: so has the general school district :
so has the ward school district—miaking 28 per cent in all, which
can be lawfully imposed, and has been authorized by the Act of
1874. But there is still another cause of failure to which Phila-
delphia is more peculiarly liable. In order to evade the provision
of the Constitution limiting the power to contract debts to 7 per
cent, the assessed value of property in nearly every city of the State
was largely increased—in some instances, incredible as it may seem,
to the extent of 1000 per cent. It is therefore clear that no
sufficient protection against an undue increase of municipal debt
can be found in constitutional and legislative provisions of this
kind.” —Philadelphia, a History of Municipal Development (1887),
p-. 276.

Nevertheless, such restrictions are now often found
embodied in State constitutions, and have, so far as I
could ascertain, generally diminished the evil they are
aimed at.’

The results of these various experiments, and of others
which I have not space to enumerate, are now being
watched. with eager curiosity by the municipal reformers
of the United States. The question of city government
is that which ‘chiefly occupies practical publicists, and
which newspapers and magazines incessantly discuss,
because it is admittedly the weak point of the country.
That adaptability of the institutions to the people and
their conditions, which judicious strangers admire in the
United States, and that consequent satisfaction of the
people with their institutions, which contrasts so agreeably
with the discontent of European nations, is wholly absent
as regards municipal administration. Wherever there is

1 See note in Appendix at the end of this volume.

-cHAaP, LI «=THE WORKING OF CITY GQVERNMENTS — 295

a large city there are loud complaints, and Americans
who deem themselves in other respects a model for the
Old World are in this respect anxious to study Old World
models, those particularly which the cities of Great
Britain present. The best proof of dissatisfaction is to
be found in the frequent changes of system and method.
What Dante said of his own city may be said of the cities
of America: they are like the sick man who cannot
find rest upon his bed, but seeks to ease his pain by
turning from side to side. Yet no one who studies the
municipal history of the last decades will doubt that
things are better than they were twenty years ago. The
newer frames of government are an improvement upon
the older. Rogues are less audacious. Good citizens are
more active. Party spirit is less and less permitted to
dominate and pervert municipal politics.

CHAPTER LII

AN AMERICAN VIEW OF MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT IN
THE UNITED STATES!

By the Hon. Setu Low, formerly Mayor of the City of Brooklyn

A city in the United States is quite a different thing
from a city in its technical sense, as the word is used
in England. In England a city. is usually taken to be
a place which is or has been the seat of a bishop.? The
head of a city government in England is a mayor, but
many boroughs which are not cities are also governed by a
mayor. In the United States a city is a place which has
received a charter as a city from the legislature of its State.
In America there is nothing whatever corresponding to the
English borough. Whenever in the United States one
enters a place that is presided over by a mayor, he may
understand, withdut further inquiry, that he is in a city.

Any European student of politics who wishes to
understand the problem of government in the United
States, whether of city government or any other form of
it, must first of all transfer himself, if he can, to a point
of view precisely the opposite of that which is natural to

1 This chapter is copyright, by Seth Low, 1888.

2 In Scotland, where there have been, since the Revolution, no bishops,

Edinburgh, Glasgow, and Aberdeen are described as cities. Westminster
is a city, but has never had a bishop.

CHAP, LIT MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT 297

him. This is scarcely, if at all, less true of the English
than of the continental student. In England as upon
the continent, from time immemorial, government has
descended from the top down. Until recently, society
in Europe has accepted the idea, almost without protest,
that there must be governing classes, and that the
great majority of men must be governed. In the United
States that idea does not obtain, and, what is of scarcely
less importance, it never has obtained. No distinction
is recognized between governing and governed classes,
and the problem of government is conceived to be this,
that the whole of society should learn and apply to itself
the art of government. Bearing this in mind, it becomes
apparent that the immense tide of immigration into the,
United States is a continually disturbing factor. The
immigrants come from many countries, a very large pro-
portion of them being of the classes which, in their old
homes from time out of mind, have been governed.
Arriving in America, they shortly become citizens in a
society which undertakes to govern itself. However
well-disposed they may be as a rule, they have not had
experience in self-government, nor do they always share
the ideas which have expressed themselves in the Con-
stitution of the United States. This foreign element
settles largely in the cities of the country. It is esti-
mated that the population of New York City contains
eighty per cent of people who either are foreign-born or
who are the children of foreign-born parents. Con-
sequently, in a city like New York, the problem of learn-
ing the art of government is handed over to a population
that begins in point of experience very low down. In
many of the cities of the United States, indeed in almost
all of them, the population not only is thus largely un-
trained in the art of self-government, but it is not even

298 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

homogeneous. So that an American city is confronted
not only with the necessity of instructing large and
rapidly-growing bodies of people in the art of govern-
ment, but it is compelled at the same time to assimilate
strangely different component parts into an American
community. It will be apparent to the student that
either one of these functions by itself would be diffi-
cult enough. When both are found side by side the
problem is increasingly difficult as to each. Together
they represent a problem such as confronts no city in
the United Kingdom, or in Europe.

The American city has had problems to deal with also
of a material character, quite different from those which
have confronted the cities of the Old World. With the ex-
ception of Boston, Philadelphia, Baltimore, New Orleans,
and New York, there is no American city of great con-
sequence whose roots go back into the distant past even
of America. American cities as a rule have grown with
a rapidity to which the Old World presents few parallels.
London, in the extent of its growth, but not in the pro-
portions of it, Berlin since 1870, and Rome in the last
few years, are perhaps the only places in Europe which
have been compelled to deal with this element of rapid
growth in anything like a corresponding degree. All of
these cities, London, Berlin, and Rome, are the seats of
the national government, and receive from that source
more or less help and guidance in their development.
In all of them an immense nucleus of wealth existed
before this great and rapid growth began. The problem
in America has been to make a great city in a few years
out of nothing. There has been no nucleus of wealth
upon which to found the structure which every succeed-
ing year has enlarged. Recourse has been had of neces-
sity, under these conditions, to the freest use of the

CHAP. LII MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT 299

public credit. The city of Brooklyn and the city of
Chicago, each with a population now of three-quarters of
a million of people, are but little more than fifty years
old. In that period everything now there has been
created out of the fields. The houses in which the
people live, the water-works, the paved streets, the
sewers, everything which makes up the permanent plant
of a city, all have been produced while the city has
been growing from year to year at a fabulous rate. Be-
sides these things are to be reckoned the public schools,
the public parks, and in the case of Brooklyn, the great
bridge connecting it with New York, two-thirds of the
cost of which is borne by Brooklyn. Looked at in this
light the marvel would seem to be, not so much that the
American cities are justly criticizable for many defects, but
rather that results so great have been achieved in so short
atime. The necessity of doing so much so quickly, has
worked to the disadvantage of the American city in two
ways. First, it has compelled very lavish expenditure
under great pressure for quick results. This is precisely
the condition under which the best trained business men
make their greatest mistakes, and are in danger of run-
ning into extravagance and wastefulness. No candid
American will deny that American cities have suffered
largely in this way, not alone from extravagance and
wastefulness, but also from dishonesty ; but in estimat-
ing the extent of the reproach, it is proper to take into
consideration these general conditions under which the
cities have been compelled to work. The second disad-
vantage which American cities have laboured under from
this state of things has been their inability to provide
adequately for their current needs, while discounting the
future so freely in order to provide their permanent
plant. When the great American cities have paid

300 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

for the permanent plant which they have been accumu-
lating during the last half century, so that the duty
which lies before them is chiefly that of caring ade-
quately for the current life of their population, a vast
improvement in all these particulars may reason-
ably be expected. In other words, time is a necessary
element in making a great city, as it is in every other
great and enduring work. American cities are judged
by their size rather than by the time which has entered
into their growth. It cannot be denied that larger results
could have been produced with the money expended if
it always had been used with complete honesty and
good judgment. But to make an intelligent criticism
upon the American city, in its failures upon the material
side, these elements of difficulty must be taken into
consideration.

Another particular in which the American city may
be thought to have come short of what might have
been hoped for, may be described in general terms as
a lack of foresight. It would have been compara-
tively easy to have preserved in all of them small open
parks, and generally to have made them more beauti-
ful, if there had been a greater appreciation of the need
for these things and of the growth the cities were to
attain to. The western cities probably have erred in this
regard less than those upon the Atlantic coast. But
while it is greatly to be regretted that this large foresight
has not been displayed, it is after all only repeating in
America what has taken place in Europe. The improve-
ment of cities seems everywhere to be made by tearing
down and replacing at great cost, rather than by a far-
sighted provision for the demands and opportunities of
the future. These unfortunate results in America have
flowed largely from two causes: first, from inability on

CHAP, LII MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT 301

the part of the cities to appreciate in advance the
phenomenal growth that is coming upon them; and
second, from the frequent tendency of population to grow
in precisely the direction where it was not expected to.
A singular illustration of this last factor is to be found
in the city of Washington. The Capitol was made to face
towards the east, under the impression that population
would settle in that direction ; as matter of fact the city
has grown towards the west, so that the Capitol stands
with its back to the city and faces a district that is
scarcely built upon at all.

Probably no detail strikes the eye of the foreigner
more unfavourably in connection with the average
American city than the poor paving of the streets and
their lack of cleanliness. The comparison with cities
of Europe in these respects is immensely to the dis-
advantage of the American city. But, in this con-
nection, it is not unfair to call attention to the fact
that the era of good paving and clean streets in Europe
is scarcely more than thirty years old. Poor as is the
condition of the streets in most American cities now, it
would be risking very little to say that it would average
much higher than ten years ago. There are several con-
tributing causes which are reflected in this situation that
represent difficulties from which most European cities
are free. In the first place, frost strikes much deeper
in America, and is more trying to the pavements in
every way. In the next place, the streets are more
often disturbed in connection with gas pipes, steam
pipes, and telegraph service, than in European cities.
But, apart from these incidental difficulties, the funda-
mental trouble in connection with the streets of Ameri-
can cities is the lack of sufficient appropriations to put
them in first-class condition and to keep them so, both

302 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

as to paving and as tocleaning. The reason for this has
been pointed out.

All the troubles, however, which have marked the
development of cities in the United States are not due
to these causes. Cities in the United States, as forms
of government, are of comparatively recent origin. The
city of Boston, for example, in the State of Massa-
chusetts, although the settlement was founded more
than two hundred and fifty years ago, received its
charter as a city so recently as 1822. The city of
Brooklyn received its charter from the State of New
York in 1835. In other words, the transition from
village and town government into government by
cities, has simply followed the transition of small places
into large communities. This suggests another dis-
tinction between the cities of the United States and
those of Great Britain. The great cities of England and
of Europe, with few exceptions, have their roots in the
distant past. Many of their privileges and chartered
rights were wrested from the Crown in feudal times.
Some of these privileges have been retained, and con-
tribute to the income, the pride, and the influence of the
municipality. The charter of an American city repre-
sents no element of prestige or inspiration. It is only the
legal instrument which gives the community authority
to act as a corporation, and which defines the duties of
its officers. The motive for passing from town govern-
ment to city government in general has been the same
everywhere—to~acquire a certain readiness of action,
and to make more available the credit of the community
in order to provide adequately for its own growth. The
town meeting, in which every citizen takes part, serves
its purpose admirably in communities up to a certain
size, or for the conducting of public work on not too large

CHAP. LII MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT 303

$$
a scale. But the necessity for efficiency in providing
for the needs of growth has compelled rapidly-growing
communities, in all the States, to seek the powers of
a corporation as administered through a city govern-
ment. Growing thus out of the town, it happened very
naturally that the first conception of the city on the
part of Americans was that which had applied to the
town and the village as local subdivisions of the com-
monwealth. Charters were framed as though cities were
little states. Americans are only now learning, after
many years of bitter experience, that they are not so
much little states as large corporations. Many of the
mistakes which have marked the progress of American
cities up to this point have sprung from that defective
conception. The aim deliberately was, to make a city
government where no officer by himself should have
power enough to do much harm. The natural result
of this was to create a situation where no officer had
power to do much good. Meanwhile bad men united
for corrupt purposes, and the whole organization of
the city government aided such in throwing responsi-
bility from one to another. Many recent city charters
in the United States proceed upon the more accurate
theory that cities, in their organic capacity, are chiefly
large corporations. The better results flowing from
this theory are easily made clear. Americans are suffi-
ciently adept in the administration of large business
enterprises to understand that, in any such undertaking,
some one man must be given the power of direction and
the choice of his chief assistants; they understand that
power and responsibility must go together from the top
to the bottom of every successful business organization.
Consequently, when it began to be realized that a city
was a business corporation rather than an integral part

304 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

of the State, the unwillingness to organize the city upon
the line of concentrated power in connection with con-
centrated responsibility began to disappear. The charter
of the city of Brooklyn is probably as advanced a type
as can be found of the results of this mode of thinking.
In Brooklyn the executive side of the city government
is represented by the mayor and the various heads of
departments. The legislative side consists of a com-
mon council of nineteen members, twelve of whom are
elected from three districts each having four aldermen,
the remaining seven being elected as aldermen at large
by the whole city. The people elect three city officers
besides the board of aldermen ; the mayor, who is the
real, as well as the nominal, head of the city; the comp-
troller, who is practically the book-keeper of the city ;
‘and the auditor, whose audit is necessary for the pay-
ment of every bill against the city whether large or
small, The mayor appoints absolutely, without con-
firmation by the common council, all the executive
heads of departments. He appoints, for example, the
police commissioner, the fire commissioner, the health
commissioner, the commissioner of city works, the cor-
poration counsel or counsellor at law, the city treasurer,
the tax collector, and in general all the officials who are
charged with executive duties. These officials in turn
appoint their own subordinates, so that the principle of
defined responsibility permeates the city government
from top to bottom. The mayor also appoints the board
of assessors, the “board of education, and the board of
elections. The executive officers appointed by the
mayor are appointed for a term of two years, that is
to say, for a term similar to his own. The mayor is
elected at the general election in November; he takes
office on the first of January following, and for one

CHAP, LII MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT 305

month the great departments of the city are carried on
for him by the appointees of his predecessor. On the
first of February it becomes his duty to appoint his own
heads of departments, and inasmuch as they serve for
the same term as himself, each incoming mayor thus
has the opportunity to make an administration in all its
parts in sympathy with himself. Each one of these
great executive departments is under the charge of
a single head, the charter of the city conforming
absolutely, with one exception which is felt to be an
anomaly, to the theory that where executive work is to
be done it should be committed to the charge of one
man, Where boards of officials exist in Brooklyn, it is
because the work committed to them is discretion-
ary more than it is executive in character. These
boards, also, are appointed by the mayor without
confirmation by the board of aldermen, but they are
appointed for terms not coterminous with his own; so
that, in most cases, no mayor would appoint the
whole of any such board unless he were to be twice
elected by the people. In other words, with quite
unimportant exceptions, the charter of Brooklyn, a city
with 750,000 inhabitants, makes the mayor entirely
responsible for the conduct of the city government on
its executive side, and, in holding him to this responsi-
bility, equips him fearlessly with. the necessary power
to discharge his trust. This charter went into effect
on the first of January 1882. It has been found to
have precisely the merits and the defects which one
might expect of such an instrument. A strong execu-
tive can accomplish satisfactory results; a weak one
can disappoint every hope. The community, how-
ever, is so well satisfied that the charter is a vast im-
provement on any system which it has tried before,
VOL. If x

306 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

that no voice is raised against it. It has had one
notable and especially satisfactory effect. It can be made
clear to the simplest citizen that the entire character of
the city government for two years depends upon the man
chosen for the office of mayor. As a consequence more
people have voted in Brooklyn on the subject of the
mayoralty than have voted there as to who should be
State Governor or who should be President. This is a
great and a direct gain for good city government, because
it creates and keeps alert a strong public sentiment, and
tends to increate the interest of all citizens in the affairs
of their city. In the absence of a historic past which
ministers to civic pride, and in the presence of many
thousands of new-comers at every election, this effect is
especially valuable. It may also be said that under
present conditions the voting is more intelligent than
formerly. The issue is so important, yet so simple, that
it can be made clear even to people who have lived but
a short time in the city. The same influences tend to
secure for the city the services, as mayor, of a higher
grade of men, because under such a charter the mayor
is given power and opportunity to accomplish some-
thing. It appeals to the best that is in a man as
strongly as it exposes him to the fire of criticism if
he does not do well.

In undertaking to administer this charter, as the
first mayor to whom such powers had been committed,
the writer adopted two principles which he believed to
be essential to success. In the first place, he deter-
mined to hold each head of department responsible for
results within his department; and in the second place,
he determined to hold himself entirely aloof from the
use of patronage, except in so far as the charter of the
city, in express terms, made it his duty to make appoint-

CHAP. LII MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT 307
— OO TTS eh] rn" Orr"
ments. The effect of this attitude towards his appointees
was to leave them entirely free in the choice of their
subordinates. Being free, they could justly be held
responsible, to the fullest extent, for results. Further
than that, being free from pressure from the mayor, they
were much stronger to resist pressure as to patronage
from outsiders, than otherwise they would have been.
Another effect of the mayor's attitude with reference to
patronage, was to secure for himself the confidence of
the community, without regard to party, to an unusual
extent. Any alarm there might have been, as to the
use of the great and unusual powers committed to the
mayor by the charter, was quieted at once.

The duties of the mayor under the charter may be
considered under three heads. First, in his relation to
the executive work of the city; second, in his relation
to the common council or local legislature ; third, in his
relation to the legislature of the State.

The successful use of the power of appointment, in
the selection of efficient heads of departments, of course
underlies the success of a city administration on its
executive side. The heads of departments having been
appointed, it was the custom of the writer to hold a
meeting in the mayor’s office with all his executive
appointees, once every week, excepting during the
summer when the common council was not in session.
This meeting served several purposes. The minutes of
the common council at their previous meeting were laid
before this informal gathering, and the mayor received
the advice of the officer whose department would be
affected by any proposed resolution or ordinance, as to
its probable effect. When a question was brought up
of general interest to the city the whole company dis-
cussed it, giving to the mayor the advantage of their

308 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART If

experience and judgment. These weekly councils were
of great value to the mayor, in determining his attitude
on the various questions raised during his term by the
common council of the city, every resolution of which
body had by law to be passed upon by the mayor, and
receive either his approval or his veto. These gather-
ings of the executive officers of the city were useful in
other ways than this. They made all heads of depart-
ments personally acquainted with each other, and
converted the machinery of the city government, from
separate and independent departments, into one organiza-
tion working in complete harmony and with singleness
of aim. The mayor’s oversight of the executive work of
the city, in its current aspect, was further maintained
by quarterly reports submitted from each of the large
departments. The mayor's office, in an American city,
is in receipt of daily complaints touching this or that
matter affecting one or more of the citizens. The
receipt of all complaints was immediately acknowledged
to the persons who made them, if they came by mail,
and the complaints were forwarded at once to the proper
department for action or explanation. ‘The reply was
made to the mayor’s office, and was communicated
without delay to the maker of the complaint. If
remedy was available, this method secured its prompt
application, If the matter were beyond reach of
remedy, the citizen had at least the satisfaction of
knowing why. The multiplicity and character of these
complaints gave ‘the mayor a daily insight into the
efficiency of the departments. By these methods, the
mayor was able to keep himself almost as well informed
as to the work in each department of the city as the
head of a great business house is informed as to the
departments into which his business is divided. Nor

CHAP. LII MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT 309

need the comparison stop there. The mayor was able
to bring the power and influence of his office to bear, to
remedy abuses or to suggest improvements in methods,
with the same directness and efficiency.

The mayor's duties in relation to the common council
of the city, are chiefly in connection with the obliga-
tion, laid upon him by the charter, to approve or
disapprove every resolution passed by that body. The
mayor’s veto is fatal, unless overridden by a two-thirds
vote of all the members elected to the council. For
three years out of four during which the writer served
as mayor, the common council was politically antagon-
istic to him, half of the time in the proportion of fourteen
to five. Notwithstanding this, only two vetoes were over-
ridden in the whole of his four years of service. Two
influences probably contributed to this result. First,
the care with which, under the advice of his appointees,
the mayor took up his positions: and second, the
mayor’s refusal to implicate himself, in any way, with
the use of patronage. Partisan opposition largely dis-
appeared, before a spirit manifestly free from self-seek-
ing and from partisanship. The same influences led to
unusual co-operation, on the part of the common council,
in forwarding the plans of the mayor in the direction
of positive action. The harmony between the executive
and the legislature of the city was scarcely less com-
plete, during this interval, to the great advantage of the
city, than was the harmony between the different
executive departments themselves.

The relation of the mayor to the legislature of the
State proved to be important to an extent not easy to
be imagined. The charter of a city, coming as it does
from the legislature, is entirely within the control of
the legislature. Just as there is no legal bar to prevent

310 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

the legislature from recalling the charter altogether, so
there is no feature of the charter so minute that the
legislature may not assume to change it. In the State
of New York there is no general law touching the
government of cities, and the habit of interference in
the details of city action has become to the legislature
almost a second nature. In every year of his term, the
writer was compelled to oppose at Albany, the seat of
the State legislature, legislation seeking to make an
increase in the pay of policemen and firemen, without
any reference to the financial ability of the city, or the
other demands upon the city for the expenditure of
money. Efforts were made, also, at one time, to legis-
late out of office some of the officials who had been ap-
pointed in conformity to the charter. New and useless
offices were sought to be created, and the mayor found
that not the least important of his duties, as mayor, was
to protect the city from unwise and adverse legislation
on the part of the State. It is a curious circumstance
that most of these propositions had their origin with
members of the legislature elected to represent different
districts of the city itself. The same influences which
made the administration strong with the common coun-
cil, at home, made it also strong with the legislature at
Albany, so that, although for one or two years the power
to make changes rested with a majority at Albany politi-
cally antagonistic, no law objected to by the mayor,
during this interval, was placed upon the statute-book.
The city itself is compelled at times to seek legislation
for the enlargement of its powers; that is to say, the
powers committed to a city are strictly limited to those
defined by the charter or granted by special acts of the
legislature. Consequently, when an unforeseen situation
is to be dealt with, calling for unusual methods or

CHAP, LII MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT 311

powers, it is necessary to secure authority to this end
from the legislature of the State. The writer found
the same general attitude, which has been referred to
so often, effectual in this regard also, so that almost
every bill which he desired in the interest of the city,
was enacted into law, and this alike by legislatures
politically in sympathy with the city administration
and by legislatures politically antagonistic to it. It is
not too much to say, however, that the greatest anxieties
of his term sprang from the uncertainties and difficulties
of this annual contest, on the one hand to advance the
interest of the city, and on the other to save it from
harm in its relations to the law-making power of the
State.

Imitating this charter of Brooklyn, the city of Phila-
delphia, still more recently, has obtained a new charter
involving a great departure in the same direction from
old methods. Boston and New York both have moved
partly along the same line, each with admitted advantage
to the city, although neither has gone so far as Brooklyn
or Philadelphia. Several smaller places have obtained
charters of the same kind. It is not to be supposed
that this new form of city charter is the result altogether
of abstract thinking. It has grown out of bitter experi-
ences. When the inhabitants of a city found that they ©
did not receive, as matter of fact, the good government
which they desired, it did not at first occur to them that
the trouble was to a large extent fundamental in their form
of charter ; or, if it did, the first effort at remedy led to
worse mistakes than before. Starting with the theory
that the path to safety was through division of power,
they resorted to all manner of expedients which would
compass that end. They established, for instance, police
boards and fire boards, which at different times were

312 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART II

made to consist of three members, and at other times
of four, the latter bemg known in American parlance
as non-partisan.’ It was supposed that a single indi-
vidual might be tempted to use his department unfairly in
the interest of the party to which he belonged, but that
by associating him with others of different parties this
tendency would be overcome. It turned out, however,
that the moment) no one in particular was to blame,
partisanship took complete possession of the adminis-
tration of every department. When one reflects that
in the Government of the United States the im-
mense administrative departments, like the Treasury
and the Post-Office, have, from the beginning of the
Government, been committed to the care of a single man,
it seems strange that, in their cities, Americans should
have been so unwilling to proceed upon the same theory.
The reason probably is that the city, as above pointed
out, has been evolved from the town by the simple process
of enlargement. In the town the theory of division of
power has been acted upon with substantial uniformity,
and in small communities has worked well. The attempt
toact upon the same lines in the great and rapidly-growing
cities of the country has, in the judgment of many, been
as instrumental as any other one element in causing the
unsatisfactory results which have marked the progress of
many American cities. For the purposes of this chapter
it is not necessary to enlarge further upon this thought.
It is emphasized_thus far for the purpose of showing
that all the large class of difficulties which American
cities have been obliged to face by reason of faulty
charters are not irremediable. The actual process of
change from one system of charter to another has been

1 Non-partisan practically means that the two great parties are equally
Tepresented upon it,

CHAP. LIT MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT 313

marked incidentally by one unfortunate effect. The city
charter, coming as it does from the legislature, lies entirely
within the control of the legislature. The many appeals
to the legislature for charter amendment of one kind
and another have bred a habit in some of the States, if
not in all, of constant interference by the legislature with
the local details of city action. This interference, though
often prompted by a genuine desire to relieve a city
from pressing evils, has tended very greatly to lessen
the sense of responsibility on the part of local officials,
and upon the part of communities themselves. It
is one of the best effects of Brooklyn’s charter, that
it has helped to create in that city a very decided spirit
of home rule, which is ready to protest at any moment
against interference on the part of the State with local
matters.

It remains to be said that the one organic problem
in connection with the charters of cities, which appar-
ently remains as far from solution as ever in America,
is that which concerns the legislative branch of city
government. In some cities the legislative side is
represented by two bodies, or houses, known by differ-
ent names in different cities, and presenting the same
general characteristics as a State legislature with its
upper and lower house. The most conspicuous instances
of this kind are furnished by the city of Boston and the
city of Philadelphia. In all the cities of New York State,
the legislative branch consists of a single chamber in-
differently spoken of as the Board of Aldermen or the
Common Council. But whether these bodies have been
composed of one house or two, the moment a city has
become large they have ceased to give satisfactory
results. Originally these bodies were given very large
powers, in order to carry out to the utmost the idea of

314 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART IT

local self-government. As a rule they have so far
abused these powers that almost everywhere the scope
of their authority has been greatly restricted. In the
city of New York that tendency has been acted upon to
so gréat an extent as to deprive the common council of
every important function it ever possessed, except the
single power to grant public franchises. How greatly
they have abused this remaining power is unfortunately
matter of public record. The powers thus taken away
from the common council, are ordinarily lodged with
boards made up of the higher city officials. Even in
the city of New York it has seldom been the case that
the mayor of the city has not been a man of good repute
and of some parts. As a general proposition, it is
found in American cities that the larger the constitu-
ency to which a candidate must appeal, and the more
important the office, the more of a man the candidate
must be. What may be the outcome of this difficulty
as to the legislative body in cities, it is impossible to
say. Sometimes it seems almost as though the attempt
would be made to govern cities without any local
legislature. But, on the other hand, there are so many
matters in regard to which such a body ought to have
power, that thus far no one has ventured seriously to
take so extreme a view. It may fairly be said to be,
therefore, the great unsolved organic problem in con-
nection with municipal government in the United
States. That it is so, illustrates with vividness the
justice of the “American view that it is a dangerous
thing, in wholly democratic communities, to make the
legislative body supreme over the executive.

Thus far in this chapter, the shortcomings of the
American city have been admitted, and the effort has
been made to show the peculiar difficulties with which

CHAP. LII MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT 315

such a city has to deal. It ought to be said that,
despite all of these difficulties, the average American
city is not going from bad to worse. There is sub-
stantial reason for thinking that the general tendency,
even in the larger cities, is towards improvement. Life
and property are more secure in almost all of them than
they used to be. Certainly there has been no decrease
of security such as might reasonably have been ex-
pected to result from increased size. Less than a score
of years ago it was impossible to have a fair election
in New York or Brooklyn. To-day, and for the last
decade, under the present system of registry laws, every
election is held with substantial fairness. The health
of our cities does not deteriorate, but on the average
improves. So that in the large and fundamental aspect
of the question the progress, if slow, is steady in the direc-
tion of better things. It is not strange that a people
conducting an experiment in city government for which
there is absolutely no precedent, under conditions of
exceptional difficulty, should have to stumble towards
correct and successful methods through experiences
which may be both costly and distressing. There is no
other road towards improvement in the coming time.
But it is probable that in another decade Americans
will look back on some of the scandals of the present
epoch in city government, with as much surprise as
they now regard the effort to control fires by the
volunteer fire department, which was insisted upon, even
in the city of New York, until within twenty years. As
American cities grow in stability, and provide them-
selves with the necessary working plant, they approxi-
mate more and more in physical conditions to those
which prevail in most European cities. As they do
So, it is reasonable to expect that their pavements

316 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS PART It

will improve and the cleansing of their streets will be
more satisfactory. American cities, as a rule, have
a more abundant supply of water than European cities,
and they are much more enterprising in furnishing
themselves with what in Europe might be called the
luxuries of city life, but which, in America, are so
common as almost to be regarded as necessities.
Especially is this true of every convenience involving
the use of electricity. There are more telephone wires,
for example, in New York and Brooklyn, than in the
whole of the United Kingdom. The problem of placing
these wires underground therefore, to take in passing an
illustration, of another kind, of the difficulties of city
government in America, is vastly greater than in any
city abroad, because the multiplication of the wires is so
constant and at so rapid a rate that as fast as some are
placed beneath the surface, those which have been
strung while this process has been going on seem as
numerous as before the underground movement began.
It may justly be said, therefore, that the American
city, if open to serious blame, «is also deserving of
much praise. Every one understands that universal
suffrage has its drawbacks, and in cities these defects
become especially evident. It would be uncandid to
deny that many of the problems of American cities spring
from this factor, especially because the voting popula-
tion is continually swollen by foreign immigrants whom
time alone can educate into an intelligent harmony
with the American system. But because there is scum
upon the surface of a boiling liquid, it does not follow
that the material, nor the process to which it is sub-
jected, is itself bad. Universal suffrage, as it exists in
the United States, is not only a great element of safety
in the present day and generation, but is perhaps the

CHAP. LIl MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT 317
a i on ee

mightiest educational force to which the masses of men
ever have been exposed. In a country where wealth
has no hereditary sense of obligation to its neighbours,
it is hard to conceive what would be the condition of
society if universal suffrage did not compel every one
having property to consider, to some extent at least, the
well-being of the whole community.

It is probable that no other system of government
would have been able to cope any more successfully, on
the whole, with the actual conditions that American
cities have been compelled to face. It may be claimed
for American institutions even in cities, that they lend
themselves with wonderfully little friction to growth and
development and to the peaceful assimilation of new
and strange populations. Whatever defects have marked
the progress of such cities, no one acquainted with their
history will deny that since their problem assumed its
present aspect, progress has been made, and substantial
progress, from decade to decade. The problem will
never be anything but a most difficult one, but with all
its difficulties there is,every reason to be hopeful.

PART III
THE PARTY SYSTEM

CHAPTER LIII
POLITICAL PARTIES AND THEIR HISTORY

In the preceding chapters I have endeavoured to de-
scribe the legal framework of American government as
it exists both in the nation and in the States. Be-
ginning from the Federal and State Constitutions we
have seen what sort of a structure has been erected upon
them as a foundation, what methods of legislation
and administration have been developed, what results
these methods have produced. It is only occasionally
and incidentally that we have had to consider the in-
fluence upon political bodies and methods of those extra-
legal groupings of men which we call political parties.
But the spirit and force of party has in America been
as essential to the action of the machinery of govern-
ment as steam is to a locomotive engine; or, to vary
the simile, party association and organization are to
the organs of government almost what the motor
nerves are to the muscles, sihews, and bones of the
human body. They transmit the motive power, they
determine the directions in which the organs act. A
description of them is therefore a necessary complement
to an account of the Constitution and government ; for
it is into the hands of the parties that the working of
the government has fullen. Their ingenuity, stimulated
VOL. IL 4

322 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

by incessant rivalry, has turned many provisions of the
Constitution to unforeseen uses, and given to the legal
institutions of the country no small part of their present
colour.

To describe the party system is, however, much
harder than it has been to describe those legal institu-
tions. Hitherto we have been on comparatively firm
ground, for we have had definite data to rely upon, and
the facts set forth have been mostly patent facts which
can be established from books and documents. But now
we come to phenomena for a knowledge. of which one
must trust to a variety of flying anu floating sources, to
newspaper paragraphs, to the conversation of American
acquaintances, to impressions formed on the spot from
seeing incidents and hearing stories and anecdotes, the
authority for which, though it seemed sufficient at the
time, cannot always be remembered. Nor have I the
advantage of being able to cite any previous treatise on
the subject ; for though the books and articles dealing
with the public life of the United States may be counted
by hundreds, I know of no author who has set him-
self to describe impartially the actual daily working of
that part of the vast and intricate political machine
which lies outside the Constitution, nor, what are more
important still, the influences which sway the men by
whom this machine has been constructed and is daily
manipulated. The task, however, cannot be declined ;
for it is that very part of my undertaking which, even
though imperfectly performed, may be most serviceable
to the student of modern politics. A philosopher in Ger-
many, who had mastered all the treatises on the British
Constitution, perused every statute of recent years, and
even followed through the newspapers the debates in
Parliament, would know far less about the government

cHap. tt POLITICAL PARTIES AND THEIR HISTORY 323

so
and politics of England than he might learn by spend-
ing a month there conversing with practical politicians,
and watching the daily changes of sentiment during a
parliamentary crisis or a general election.

So, too, in the United States, the actual working of
party government is not only full of interest and in-
struction, but is so unlike what a student of the Federal
Constitution could have expected or foreseen, that it is
the thing of all others which any one writing about
America ought to try to portray. In the knowledge of
a stranger there must, of course, be serious gaps. I
am sensible of the gaps in my own. But since no
native American has yet essayed the task of describing
the party system of his country, it is better that a
stranger should address himself to it, than that the in-
quiring European should have no means of satisfying
his curiosity. And a native American writer, even
if he steered clear of partisanship, which I think he
might, for in no country does one find a larger number
of philosophically judicial observers of politics, would
suffer from his own familiarity with many of those very
things which a stranger finds perplexing. Describe
English politics to an intelligent foreigner and you will
find his questions directed to the points which you
have passed over, because obvious to yourself, while
they may probably suggest to you new aspects which it
has never occurred to you to consider. Thus European
and perhaps even American readers may find in the
sort of perspective which a stranger gets of transatlantic
phenomena some compensation for his necessarily inferior
knowledge of details.

In America the great moving forces are the parties.
The government counts for less than in Europe, the
parties count for more ; and the fewer have become their

324 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

principles and the fainter their interest in those principles,
the more perfect has become their organization. The less
of nature the more of art; the less spontaneity the more
mechanism. But before I attempt to describe this or-
ganization, something must be said of the doctrines which
the parties respectively profess, and the explanation of
the doctrines involves a few preliminary words upon
the history of party in America.

Although the early colonists carried with them across
the sea some of the habits of English political life, and
others may have been subsequently imitated from the old
country, the parties of the United States are pure home
growths, developed by the circumstances of the nation.
The English reader who attempts, as Englishmen are apt
to do, to identify the great American parties with his own
familiar Whigs and Tories, or even to discover a general
similarity between them, had better give up the attempt,
for it will lead him hopelessly astray. Here and there
we find points of analogy rather than of resemblance,
but the moment we try to follow out the analogy it
breaks down, so different are the issues on which English
and American polities have turned.

In the United States, the history of party begins
with the Constitutional Convention of 1787 at Phila-
delphia. In its debates and discussions on the drafting
of the Constitution there were revealed two opposite
tendencies, which soon afterwards appeared on a larger
scale in the State Conventions, to which the new instru-
ment was submitted for acceptance. These were the
centrifugal and centripetal tendencies—a tendency to
maintain both the freedom of the individual citizen and
the independence in legislation, in administration, in juris-
diction, indeed in everything except foreign policy and
national defence, of the several States; an opposite

cHar, tut POLITICAL PARTIES AND THEIR HISTORY 325

tendency to subordinate the States to the nation and
vest large powers in the central Federal authority.

The charge against the Constitution that it endan-
gered State rights evoked so much alarm that some
States were induced to ratify only by the promise that
certain amendments should be added, which were accord-
ingly accepted in the course of the next three years.
When the machinery had been set in motion by the
choice of George Washington as president, and with him
of a Senate and a House of Representatives, the tenden-
cies which had opposed or supported the adoption of the
Constitution reappeared not only in Congress but in the
President’s cabinet, where Alexander Hamilton, secretary
of the treasury, counselled a line of action which assumed
and required the exercise of large powers by the Federal
government, while Jefferson, the secretary of state, de-
sired to practically restrict its action to foreign affairs.
The advocates of a central national authority had begun
to receive the name of Federalists, and to act pretty con-
stantly together, when an event happened which, while it
tightened their union, finally consolidated their oppon-
ents also into a party. This was the creation of the
French Republic ‘and its declaration of war against
England. The Federalists, who were shocked by the
excesses of the Terror of 1793, counselled neutrality, and
were more than ever inclined to value the principle
of authority, and to allow the Federal power a wide
sphere of action. The party of Jefferson, who had
now retired from the administration, were pervaded by
sympathy with French ideas, were hostile to England
whose attitude continued to be discourteous, and sought
to restrict the interference of the central government
with the States, and to allow the fullest play to the
sentiment of State independence, of local independence,

326 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

of personal independence. This party took the name of
Republicans or Democratic Republicans, and they are
the predecessors of the present Democrats. Both parties
were, of course, attached to republican government—that
is to say, were alike hostile to a monarchy. But the
Jeffersonians had more faith in the masses and in leav-
ing things alone, together with less respect for authority,
so that in a sort of general way one may say that while
one party claimed to be the apostles of Liberty, the
other represented the principle of Order.

These tendencies found occasions for combating one
another, not only in foreign policy and in current legis-
lation, but also in the construction and application of
the Constitution. Like all documents, and especially
documents which have been formed by a series of com-
promises between opposite views, it was and is sus-
ceptible of various interpretations, which the acuteness
of both sets of partisans was busy in discovering and
expounding. While the piercing intellect of Hamilton
developed all those of its provisions which invested the
Federal Congress and President with far-reaching
powers, and sought to build up a system of institutions
which should give to these provisions their full effect,
Jefferson and his coadjutors appealed to the sentiment
of individualism, strong in the masses of the people,
and, without venturing to propose alterations in the
text of the Constitution, protested against all exten-
sions of its letter, and against all the assumptions of
Federal authority which such extensions could be made
to justify. Thus two parties grew up with tenets,
leaders, impulses, sympathies, and hatreds, hatreds which
soon became so bitter as not to spare the noble and
dignified figure of Washington himself, whom the angry
Republicans assailed with invectives the more unbe-

cHaP, Lat POLITICAL PARTIES AND THEIR HISTORY 327

coming because his official position forbade him to
reply.’

At first the Federalists had the best of it, for the
reaction against the weakness of the old Confederation
which the Union had superseded disposed sensible men to
tolerate a strong central power. The President, though
not a member of either party, was, by force of circum-
stances, as well as owing to the influence of Hamilton,
practically with the Federalists. But during the presi-
dency of John Adams, who succeeded Washington, they
committed grave errors. When the presidential election
of 1800 arrived, it was seen that the logical and oratorical
force of Hamilton’s appeals to the reason of the nation
told far less than the skill and energy with which
Jefferson played on their feelings and prejudices. The
Republicans triumphed in the choice of their chief, who
retained power for eight years (he was re-elected in 1804),
to be peaceably succeeded by his friend Madison for
another eight years (elected in 1808, re-elected in 1812),
and his disciple Monroe for eight years more (elected in
1816, re-elected in 1820). Their long-continued tenure
of office was due not so much to their own merits, for
neither Jefferson nor Madison conducted foreign affairs
with success, as to the collapse of their antagonists. The
Federalists never recovered from the blow given in the
election of 1800. They lost Hamilton by death in 1803,
No other leader of equal gifts appeared, and the party,
which had shown little judgment in the critical years
1810-14, finally disappears from sight after the second
peace with England in 1815.

One cannot note the disappearance of this brilliant

1 In mockery of the title he had won from public gratitude a few

years before, he was commonly called by them “The stepfather of his
country.”

328 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

figure, to Europeans the most interesting in the earlier
history of the Repubfic, without the remark that his
countrymen seem to have never, either in his lifetime
or afterwards, duly recognized his splendid gifts.
Washington is, indeed, a far more perfect character.
Washington stands alone and unapproachable, like a
snow-peak rising above its fellows into the clear air
of morning, with a dignity, constancy, and purity
which have made him the ideal type of civic virtue to
succeeding generations. No greater benefit could have
befallen the republic than to have such a type set from
the first before the eye and mind of the people. But
Hamilton, of a virtue not so flawless, touches us more
nearly, not only by the romance of his early life and
his tragic death, but by a certain ardour and impulsive-
ness, and even tenderness of soul, joined to a courage
equal to that of Washington himself. Equally apt for
war and for civil government, with a profundity and
amplitude of view rare in practical soldiers or states-
men, he stands in the front rank of a generation
never surpassed in history, a generation which includes
Burke and Fox and Pitt and Grattan, Stéin and Har-
denberg and William von Humboldt, Wellington and
Napoleon. Talleyrand, who seems to have felt for him
something as near affection as that cold heart could feel,
said, after knowing all the famous men of the time, that
only Fox and Napoleon were Hamilton’s equals, and that
he had divined Europe, having never seen it.

“This period (1788-1824) may be said to constitute the
first act in the drama of American party history. The
people, accustomed hitherto to care only for their several
commonwealths, learn to value and to work their new
national institutions. They become familiar with the
Constitution itself, as partners get to know, when disputes

cHap.tul POLITICAL PARTIES AND THEIR HISTORV 329

arise among them, the provisiops of the partnership
deed under which their business has to be carried on. It
is found that the existence of a central Federal power
does not annihilate the States, so the apprehensions on
that score are allayed. It is also discovered that there
are unforeseen directions, such for instance as banking
and currency, through which the Federal power can
strengthen its hold on the nation. Differences of
view and feeling give rise to parties, yet parties are
formed by no means solely on the basis of general
principles, but owe much to the influence of prominent
personalities, of transient issues, of local interests or
prejudices, The small farmers and the Southern men
generally follow the Republican standard borne aloft by
the great State of Virginia, while the strength of the
Federalists lies in New England and the middle States,
led sometimes by Massachusetts, sometimes by Pennsyl-
vania. The commercial interest was with the Federalists,
and the staid solid Puritanism of all classes, headed by the
clergy. Some one indeed has described the struggle from
1796 to 1808 as one between Jefferson, who was an
avowed free-thinker, and the New England ministers,
and no doubt the ministers of religion did in the Puritan
States exert a political influence approaching that of the
Presbyterian clergy in Scotland during the seventeenth
century. Jefferson’s importance lies in the fact that he
became the representative not merely of democracy, but
of local democracy, of the notion that government is
hardly wanted at all, that the people are sure to go
right if they are left alone, that he who resists authority
is prima facie justified in doing #o, because authority is
prima facie tyrannical, that a country where each local
body in its own local area looks after the objects of
common concern, raising and administering any such

330 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART HI

funds as are needed, and is interfered with as little as
possible by any external power, comes nearest to the
ideal of a truly free people. Some intervention on the
part of the State there must be, for the State makes the
law and appoints the judges of appeal; but the less one
has to do with the State, and a fortiori the less one has
to do with the less popular and more encroaching Federal
authority, so much the better. Jefferson impressed this
view on his countrymen with so much force and such
personal faith that he became a sort of patron saint of
freedom in the eyes of the next generation, who used to
name their children after him,* and to give. dinners and
deliver high-flown speeches on his birthday, a festival only
second in importance to the immortal Fourth of July.
He had borrowed from the Revolutionists of France even
their theatrical ostentation of simplicity. He rejected
the ceremonial with which Washington had sustained
the chief magistracy of the nation, declaring that to him
there was no majesty but that of the people.

As NewEngland was, by its system of local self- “govern-
ment through the town meeting,‘as well as by the ab-
sence of slavery, in some respects the most democratic
part of the United States, it may seem surprising that it
should have been a stronghold of the Federalists. The
reason is to be found partly in its Puritanism, which re-
volted at the deism or atheism of the French revolutionists,
partly in the interests of its shipowners and merchants,
who desired above all things a central government which,
while strong enouglf to make and carry out treaties with
England and so secure the development of American

1 It is related of a New England clergyman that when, being about
to baptize a child, he asked the father the child’s name, and the father
replied, “‘ Thomas Jefferson,” he answered in a loud voice, “ No such un-

christian name: John Adams, I baptize thee,” with the other sacramental
words of the rite.

cHap. Lut POLITICAL PARTIES AND THEIR HISTORY 331

commerce, should be able also to reform the currency
of the country and institute a national banking system.
Industrial as well as territorial interests were already
beginning to influence politics. That the mercantile and
manufacturing classes, with all the advantages given
them by their wealth, their intelligence, and their habits
of co-operation, should have been vanquished by the
agricultural masses, may be ascribed partly to the fact
that the democratic impulse of the War of Independence
was strong among the citizens who had grown to man-
hood between 1780 and 1800, partly to the tactical
errors of the Federalist leaders, but largely also to the
skill which Jefferson showed in organizing the hitherto
undisciplined battalions of Republican voters. Thus
early in American history was the secret revealed, which
Europe is only now discovering, that in free countries
with an extended suffrage, numbers without organization
are helpless and with it omnipotent.

I have ventured to dwell on this first period, because
being the first it shows the origin of tendencies which
were to govern the subsequent course of party strife.
But as I am not writing a history of the United States
I pass by the particular issues over which the two parties
wrangled, most of them long since extinct. One re-
mark is however needed as to the view which each took
of the Constitution. Although the Federalists were in
general the advocates of a loose and liberal construction
of the fundamental instrument, because such a construc-
tion opened a wider sphere to Federal power, they were
ready, whenever their local interests stood in the way, to
resist Congress and the executive, alleging that the latter
were overstepping their jurisdiction. In 1814 several of
the New England States, where the opposition to the
war then heing waged with England was strongest, sent

332 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART Ill

delegates to a convention at Hartford, which, while dis-
cussing the best means for putting an end to the war
and restricting the powers of Congress in commercial
legislation, was suspected of meditating a secession of
the trading States from the Union. On the other
hand, the Republicans did not hesitate to stretch to
their utmost, when they were themselves in power, all
the authority which the Constitution could be construed
to allow to the executive and the Federal government
generally. The boldest step which a president has ever
taken, the purchase from Napoleon of the vast territories
of France west of the Mississippi which went by the
name of Louisiana, was taken by Jefferson without the
authority of Congress. Congress subsequently gave its
sanction. But Jefferson and many of his friends held
that under the Constitution even Congress had not
the power to acquire new territories to be. formed
into States. They were therefore in the dilemma of
either violating the Constitution or losing a golden
opportunity of securing the Republic against the growth
on its western frontier of a powetful and possibly hostile
foreign state. Some of them tried to refute their former
arguments against a lax construction of the Constitution,
but many others avowed the dangerous doctrine that
if Louisiana could be brought in only by breaking down
the walls of the Constitution, broken they must be.’
The disappearance of the Federal party between 1815
and 1820 left the Republicans masters of the field. But
in the United States if old parties vanish nature pro-
1 The best authorities now hold that the Constitution did really
permit the Federal government to acquire the new territory, and Con-
gress to form States out of it—See the interesting pamphlet of Judge
Thomas M, Cooley, The Purchase of Louisiana, Indianapolis, 1886. Many

of the Federalist leaders warmly opposed the purchase, but the far-seeing
patriotism of Hamilton defended it.

cHap. uit POLITICAL PARTIES AND THEIR HISTORY 333

duces new ones. Sectional divisions soon arose among
the men who joined in electing Monroe in 1820, and
under the influence of the personal hostility of Henry
Clay and Andrew Jackson (chosen President in 1828),
two great parties were again formed (about 1830) which
some few years later absorbed the minor groups. One
of these two parties carried on, under the name of Demo-
crats, the dogmas and traditions of the Jeffersonian
Republicans. It was the defender of States’ Rights and
of a restrictive construction of the Constitution ; it leant
mainly on the South and the farming classes generally,
and it was therefore inclined to free trade. The other
section, which called itself at first the National Repub-
lican, ultimately the Whig party, represented many of the
views of the former Federalists, such as their advocacy
of a tariff for the protection of manufactures, and of the
expenditure of public money on internal improvements.
It was willing to increase the army and navy, and like
the Federalists found its chief, though by no means its
sole, support in the commercial and manufacturing parts
of the country, that is to say, in New England and the
middle States. Meantime a new question far more
exciting, far more menacing, had arisen. In 1819, when
Missouri applied to be admitted into the Union as a
State, a sharp contest broke out in Congress as to
whether slavery should be permitted within her limits,
nearly all the Northern members voting against slavery,
nearly all the Southern members for. The struggle might
have threatened the stability of the Union but for the
compromise adopted next year, which, while admitting
slavery in Missouri, forbade it for the future north of
lat. 36° 30’. The danger seemed to have passed, but in
its very suddenness there had been something terrible.
Jefferson, then over seventy, said that it startled him

334 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

“like a fire-bell in the night.” After 1840 things grew
more serious, for whereas up till that time new States
had been admitted substantially in pairs, a slave State
balancing a free State, it began to be clear that this
must shortly cease, since the remaining territory out of
which néw States would be formed lay north of the line
36° 30’. As every State held two seats in the Senate,
the then existing balance in that chamber between slave
States and free States would evidently soon be overset
by the admission of a larger number of the latter. The
apprehension of this event, with its probable result of
legislation unfriendly to slavery, stimulated the South to
the annexation of Texas, and made them increasingly
sensitive to the growth, slow as that growth was, of
Abolitionist opinions at the North. The question of the
extension of slavery west of the Missouri river had
become by 1850 the vital and absorbing question for
the people of the United States, and as in that year
California, having organized herself without slavery,
was knocking at the doors of Congress for admission
as a State, it had become an urgent question which
evoked the hottest passions, and the victors in which
would be victors all along the line. But neither of
the two great parties ventured to commit itself either
way. The Southern Democrats hesitated to break
with those Democrats of the Northern States who
sought to restrict slavery. The Whigs of the North,
fearing to alienate the South by any decided action
against the growing pretensions of the slaveholders,
temporized and suggested compromises which practically
served the cause of slavery. They did not perceive that
in trying to preserve their party they were losing hold
of the people, alienating from themselves the men who
cared for principle in politics, sinking into a mere organi-

cHap.iut POLITICAL PARTIES AND THEIR HISTORY 335

zation without a faith worth fighting for. That this was
so presently appeared. The Democratic party had by
1852 passed almost completely under the control of the
slave-holders, and was adopting the dogma that Congress
enjoyed under the Constitution no power to prohibit
slavery in the territories. This dogma obviously over-
threw as unconstitutional the Missouri compromise of
1820. The Whig leaders discredited themselves by
Henry Clay’s compromise scheme of 1850, which, while
admitting California as a free State, appeased the South
by the Fugitive Slave Law. They received a crushing
defeat at the presidential election of 1852; and what
remained of their party finally broke in pieces in
1854 over the bill for organizing Kansas as a terri-
tory in which the question of slaves or no slaves
should be left to the people, a bill which of course
repealed the Missouri compromise. Singularly enough,
the two great orators of the party, Henry Clay and
Daniel Webster, both died in 1852, wearied with strife
and disappointed in their ambition of reaching the presi-
dential chair. Together with Calhoun, who passed away
two years earlier, they are the ornaments of this gener-
ation, not indeed rising to the stature of Washington
or Hamilton, but more remarkable than any, save one,
among the statesmen who have followed them.’ With
them ends the second period in the annals of American
parties, which, extending from about 1820 to 1856,
includes the rise and fall of the Whig party. Most of
the controversies which filled it have become’ matter for
history only. But three large results, besides the general
democratization of politics, stand out. One is the detach-

1 Powerful pictures of the political struggles of this time may be

found in Mr, Schurz’s Life of Henry Clay, and Dr. von Holst’s Life of
John C, Calhoun.

336 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART HI

ment of the United States from the affairs of the Old

World. Another is the growth of a sense of national life,

especially in the Northern and Western States, along with »
the growth at the same time of a secessionist spirit among

the slave-holders. And the third is the development of

the complex machinery of party organization, with the

adoption of the principle on which that machinery so

largely rests, that public office is to be enjoyed only by

the adherents of the President for the time being.

The Whig party having vanished, the Democrats
seemed to be for the moment, as they had been once
b&fore, left in possession of the field, But this time a
new antagonist was quick to appear. The growing bold-
ness of the slave-owners had begun to alarm the Northern
people when they were startled by the decision of the
Supreme court, pronounced in the case of the slave Dred
Scott, which laid down the doctrine that Congress had
no power to forbid slavery anywhere, and that a slave-
holder might carry his slaves with him where he pleased,
seeing that they were mere objects of property, whose
possession the Constitution guaranteed.’ This hastened
the formation out of the wrecks of the Whigs of a
new party, which took in 1856 the name of Republican,
while at the same time it threw an apple of discord
among the Democrats. In 1860 the latter could not
agree upon a candidate for President. The Southern
wing pledged themselves to one man, the Northern wing
to another; a body of hesitating and semi-detached
politicians ‘put forward a third. Thus the Republicans
through the divisions of their opponents triumphed in
the election of Abraham Lincoln, presently followed by
the secession of eleven slave States.

1 This broad doctrine was not necessary for the decision of the case,
but delivered as an obiter dictum by the majority of the court.

cuap, Lui POLITICAL PARTIES AND THEIR HISTORY 337

Eee es
The Republican party, which had started by cenoun-
eing the Dred Scott decision and proclaiming the right
of Congress to restrict slavery, was of course throughout
the Civil War the defender of the Union and the
assertor of Federal authority, stretched, as was unavoidl-
able, to lengths previously unheard of. When the
war was over, there came the dithicult task of recon-
structing the now reconquered slave States, and of
securing the position in them of the lately liberated
negroes, The outrages perpetrated on the latter, and on
white settlers in some parts of the South, required further
exertions of Federal authority, and made the question
of the limit of that authority still a practical one, for
the old Democratic party, almost silenced during the
war, had now reappeared in full force as the advocate
of State rights, and the watchful critic of any undue
stretches of Federal authority. It was found necessary
to negative the Dred Scott decision and set at rest all
questions relating to slavery and to the political equality
of the races by the adoption of three important amend-
ments to the Constitution. The troubles of the South by
degrees settled down as the whites regained possession of
the State governments and the Northern troops were
withdrawn. In the presidential election of 1876 the
war question and negro question had become dead issues,
for it was plain that a large and increasing number of
the voters were no longer, despite the appeals of the
Republican leaders, seriously concerned about them.
This election marks the close of the third period,
which embraces the rise and overwhelming predomin-
ance of the Republican party. Formed to resist the
extension of slavery, led on to destroy it, compelled by
circumstances to expand the central authority in a way
unthought of before, that party had now worked out its
VOL. IT Z

338 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART IIT

programme and fulfilled its original mission. The old
aims were accomplished, but new ones had not yet been
substituted, for though new problems had appeared, the
party was not prepared with solutions. Similarly the
Democratic party had discharged its mission in defend-
ing the rights of the reconstructed States, and criticiz-
ing excesses of executive power; similarly it too had
refused to grapple either with the fresh questions which
had begun to arise since the war, or with those older
questions which had now reappeared above the subsiding
flood of war days. The old parties still stood as
organizations, and still claimed to be the exponents of
principles. Their respective principles had, however,
little direct application to the questions which confronted
and divided the nation. A new era was opening which
called either for the evolution of new parties, or for the
transformation of the old ones by the adoption of tenets
and the advocacy of views suited to the needs of the
time. But this fourth period, which began with 1876,
has not yet seen such a transformation, and we shall
therefore find, when we come to,exarnine the existing
state of parties, that there is an unreality and lack of
vital force in both Republicans and Democrats, powerful
as their organizations are.

The foregoing sketch, given only for the sake of ex-
plaining the present condition of parties, suggests some
observations on the foundations of party in America.

If we look over Europe we shall find that the grounds
on which parties have been built and contests waged
since the beginning" of free governments have been in sub-
stance but few. In the hostility of rich and poor, or of
capital and labour, in the fears of the Haves and the
desire of the Have-nots, we perceive the most frequent
ground, though it is often disguised as a dispute about

cnar. tur POLITICAL PARTIES AND THEIR HISTORY 339
oO  ----OOO cn nS
the extension of the suffrage or some other crvic right.
Questions relating to the tenure of land have played a
large part; so have questions of religion; so too have
animosities or jealousies of race; and of course the form
of government, whether it shall be a monarchy or a
republic, has sometimes been in dispute. None of these
grounds of quarrel substantially affected American parties
during the three periods we have been examining. No
one has ever advocated monarchy, or a restricted suf-
frage, or a unified instead of a Federal republic. Nor
down to 1876 was there ever any party which could
promise more to the poor than its opponents. In 1852
the Know-nothing party came forward as the organ of
native American opinion against recent immigrants, then
chiefly the Irish, for German immigration was com-
paratively small in those days. But as this party failed
to face the problem of slavery, and roused jealousy by
its secret organization, 1t soon passed away. The com-
plete equality of all sects, with the complete neutrality
of the government in religious matters, has fortunately
kept religious passion,outside the sphere of politics.
Have the American parties then been formed only
upon narrow and local bases, have they contended for
transient objects, and can no deeper historical meaning,
no longer historical continuity, be claimed for them ?
Two permanent oppositions may, I think, be dis-
cerned running through the history of the parties, some-
times openly recognized, sometimes concealed by the
urgency of a transitory question. One of these is the
opposition between a centralized or unified and a federal-
ized government. In every country there are centri-
fugal and centripetal forces at work, the one or the
other of which is for the moment the stronger. There
has seldom been a country in which something might

340 THE PARTY SVSTEM PART IIT

not have been gained, in the way of good administration
and defensive strength, by a greater concentration of
power in the hands of the central government, enabling
it to do things which local bodies, or a more restricted
central government, could not do equally cheaply or well,
Against this gain there is always to be set the danger
that such concentration may weaken the vitality of
local communities and authorities, and may enable the
central power to stunt their development. Sometimes
needs of the former kind are more urgent, or the senti-
ment of the people tends to magnify them ; sometimes
again the centrifugal forces obtain the upper hand.
English history shows several such alternations, But
in America the Federal form of government has made
this permanent and natural opposition specially con-
spicuous. The salient feature of the Constitution is the
effort it makes to establish an equipoise between the
force which would carry the planet States off into space
and the force which would draw them into the sun of the
National government. There have always therefore been
minds inclined to take sides upon this fundamental
question, and a party has always had something definite
and weighty to appeal to when it claims to represent
either the autonomy of communities on the one hand, or
the majesty and beneficent activity of the National
government oy the other. The former has been the
watchword of the Democratic party. The latter was
seldom distinctly avowed, but was generally in fact
represented by the Federalists of the first period,.the
Whigs of the second, the Republicans of the third.

The other opposition, though it goes deeper and is
more pervasive, has been less clearly marked in America,
and less consciously admitted by the Americans them-
selves. Itis the opposition between the tendency which

cHar.tut POLITICAL PARTIES AND THEIR HISTORY 341
eee eee
makes some men prize the freedom of the individual as
the first of social goods, and that which disposes others to
insist on checking and regulating his impulses. The
opposition of these two tendencies, the love of liberty
and the love of order, is permanent and necessary,
because it springs from differences in the intellect and
feelings of men which one finds in all countries and at
all epochs. There are always persons who are struck
by the weakness of mankind, by their folly, their
passion, their selfishness: and these persons, distrusting
the action of average mankind, will always wish to see
them guided by wise heads and restrained by strong
hands. Such guidance seems the best means of progress,
such restraint the only means of security. Those on
the other hand who think better of human nature, and
have more hope in their own tempers, hold the impulses
of the average man to be generally towards justice and
peace. They have faith in the power of reason to
conquer ignorance, and of generosity to overbear selfish-
ness. They are therefore disposed to leave the individual
alone, and to entrust the masses with power. Every
sensible man feels in himself the struggle between these
two tendencies, and is on his guard not to yield wholly
to either, because the one degenerates into tyranny, the
other into an anarchy out of which tyranny will event-
ually spring. The wisest statesman is he who best holds
the balance between them.

Each of these tendencies found among the fathers
of the American Republic a brilliant and characteristic
representative. Hamilton, who had a low opinion of
mankind, but a gift and a passion for large construc-
tive statesmanship, went so far in his advocacy of a
strong government as to, be suspected of wishing to
establish a monarchy after the British pattern. He has

342 THE PARTY SYSTEM .PART IIT

left on record his opinion that the free constitution of
-England, which he admired in spite of the faults he
clearly saw, could not be worked without its corrup-
tions.’ Jefferson carried further than any other person
set in an equally responsible place has ever done, his
faith that government is either needless or an evil,
and that with enough liberty, everything will go well.
An insurrection ‘every few years, he said, must be
looked for, and even desired, to keep government in
order. The Jeffersonian tendency has always re-
mained, like a leaven, in the Democratic party, though
in applying Jeffersonian doctrines the slave-holders
stopped when they came to a black skin. Among
the Federalists, and their successors the Whigs, and
the more recent Republicans, there has never been
wanting a full faith in the power of freedom. The
Republicans gave a remarkable proof of it when
they bestowed the suffrage on the negroes. Neither
they nor any American party has ever professed itself
the champion of authority and order ; that would be a
damaging profession. Neverthelegs it is rather towards
what I may perhaps venture to call the Fedeyalist-Whig-
Republican party than towards the Democrats that those
who have valued the principle of authority have been
generally drawn. It is for that party that the Puritan
spirit, not extinct in America, has felt the greater
affinity, for this spirit, having realized the sinfulness
of human nature, is inclined to train and control the
natural man by lawg and force.

The tendency that makes for a strorig government
being akin to that which makes for a central govern-

1 David Hume had made the same remark, natural at a time when
the power of Parliament was little checked by responsibility to the
people.

cHaP.Lur POLITICAL PARTIES AND THEIR HISTORY 343
a ee
ment, the Federalist-Whig-Republican party, which
has, through its long history, and under its vary-
ing forms and names, been the advocate of the
national principle, found itself for this reason also led,
more frequently than the Democrats, to exalt the rights
and powers of government. It might be thought that
the same cause would have made the Republican party
take sides in that profound opposition which we per-
ceive to-day in all civilized peoples, between the tend-
ency to enlarge the sphere of legislation and State
action, and the doctrine of laissez faire. So far, how-
ever, this has not happened. There is more in the
character and temper of the Republicans than of the
Democrats that leans towards State interference. But
neither party has thought out the question ; neither has.
shown any more definiteness of policy regarding it than
the Tories and the Liberals have done in England.

American students of history may think that I have
pressed the antithesis of liberty and authority, as well
as that of centrifugal and centripetal tendencies, some-
what too far in makiag one party a representative of
each through the first century of the Republic. Ido not
deny that at particular moments the party which was
usually disposed towards a strong government resisted
and decried authority, while the party which specially
professed itself the advocate of liberty sought to make
authority more stringent. Such deviations are however
compatible with the general tendencies I have described.
And no one who has gained even a slight knowledge of
the history of the United States will fall into the error
of supposing that order and authority mean there what
they have meant in the monarchies of Continental
Europe.

CHAPTER LIV
THE PARTIES OF TO-DAY

THERE are now two great and several minor parties in
the United States. The great parties are the Republi-
cans and the Democrats. What are their principles,
their distinctive tenets, their tendencies? Which of
them is for free trade, for civil service reform, for a
spirited foreign policy, for the regulation of telegraphs by
legislation, for a national bankrupt law, for changes in
the currency, for any other of the twenty issues which
one hears discussed in the country as seriously involv-
ing its welfare ?

This is what a European is always asking of in-
telligent Republicans and intelligent Democrats. He
is always asking because he never gets an answer.
The replies leave land in deeper perplexity. After some
months the truth begins to dawn upon him. Neither
party has anything “definite to say on these issues ;
neither party has any principles, any distinctive tenets.
Both have traditions. Both claim to have tendencies.
Both have certainly war cries, organizations, interests
enlisted in their support. But those interests are in
the main the interests of getting or keeping the patron-
age of the government. Tenets and policies, points
of political doctrine and points of political practice,

CHAP, LIV THE PARTIES OF TO-DAY 345

have all but vanished. They have not been thrown
away but have been stripped away by Time and the
progress of events, fulfilling some policies, blotting out
others. All has been lost, except office or the hope of it.

The phenomenon may be illustrated from the case of
England, where party government has existed longer
and in a more fully developed form than in any other part
of the Old World.’ The essence of the English parties
has lain in the existence of two sets of views and tend-
encies which divide the nation into two sections, the
party, let us say, though these general terms are not
very safe, of movement and the party of standing still,
the party of liberty and the party of order. ach sec-.
tion believes in its own views, and is influenced by its
peculiar tendencies, recollections, mental associations,
to deal in its own peculiar way with every new ques-
tion as it comes up. The particular dogmas may change:
doctrines once held by Whigs alone may now be held
by Tories also; doctrines which Whigs would have
rejected fifty years ago may now be part of the ortho-
dox programme of the Liberal party. But the tend-
encies have been permanent and have always so worked
upon the various fresh questions and problems which
have presented themselves during the last two centuries,
that each party has had not only a brilliant concrete
life in its famous leaders and zealous members, but also
an intellectual and moral life in its principles. These
principles have meant something to those who held
them, so that when a fresh question arose it was usually
possible to predict how each party, how even the average
members of each party, would regard and wish to deal

1 English parties are however not very ancient ; they date only from
the struggle of the Stuart kings with the Puritan and popular party in

the House of Commons, and did not take regular shape as Whigs and
Tories till the reign of Charles II.

346 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

with it. Thus even when the leaders have been least
worthy and their aims least pure, an English party
has felt itself ennobled and inspirited by the sense that
it had great objects to fight for, a history and traditions
which imposed on it the duty of battling for its dis-
tinctive ptinciples. It is because issues have never
been lacking which brought these respective principles
into operation, forcing the one party to maintain the
cause of order and existing institutions, the other that
of freedom and what was deemed progress, that the two
English parties have not degenerated into mere factions.
Their struggles for office have been redeemed from
selfishness by the feeling that office was a means of
giving practical effect to their doctrines.

But suppose that in Britain all the questions which
divide Tories from Liberals were to be suddenly settled
and done with. Britain would be in a difficulty. Her
free government has sa long been worked by the action
and reaction of the ministerialists and the opposition that
there would probably continue to be two parties. But
they would not be really, in the true old sense of the
term, Tories and Liberals; they would be merely Ins
and Outs. Their combats would be waged hardly
even in name for principles, but only for place. The
government of the country, with the honour, power,
and emoluments! attached to it, would still remain as a
prize to be contended for. The followers would still
rally to the leaders ; and friendship would still bind the
members together into organized bodies; while dislike
and suspicion would still rouse them against their
former adversaries. Thus not only the leaders, who
would have something tangible to gain, but even others
who had only their feelings to gratify, would continue
to form political clubs, register voters, deliver party

CHAP. LIV THE PARTIES OF TO-DAY 347
ee es ee
harangues, contest elections, just as they do now. The
difference would be that each faction would no longer
have broad principles—I will not say to invoke, for
such principles would probably continue to be invoked
as heretofore—but to insist on applying as distinctively
its principles to the actual needs of the state. Hence
quiet or fastidious men would not join in party struggles ;
while those who did join would no longer be stimulated by
the sense that they were contending for something ideal.
Loyalty to a leader whom it was sought to make prime
minister would be a poor substitute for loyalty to a faith.
If there were no conspicuous leader, attachment to the
party would degenerate either into mere hatred of
antagonists or into a struggle over places and salaries.
And almost the same phenomena would be seen if,
although the old issues had not been really determined,
both the parties should have so far abandoned their
former position that these issues did not divide them, but
each professed principles which were, at least in their
application, practicably undistinguishable.

This is what has happened with the American
parties. The chief practical issues which once divided
them have been settled. Some others have not been
settled, but as regards these, one or other party has so
departed from its former attitude that we cannot now
speak of any conflict of principles.

When life leaves an organic body it becomes useless,
fetid, pestiferous : it is fit to be cast out or buried from
sight. What life is to an organism, principles are to a
party. When they which are its soul have vanished, its
body ought to dissolve, and the elements that formed
it be regrouped in some new organism :

“The times have been
That when the brains were out the man would die.”

348 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

But a party does not always thus die. It may
hold together long after its moral life is extinct.
Guelfs and Ghibelines warred in Italy for nearly two
centuries after the Emperor had ceased to threaten the
Pope, or the Pope to befriend the cities of Lombardy.
Parties gd on contending because their members have
formed habits of joint action, and have contracted
hatreds and prejudices, and also because the leaders find
their advantage in using these habits and playing on these
prejudices. The American parties now continue to exist,
because they have existed. The mill has been constructed,
and its machinery goes on turning, even when there is no
grist to grind. But this is not wholly the fault of the
men ; for the system of government requires and implies
parties, just as that of England does. These systems are
made to be worked, and always have been worked, by a
majority ; a majority must be cohesive, gathered into a
united and organized body: such a body is a party.

If you ask an ordinary Northern Democrat to char-
acterize the two parties, he will tell you that the Repub-
licans are corrupt and incapable, and will cite instances
in which persons prominent in that party, or intimate
friends of its leaders, have been concetned in frauds on the
government or in disgraceful lobbying transactions in
Congress. When you press him for some distinctive prin-
ciples separating his own party from theirs, he will prob-
ably say that the Democrats are the protectors of States’
rights and of local independence, and the Republicans
hostile to both. If you go on to inquire what bearing
this doctrine of States’ rights has on any presently debated
issue he will admit that, for the moment, it has none,
but will insist that should any issue involving the rights
of the States arise, his party will be, as always, the
guardian of American freedom.

CHAP. LIV THE PARTIES OF TO-DAY 349

This is really all that can be predicated about the
Democratic party. Ifa question involving the rights of
a State against the Federal authority were to emerge,
its instinct would lead it to array itself on the side of the
State rather than of the central government, supposing
that it had no direct motive to do the opposite. As it
has at no point of time, from the outbreak of the war
down to 1888, possessed a majority in both Houses of
Congress as well as the President in power, its devotion
to this principle has not been tested, and might not resist
the temptation of any interest the other way. However,
this is matter of speculation, for at present the States fear
no infringement of their rights. So conversely of the
Republicans. Their traditions ought to dispose them to
support Federal power against the States, but their
action in a concrete case would probably depend on
whether their party was at the time in condition to use
that power for its own purposes. If they were in a
minority in Congress, they would be little inclined to
strengthen Congress against the States. The simplest
way of proving or illustrating this will be to run quickly
through the questions of present practical interest.

That which most keenly interests the people, though
of course not all the people, is the regulation or ex-
tinction of the liquor traffic. On this neither party
has committed or will commit itself. The traditional
dogmas of neither cover it, though the Democrats have
been rather more disposed to leave men to themselves
than the Republicans, and rather less amenable to the
influence of ethical sentiment. Practically for both
parties the point of consequence is what they can gain
or lose. Each has clearly something to lose. The
drinking part of the population is chiefly foreign. Now
the Irish are mainly Democrats, so the Democratic party

350 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

dare not offend them. The Germans are mainly Re-
publican, so the Republicans are equally bound over to
caution. It is true that though the parties, as parties,
are neutral, most Temperance men are, in the North and
West,! Republicans, most whisky-men and saloon-keepers
Democrats. The Republicans therefore more frequently
attempt to conciliate the anti-liquor party by flattering
phrases., They suffer by the starting of a Prohibitionist
candidate, since he draws more voting strength away
from them than he does from the Democrats.

Free Trade v. Protection is another burning question,
and has been so since the early days of the Union. The
old controversy as to the constitutional right of Congress
to impose a tariff for any object but that of raising
revenue, has been laid to rest, for whether the people in
1788 meant or did not mean to confer such a power, it
has been exerted for so many years, and on so superb
a scale, that no one now doubts its legality. Before
the war the Democrats were advocates of a tariff for

“revenue only, ae. of Free Trade. Most of them still
clung to the doctrine, and have favoured a reduction
of the present system of import duties. But the
party trumpet has often given an uncertain sound, for
Pennsylvania is Protectionist on account of its iron
industries; northern Georgia and southern Tennessee
are tending that way for the same reason; Louisiana is
inclined to protection on account of its sugar. As it
would never do to alienate the Democrats of three such

1 The Southern negroes are generally supposed to be Republicans,
but are generally opposed to restrictions on the sale of liquor. This was
strikingly shown in the recent popular vote on the subject in Texas. On
the other hand, the better class of Southern whites, who are of course
Democrats, are largely Temperance men, and some States, ¢g. Georgia,
have adopted a local option system, under which each county decides
whether it will be “wet” or “dry” (eg. permit or forbid the sale of in-
toxicants). At present most of the counties of Georgia are “dry counties.”

CHAP, LIV THE PARTIES OF TO-DAY 351
Or
districts, the party has generally sought to remain un-
pledged, or, at least, in winking with one eye to the Free
Traders of the North-west and South-east, it has been
tempted to wink with the other to the iron men of
Pittsburg and the sugar planters of New Orleans.’ And
though it has come to advocate more and more strongly
a reduction of the present high tariff, it does this not so
much on Free Trade principles, as on the ground that
the present surplus must be got rid of. The Republicans
are bolder, and pledge themselves, when they frame a
platform, to maintain the protective tariff. But some
of the keenest intellects in their ranks, including a few
leading journalists, are strong for free trade and there-
fore sorely tempted to break with their party.

Civil service reform, whereof more hereafter, has
for some time past received the lip service of both
parties, a lip service expressed by both with equal
warmth, and by the average professional politicians of
both with equal insincerity. Such reforms as have been
effected in the mode of filling up places, have been forced*
on the parties by public opinion, rather than carried
through by either. None of the changes made—and
they are perhaps the most beneficial of recent changes—
has raised an issue between the parties, or given either
of them a claim on the confidence of the country. The
best men in both parties support the Civil Service Com-
mission ; the worst men in both would gladly get rid of it.

The advantages of regulating, by Federal legislation,
railroads and telegraphic lines extending over a number
of States, is a subject frequently discussed. Neither
party has had anything distinctive to say upon it in the

1 The Democratic party seems at this moment (1888) more inclined

than at any previous moment since the war co “go solid,” if not for Free
Trade, yet for large reductions in the present protective tariff.

352 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART II

way either of advocacy or of condemnation. Both have
asserted that it is the duty of railways to serve the
people, and not to tyrannize over or defraud them, so
the Inter-State Commerce Bill which has lately been
passed with this view cannot be called a party measure.
Finances have on the whole been well managed, and debt
paid off with surprising speed. But there have been,
and are still, serious problems raised by the condition of
the currency. Both parties have made mistakes, and
mistakes about equally culpable, for though the Repub-
licans, having more frequently commanded a Congres-
sional majority, have had superior opportunities for
blundering, the Democrats have once or twice more
definitely committed themselves to pernicious doctrines.
Neither party now proposes a clear and definite policy.
It is the same as regards minor questions, such as
women’s suffrage or international copyright, or convict
labour, Neither party has any distinctive attitude on
these matters; neither is more likely, or less likely,
than the other to pass a measure dealing with them.
It is the same with regard to the doctrine of laissez fuire
as opposed to governmental interference. Neither Re-
publicans nor Democrats can be said to be friends or
foes of State interference: each will advocate it when
there seems a practically useful object to be secured,
or when the popular voice seems to call for it. It is
the same with foreign policy. Both parties are practi-
cally agreed not only as to the general principles which
ought to rule the conduct of the country, but as to
the application of these principles. The party which
opposes the President may at any given moment seek to
damage him by defeating some particular proposal he
has made, but this it will do as a piece of temporary
strategy, not in pursuance of any settled doctrine.

CHAP. LIV THE PARTIES OF TO-DAY 353

Yet one cannot say that there is to-day no difference
between the two great parties. There is a difference of
spirit or sentiment perceptible even by a stranger when,
after having mixed for some time with members of the one
he begins to mix with those of the other, and doubtless
much more patent to a native American. It resembles
(though it is less marked than) the difference of tone
and temper between Tories and Liberals in England.
The intellectual view of a Democrat of the better sort
is not quite the same as that of his Republican com-
peer, neither is his ethical standard. Each of course
thinks meanly of the other; but while the Democrat
thinks the Republican “ dangerous” (ze. likely to under-
mine the Constitution) the Republican is more apt to
think the Democrat vicious and unscrupulous. So in
England your Liberal fastens on stupidity as the char-
acteristic fault of the Tory, while the Tory suspects the
morals and religion more than he despises the intelli-
gence of the Radical.

It cannot be charged on the American parties that
they have drawn towards one another by forsaking their
old principles. It is time that has changed the circum-
stances of the country, and made those old principles
inapplicable. They would seem to have erred rather
by clinging too long to outworn issues, and by neglect-
ing to discover and work out new principles capable of
solving the problems which now perplex the country.
In a country so full of change and movement as America
new questions are always coming up, and must be
answered. New troubles surround a government, and
a way must be found to escape from them; new
diseases attack the nation, and have to be cured.
The duty of a great party is to face these, to find
answers and remedies, applying to the facts of the hour

VOL. II 2A

354 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

the doctrines it has lived by, so far as they are still
applicable, and when they have ceased to be applicable,
thinking out new doctrines conformable to the main
principles and tendencies which it represents. This is
a work to be accomplished by its ruling minds, while
the habit of party loyalty to the leaders powerfully serves
to diffuse through the mass of followers the conclusions
of the leaders and the reasonings they have employed.

“But,” the European reader may ask, “is it not the
interest as well as the duty of a party thus to adapt
itself to new conditions? Does it not, in failing to do
so, condemn itself to sterility and impotence, ultimately,
indeed, to supersession by some new party which the
needs of the time have created ?”

This -is what happens in England and in Europe
generally. Probably it will happen in the long run
in America also, unless the parties adapt themselves
to the new issues, just as the Whig party fell in
1852-57 because it failed to face the problem of slavery.
That it happens more slowly may be ascribed partly
to the completeness and strength, of the party organi-
zations, which make the enthusiasm generated by
ideas less necessary, partly to the fact that the ques-
tions on which the two great parties still hesitate
to take sides are not presently vital to the well-being
of the country, partly also to the smaller influence in
America than in Europe of individual leaders. English
parties, which hesitate long over secondary questions,
might hesitate longer than is now their practice over
vital ones also, weré they not accustomed to look for
guidance to their chiefs, and to defer to the opinion
-which the chiefs deliver. And it is only by courage
and the capacity for initiative that the chiefs them-
selves retain their position.

CHAPTER LV
CUMPOSITION OF THE PARTIES

Tue less there is in the tenets of the Republicans and
Democrats to make their character intelligible to a
European reader, so much the more desirable is it to
convey some idea of what may be called their social
and local, their racial and ecclesiastical complexions.
The Republican party was formed between 1854
and 1856 chiefly out of the wrecks of the Whig party,
with the addition of the Abolitionists and Free Soilers,
who, disgusted at the apparent subservience to the
South of the leading northern Whigs, had for some
time previously acted as a group by themselves, though
some of them had been apt to vote for Whig candidates.
They had also recruits from the Free Soil Democrats,
who had severed themselves from the bulk of the Demo-
cratic party, and some of whom claimed to be true
Jeffersonians in joining the party which stood up against
the spread of slavery.1 The Republicans were therefore
from the first a Northern party, more distinctly so
than the Federalists had been at the close of the pre-
ceding century, and much more distinctly so than the
1 The name Republican was given to the new party, not without the

hope of thereby making it easier for these old school Democrats to join it,
for in Jefferson’s day his party had been called Republican. :

356 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART IIIf

Whigs, in whom there had been a pretty strong
Southern element.

The Whig element brought to the new party solidity,
political experience, and a large number of wealthy and
influential adherents. The Abolitionist element gave it
force and enthusiasm, qualities invaluable for the crisis
which came in 1861 with the secession of all save
four of the slave-holding States. During the war, it
drew to itself nearly all the earnestness, patriotism,
religious and moral fervour, which the North and West
contained. It is still, in those regions, the party in
whose ranks respectable, steady, pious, well-conducted
men are to be looked for. If you find yourself dining
with one of “the best people” in any New England
city, or in Philadelphia, or in Cincinnati, Cleveland,
Chicago, or Minneapolis, you assume that the guest
sitting next you is a Republican, almost as confidently
as in English county society you would assume your
neighbour to be a Tory; that is to say, you may
sometimes be wrong, but in four cases out of five you
will be right. In New York the presumption is weaker,
though even there you will be right three times out of
five. One may say that all over the North, the
merchants, manufacturers, and professional men of the
smaller perhaps even more than of the larger towns,
tend to be Republicans. So too are the farmers, par-
ticularly in the North-west, in Illinois, Wisconsin,
Michigan, Minnesota, Jowa. The working class in the
cities is divided, but the more solid part of it, the
church-goers and total abstainers, are generally Re-
publicans. A number, still large, though of course daily
diminishing, are soldiers of the Civil War; and these
naturally rally to the old flag. When turning south-
wards one reaches the borders of the old slave States,

CHAP, LV COMPOSITION OF THE PARTIES 357

everything is changed. In Baltimore the best people
are so generally Democrats that when you meet a
Republican in society you ask whether he is not an
immigrant from New England. In Virginia, or the
Carolinas, or the Gulf States, very few men of good
standing belong to the Republican party, which consists
of the lately enfranchised negroes, of a certain number
of whites, seldom well regarded, who organize and use
the negro vote, and who some twenty years ago were
making a good thing for themselves out of it; of Federal
officials, who have been put into Federal places by their
friends at Washington, on the understanding that they
are to work for the party, and of a certain number of
stray people, perhaps settlers from the North, who have
not yet renounced their former affiliations. It is not
easy for an educated man to remain a Republican in
the South, not only because the people he meets in
society are Democrats, but because the Republican party
managers are apt to be black sheep.

In the Middle States, New York, New Jersey,
Pennsylvania, to which one may for this purpose add
Ohio and Indiana, and on the Pacific slope, the parties
are nearly balanced, and the majority of votes sways now
this way now that, as the circumstances of the hour, or
local causes, or the merits of individual candidates, may
affect the popular mind. Pennsylvania, for instance, is
now, as she has been since 1860, a Republican State,
owing to her interest in a protective tariff. New York,
whose legislature is usually Republican, in presidential
elections generally goes Democratic. In these doubtful
States, the better sort of people are mostly Republicans.
It is in that party you look to find the greater number of
the philanthropists, the men of culture, the men of sub-
stance who desire to see things go on quietly, with no

358 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

shocks given to business confidence by rash legislation.
These are. great elements of strength. They have been
gained for the Republican party by its earlier history,
which drew into it thirty years ago those patriotic
and earnest young men who are now the leading elderly
men in their respective neighbourhoods. But against
them must be set the tendency of a section of the Repub-
lican party, a section which includes many men of high
intelligence, to break away, or, as it is called, “ bolt” from
the party platform and “ticket.” This section explains
its conduct by declaring that the great claims which the
party gained on the confidence of the country by its
resistance to slavery and its vigorous prosecution of the
war have been forfeited by maladministration since the
war ended, and by the scandals which have gathered
round some of its conspicuous figures. If intelligence
and cultivation dispose their possessors to desert at a
critical moment, the party might be stronger without this
element, for, as everybody knows, a good party man is
he who stands by his friends when they are wrong.

The Democratic party suffers in the North and West
from exactly the opposite causes to the Republican. It
was long discredited by its sympathy with the South,
and by the opposition of a considerable section within it
(the so-called Copperheads) to the prosecution of the
war. This shadéw hung heavy over it till the complete
pacification of the South and growing prominence of
new questions began to call men’s minds away from the
war years. From 1869 to 1885 it profited from being in
opposition. Saved from the opportunity of abusing
patronage, or becoming complicated in administration
jobs, it has been able to criticize freely the blunders or
vices of its opponents. It may however be doubted
whether its party managers have been, take them all in

CHAP. LV COMPOSITION OF THE PARTIES 359
a]

all, either wiser or purer than those whom they criticized,
nor do they seem to have inspired any deeper trust in
the minds of impartial citizens. When, as has several
times happened, the Democrats have obtained a majority
in the House of Representatives, their legislation has
not been higher in aim or more judicious in the choice
of means than that which Republican congresses have
produced. Hence the tendency to desert from the Re-
publican ranks has enured to the benefit of the Democrats
less than might have been expected. However, the
Democratic party includes not only nearly all the talent
education and wealth of the South, together with the
bulk of the Southern farmers and poor whites, but also
a respectable minority of good men in the Middle States,
and a somewhat smaller minority in New England and
the North-west.

In these last-mentioned districts its strength lies
chiefly in the cities, a curious contrast to those earlier
days when Jefferson was supported by the farmers and
Hamilton by the townsfolk... But the large cities
have now a population unlike anything that existed
eighty years ago, a vast ignorant fluctuating mass of
people, many of them only recently admitted to citizen-
ship, who have little reason for belonging to one party
rather than another, but are attracted some by the name
of the Democratic party, some by the fact that it is not the
party of the well-to-do, some by the leaders belonging to
their own races who have risen to influence in its ranks.
The adhesion of this mob gives the party a slight flavour
of rowdyism, as its old associations give it, to a Puritan

1 Jefferson regarded agriculture as so much the best occupation for
citizens that he was alarmed by the rumour that the codfish of the North-
eastern coasts were coming down to the shores of Virginia and Carolina,
lest the people of those States should “‘be tempted to catch them, and
commerce, of which we have already too much, receive an accession.”

360 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART II

palate, a slight flavour of irreligion. Twenty years ago,
a New England deacon—the deacon is in America the
type of solid respectability—-would have found it as
hard to vote for a Democratic candidate as an English
archdeacon to vote for a Birmingham Radical. But
these old feelings have begun to wear away. A new
generation of voters has arisen which never saw slavery,
and which cares little about Jefferson for good or for evil.
This generation takes parties as it finds them. Even
among the older voters there has been a sensible change
within the last three years. Many of the best Repub-
licans, who remembered the Democrats as the party
of which a strong section sympathized with the slave-
holders before the war, and disapproved of the war while
it was being waged, looked with horror on the advent to
power of a Democratic president. The country, however,
has not been ruined by Mr. Cleveland, but on the
contrary goes on much as before, its elements of good
and evil mixed and contending, just as under Republican
administrations. However, the Republican leaders still
point to the fact that the Democrdts command the solid
vote of all the States where slavery formerly existed as
a reason why it should excite the distrust of good
citizens who fought for the Union.

Now that differences of political doctrine are not
accentuated, racé differences play a considerable part in
the composition of the parties. Besides the native
Americans, there are men of five nationalities in the
United States—Britigsh, Irish, Germans, Scandinavians,
French Canadians." Of these, however, the English
and Scotch lose their identity almost immediately,

1 There are also Poles, Czechs, and Italians; but their number,
except in two or three of the Atlantic cities, to which I may perhaps add
Chicago, Milwaukee, and the mining regions of Pennsylvania, is rela-
tively small, though increasing more rapidly of late years.

CHAP. LV COMPOSITION OF THE PARTIES 361

being absorbed into the general mass of native citizens.
Though very numerous, they have hitherto counted
for nothing politically, because English immigrants
have either been indifferent to political struggles or
have voted from the same motives as an average
American. They have to a large extent remained British
subjects, not caring for the suffrage. But quite recently
an effort has been made (apparently chiefly for the sake
of counter-working the Irish) to induce them to apply
for citizenship and exert their voting power as a united
body. It may be doubted whether they will become
citizens to any great extent, or whether, if they do, they
will cast a solid vote.

Far otherwise with the Irish. They retain their
national spirit and disposition to act together into the
second, rarely however into the third, generation ; they
are a factor potent in Federal and still more potent in
city politics. Now the Irish have hitherto been nearly
all Democrats. When the great exodus from Ireland
began in 1846-50,! the first-comers joined the Demo-
cratic party, probably because it was less Protestant
in sentiment than the Whig party, and was already
dominant in the city of New York, where the Irish
first became a power in politics. The aversion to
the negro which they soon developed, made them,
when the Republican party arose, its natural enemies,
for the Republicans were, both during and after the
war, the negro’s patrons. Before the war ended the
Irish vote had come to form a large part of the Demo-
cratic strength, and Irishmen were prominent among
the politicians of that party: hence new-comers from

1 There had been considerable immigration from Ireland before the
great famine of 1846-47, but that is the date when it swelled to vast
proportions.

362 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

Ireland have generally enlisted under its banner. To-
day, however, there are plenty of Irishmen, and indeed
_ of Irish leaders and bosses, among the Republicans of
the great cities; and statesmen of that party often
seek to “placate” and attract the Irish vote in ways
too familiar to need description.

The German immigration, excluding of course the
early German settlements in Pennsylvania, began rather
later than the Irish; and as there is some jealousy be-
tween the two races, the fact that the Irish were already
Democrats when the Germans arrived, may be one reason
why the latter have been more inclined to enrol them-
selves as Republicans, The Germans usually become
farmers in the Middle and Western States, where, find-
ing the native farmers mainly Republicans, they imitate
the politics of their neighbours. That there are many
German Democrats in the great cities may be ascribed
to the rather less friendly attitude of the Republicans to
the liquor traffic, for the German colonist is faithful to
the beer of his fatherland, and, in the case of the Roman
Catholic Germans, to the tacit alliance which has sub-
sisted in many districts between the Catholic Church
and the Democrats. The Germans are a cohesive race,
keeping up national sentiment by festivals, gymnastic
societies, processions, and national songs, but as they take
much less keenly to politics, and are not kept together
by priests, their cohesion is more short-lived than that
of the Irish. The American-born son of a German is
already completely an American in feeling as well as in
practical aptitude. The German vote over the whole
Union may be roughly estimated as three-fifths Repub-
lican, two-fifths Democratic.

The Scandinavians—Swedes and Norwegians, with
a few Danes and a handful of Icelanders—now form a

CHAP. LV COMPOSITION OF THE PARTIES. 363

respectable element among the farmers of the Upper
Mississippi States, particularly Wisconsin and Minnesota.
So far as can be judged from the short experience the
country has of them, for it is only some twenty-five
years since their immigration began, they Americanize
even more readily than their Teutonic cousins from the
southern side of the Baltic. However, both Swedes
and Norwegians are still so far clannish that in these
States both parties find it worth while to run for office
now and then a candidate of one or other, or candidates
of both of these nationalities, in order to catch the votes
of his or their compatriots.’ Nine-tenths of them are
Republicans. Like the Germans, they come knowing
nothing of American politics, but the watchful energy
of the native party-workers enlists them under a party
banner as soon as they are admitted to civic rights.
They make perhaps the best material for sober and
industrious agriculturists that America receives, being
even readier than the Germans to face hardship, and
more content to dispense with alcoholic drinks.

The French Canadians are numerous in New England,
and in one or two other Northern States, yet not
numerous enough to tell upon politics, especially as they
frequently remain British subjects. Their religion dis-
poses those who become citizens to side with the Demo-
cratic party, but they do not constitute what is called
“a vote.”

The negroes in the Northern, Middle, and Pacific
States are an element too small to be of much importance
as voters. Gratitude for the favour shown to their race
has kept them mostly but not exclusively Republicans.

1 One is told that there is some little jealousy between Swedes and
Norwegians, so that where they are equally strong it is not safe to put
forward a candidate of either race without placing on the same ticket a
candidate of the other also.

364 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

They are seldom admitted to a leading place in party
organizations, but it is found expedient in presidential
contests to organize a “coloured club” to work for the
candidate among the coloured population of a town.
In the Sopth, and more particularly in South Carolina,
Louisiana, and Mississippi, their mere numbers would
enable them, were they equal to the whites in intelligence,
wealth, and organization, to carry not merely congres-
sional seats, but even in some States to determine a
presidential election. But in these three respects they
are unspeakably inferior. At first, under the leader-
ship of some white adventurers, mostly of the “ carpet-
bagger ” class, they went almost solid for the Republican
party ; and occasionally, even since the withdrawal of
Federal troops, they have turned the balance in its
favour. Now, however, the Democrats have completely
gained the upper hand; and the negroes, perhaps losing
faith in their former bosses, perhaps discouraged by
seeing themselves unfit to cope with a superior race,
perhaps less interested than at first in their new privi-
leges, have begun to lose their ‘solidarity. A certain
number now vote with the Democrats. The force and
fraud which the whites have used cannot be justified ;
but he who has travelled in the South and seen the
ignorance of the negroes and the turpitude of the carpet-
baggers whose profession it was to lead and “run”
them, will admit some force in the excuses which the
Southern Democrats give for their manipulation of
election machinery.’-

Religion comes very little into American party.
Roman Catholics are usually Democrats, because, ex-
cept in Maryland, which is Democratic anyhow, they
are mainly Irish. Congregationalists and Unitarians,

1 See further on this point, Chapter LE XXII. in Vol. ITI.

CHAP. LV COMPOSITION OF THE PARTIES 365

being presumably sprung from New England, are apt
to be Republicans. Presbyterians, Methodists, Baptists,
Episcopalians, have no special party affinities. They are
mostly Republicans in the Northern States, Democrats
in the South, The Mormons fight for their own hand,
and in the two Territories which they inhabit,’ have
been wont to cast their votes, under the direction of
their hierarchy, for the local party which promised, to
interfere least with them.

From what has been said it will be perceived that
the distribution of parties is to some extent geo-
graphical. While the South casts a solid Democratic
vote, the strength of the Republicans lies in the North-
east and North-west; and the intermediate position of
the Middle States corresponds to their divided political
tendencies, The reason is that in America colonization
has gone on along parallels of latitude. The tendencies
of New England reappear in Northern Ohio, Northern
Illinois, Michigan, Wisconsin, Minnesota, giving the Re-
publicans a predominance in this vast and swiftly-growing
Western population, which it takes the whole weight of
the solid South to balance. This geographical opposi-
tion does not, however, betoken a danger of political
severance. The material interests of the agriculturists
of the North-west are not different from those of the
South: free trade, for instance, will make as much and
no more difference to the wheat-grower of Illinois as to
the cotton-grower of Texas, to the iron-workers of
Tennessee as to the iron-workers of Pennsylvania. And
the existence of an active Democratic party in the
North prevents the victory of either geographical section
from being felt as a defeat by the other.

This is an important security against disruption.

1 Utah and Idaho, There are also a few in Arizona.

366 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART Ilr

And a similar security against the risk of civil strife or
revolution is to be found in the fact, already explained,
that the American parties are not based on or sensibly
affected by differences either of wealth or of social
position. Their cleavage is not horizontal according to
social strata, but vertical. This would be less true if
it were stated either of the Northern States separately,
or of the Southern States separately: it is true of the
Union taken asa whole. It might cease to be true if
the new labour party were to grow till it absorbed or
superseded either of the existing parties. The same
feature has characterized English politics as compared
with those of most European countries, and has been
a main cause of the stability of the English govern-
ment and of the good feeling between different classes
in the community.’

1 Atthe present moment the vast majority of the rich, a proportion
probably larger than at any previous time, at any rate since 1827, belong

in England to one of the two historic parties. But this phenomenon may
possibly pass away.

CHAPTER LVI
FURTHER OBSERVATIONS ON THE PARTIES

BesipEs the two great parties which have divided
America for thirty years, there are two or three lesser
organizations or factions needing a word of mention.
Sixty years ago there was a period when one of the two
great parties having melted away, the other had become
split up into minor sections.! Parties were numerous
and unstable, new ones forming, and after a short career
uniting with some other, or vanishing altogether from
the scene. This was a phenomenon peculiar to that
time, and ceased with the building up about 1832 of the
Whig party, which lasted till shortly before the Civil
War. But De Tocqueville, who visited America in
1831-82, took it for the normal state of a democratic com-
munity, and founded upon it some bold generalizations.
A stranger who sees how few principles now exist to
hold each of the two great modern parties together will
be rather surprised that they have not shown more ten-
dency to split up into minor groups and factions.

What constitutes a party? In America there is a
simple test. Any section of men who nominate candi-
dates of their own for the presidency and vice-presidency.

1 The same phenomenon reappeared at the break-up of the Whigs
between 1852 and 1857, and from much the same cause.

368 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

of the United States are deemed a national party.
Adopting this test we shall find that there are now two
or three national parties in addition to the Republicans
and Democrats.

The first is that of the Greenbackers, who arose
soon after the end of the war. They demand a large
issue of greenbacks (?.e. paper money, so called from the
colour of the notes issued during the war), alleging that
this will be a benefit to the poorer classes, who will obvi-
ously be richer when there is more money in the country.
It may seem incredible that there should still be masses
of civilized men who believe that money is value, and
that a liberal issue of stamped paper can give the poor
more bread or better clothes. If there were a large class
of debtors, and the idea was to depreciate the currency
and let them then pay their debts in it, one could under-
stand the proposal. Such a depreciation existed during
and immediately after the Civil War. As wages and
prices had risen enormously, people were receiving more
money in wages, or for goods sold, than they had
received previously, while they, were paying fixed
charges, such as interest on mortgage debts, in a
depreciated paper currency. Thus the working classes
were on the whole gainers, while creditors and persons
with fixed incomes were losers. It is true that the
working men were also paying more for whatever they
needed, food, clothes, and lodging; still they seem to
have felt more benefit in receiving larger sums than
they felt hardship in paying out larger sums. Those
who now eall for greenbacks do not profess to wish to
depreciate the currency: nor are those who have sup-
ported them to any very great extent a debtor class to
which a depreciated currency would be welcome, as a
debased coinage served the momentary occasions of

CHAP. LVI OBSERVATIONS ON THE PARTIES 369

medieval kings. But the recollections of the war time
with its high wages cling to many people, and are
coupled with a confused notion that the more money
there is in circulation so much the more of it will every-
body have, and so much the better off will he be; so
much the more employment will capital find for labour,
and so much the more copious will be the fertilizing
stream of wages diffused among the poor.!

The Greenback party, which at first called itself
Independent, held a national Nominating Convention in
1876, at which nineteen States were represented, and
nominated candidates for president and vice-president,
issuing an emphatic but ungrammatical denunciation of
the financial policy of the Republican and Democratic
parties. They again put forward candidates in 1880
and 1884, but made a poor show in the voting in most
States, and of course came nowhere within a measurable
distance of carrying a State.

The Labour party has of late years practically
superseded the Greenbackers, and seems to have now
drawn to itself such adherents as that party retained.
It is not easy to describe its precise tenets, for it in-
cludes persons of very various views, some who would
be called in Europe pronounced socialists or communists,
others who wish to restrain the action of railway and
telegraph companies and other so-called ‘‘ monopolists,”
and of course many who, while dissatisfied with existing
economic conditions, and desiring to see the working
classes receive a larger share of the good things of the
world, are not prepared to say in what way these con-

1 The matter is further complicated by the fact that the national
bank-notes issued by the national banks are guaranteed by government
bonds deposited with the US. treasury, bonds on which the national
government pays interest. The greenhackers desire to substitute greenbacks,
or so-called “ fiat money,” for these bank-notes as a circulating medium.

VOL. II 2B

370 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

ditions can be mended and this result attained. Speak-
ing generally, the reforms advocated by the leaders of the
Labour party include the “nationalization of the land,”
the imposition of a progressive income tax,’ the taking
over of railroads and telegraphs by the National govern-
ment, the prevention of the immigration of Chinese
and of any other foreign labourers who may come under
contract, the restriction of all so-called monopolies, the
forfeiture (where legally possible) of railroad land grants,
the increase of the currency, the free issue of incon-
vertible paper, and, above all, the statutory restriction of
hours of labour. But it must not be supposed that all
the leaders adopt all these tenets; and the party is
still too young to make it easy to say who are to be
deemed its leaders. It shows a tendency to split up
into factions. Its strength has lain in the trade unions
of the operative class, and particularly in the enormous
organization or league of trade unions known as the
Knights of Labour: and it is therefure warmly inter-
ested in the administration of the various State laws
which affect strikes and the practice of boycotting by
which strikes often seek to prevail. Besides the enrolled
Knights, whose political strength séems to be less feared
now than it was a year or two ago, it has much support
from the recent immigrants who fill the great cities,
especially the Germans, Poles, and Czechs.

The Labour party has never yet run a presidential
candidate, unless we are to consider General B. F.
Butler, who was nominated in 1884 by the Greenbackers
and Anti-monopolists, as having been practically its

1 This was demanded by the Greenback national convention in its
platform of 1880, and again in 18843; but one hears very little about it
in America. Its recent adoption in the Canton of Vaud in Switzerland

had the effect of causing some of the wealthier inhabitants to quit the
canton.

CHAP. LVI OBSERVATIONS ON THE PARTIES 371
i es es

standard-bearer. But it puts forward candidates in State
and city elections when it sees a chance. It ran Mr.
Henry George for Mayor of New York City in 1886, and
obtained the unexpected success of polling 67,000 votes
against 90,000 given to the regular Democratic, and
60,000 to the regular Republican candidate ;? but this
success was not sustained in the contest for the Governor-
ship of the State of New York in 1887, when a vote of
only 37,000 was cast by the Labour party in the city.
At present it is a somewhat incalculable force in politics,
nowhere strong enough to carry its own candidates, but
sometimes strong enough to defeat one of the regular
parties by drawing away a part of its voters, or to extort
a share of the offices for some of its nominees. It is only
in some States, chiefly Northern States, that Labour can-
didates are run at all.

The Prohibitionists, or opponents of the sale of in-
toxicating liquors, held in 1872, 1876, 1880, and 1884
a national convention for the nomination of a presiden-
tial candidate, and put out a ticket, ae. nominated
candidates for president and vice-president. The action
of this party has been most frequent in the State legis-
latures, because the whole question of permitting, re-
stricting, or abolishing the sale of intoxicants is a matter
for the States and not for Congress. However, the Federal
government raises a large revenue by its high import
duty on wines, spirits, and malt liquors, and also levies
an internal excise. As this revenue is no longer needed
for the expenses of the national government, it has been
proposed to distribute it among the States, or apply it
to some new and useful purpose, or to reduce both
customs duties and the excise. The fear of the first or

1 In 1874 when a Labour candidate was first run for the New York
mayoralty he obtained only between 3000 and 4000 votes.

372 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART Ill

second of these courses, which would give the manufac-
ture and sale of intoxicants a new lease of life, or of the
third, which would greatly increase their consumption,
has induced the Prohibitionists to enter the arena of
national politics; and they further justify their con-
duct in doing so by proposing to amend the Federal
Constitution for the purposes of prohibition, and to stop
the sale of intoxicants in the Territories and in the
District of Columbia, which are under the direct control
of Congress.’ Their running a candidate for the
Presidency is more a demonstration than anything else,
as they have a comparatively weak vote to cast, many
even of those who sympathize with them preferring to
support one or other of the great parties rather than
throw away a vote in the abstract assertion of a prin-
ciple. One ought indeed to distinguish between the
Prohibitionists proper, who wish to stop the sale of in-
toxicants altogether, and the Temperance men, who are
very numerous among Republicans in the North and
Democrats in the South, and who, while ready to vote
for Local Option and a High Licence Law, disapprove
the attempt to impose absolute prohibition, by general
legislation.? The number of persons who are thorough-

1 The Prohibitionist platform of 1884, issued by their national con-
vention, contained the following passage :—

“Congress should exercise its undoubted power and prohibit the
manufacture and sale of intoxicating beverages in the District of Columbia,
in the Territories of the United States, and in all places over which the
Government has exclusive jurisdiction ; that hereafter no State shall be
admitted to the Union until its Constitution shall expressly prohibit poly-
gamy and the manufacture_and sale of intoxicating beverages.”

One might have expected the Prohibitionists to advocate the repeal
of the protective tariff on manufactured goods so as to make it necessary
to maintain customs duties and an excise on intoxicants for the purposes
of the national government. But this would imply that these beverages
might still be consumed, which is just what the more ardent spirits in

the temperance party refuse to contemplate.
2 Some State legislatures have “placated” the Temperance men by

CHAP, LVI OBSERVATIONS ON THE PARTIES 373

going Prohibitionists and pure Prohibitionists, that is
to say, who are not also Republicans or Democrats, is
small, far too small, even when reinforced by a section
of the ‘Temperance men,” and by discontented Re-
publicans or Democrats who may dislike the “regular”
candidates of their party, to give the Prohibition ticket
a chance of success in any State. The importance of
the ticket lies in the fact that in a doubtful State it
may draw away enough votes from one of the “ regular ”
candidates to leave him in a minority. Mr. Blaine
probably suffered in this way in the election of 1884,
most of the votes cast for the Prohibitionist candidate
having come from quondam Republicans. On the
other hand, a case may be imagined in which the
existence of an outlet or safety-valve, such as a Pro-
hibitionist ticket, would prevent the “ bolters” from one
party from taking the more dangerous course of voting
for the candidate of the opposite party.’

The strength of the Prohibitionist party lies in the
religious and moral earnestness which animates it and
makes it for many purposes the successor and represen-
tative of the Abolitionists of forty yearsago. Clergymen
are prominent in its conventions, and women take an
active part in its work. Partly from its traditions and
temper, partly because it believes that women would
be on its side in elections, it advocates the extension
‘to them of the electoral franchise.

The Women’s Suffrage party is perhaps hardly to be
reckoned a party, firstly, because it consists chiefly of
women who have no vote in elections ; secondly, because

enacting that “the hygienics of alcohol and its action upon the human
body” shall be a regular subject of instruction in the public schools.

1 The Prohibitionists have, as I write, put out a presidential ticket
for the election of 1888. Their Convention is said to have been attended
by a good many persons desiring to form a new Third Party, of which
the regulation of the liquor traffic should not be the only basis.

374 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

it does not run a presidential candidate. In 1884 it
nominated a woman as candidate, but she did not go
to the poll. It includes, however, a few persons who
profess indifference to other political questions and
agitate for this cause alone. It has hitherto failed to
get the franchise extended to women in any one of the
thirty-eight States, although this has been done in the
Territories of Wyoming, Utah, and Washington, with
what results for good or evil is much disputed.’

The European reader may perhaps wish to hear
something as to the new group which poes by the name
of Mugwumps.? At the presidential election of 1884 a
section of the Republican party, more important by the
intelligence and social position of the men who composed
it than by its numbers, “bolted” (to use the technical
term) from their party, and refused to vote for Mr.
Blaine. Some simply abstained, some, obeying the
impulse to vote which is strong in good citizens in
America, voted for Mr. St. John, the Prohibitionist
candidate, though well aware that this was practically
the same thing as abstention. The majority, however,
voted against their party for Mr. Cleveland, the Demo-
cratic candidate ; and it seems to have been the trans-
ference of their vote which turned the balance in New
York State, and thereby determined the issue of the
whole election in Mr. Cleveland’s favour. They are there-
fore not to be reckoned as a national party, according to-
the American use of the term, because they do not run
a ticket of their own, but vote for a candidate started

1 See further as to women’s suffrage, chapter in Vol. III. post.

2 The name is said to be formed from an Indian word denoting a
chief or aged wise man, and was applied by the “straight-out” Repub-
licans to their bolting brethren as a term of ridicule. It has now been taken
up hy the latter as a term of compliment; though the description they
used formally in 1884 was that of ‘ Independent Republicans.”

cuap.tvi OBSERVATIONS ON THE PARTIES 375

by one of the regular parties. The only organization
they formed consisted of committees which held meet-
ings and distributed literature during the election, but
dissolved when it was over. They maintain no perma-
nent party machinery ; and it seems probable that they
will not act as a distinct section, even for the purposes
of agitation, at the presidential election of 1888.1

The Mugwumps bear no more resemblance to any
English party than does any other of the parties of the
United States, for the chief doctrine they advocate is
one not in controversy in England, the necessity of
reforming the civil service by making appointments
without reference to party, and a general reform in
the methods of politics by selecting men for Federal,
State, and municipal offices, with reference rather to
personal fitness than to political affiliations. They are
most numerous in New England and in the cities of the
eastern States generally, but some few are scattered
here and there all over the North and West as far as
California. It is, however, only in New York, Massa-
chusetts, and Connecticut that they seem to have con-
stituted an appreciably potent vote. In the South there
were none, because the Southern men who would, had
they lived in the North, have taken to Mugwumpism,
are in the South Democrats, and therefore voted for
Mr. Cleveland anyhow. Nor does there seem to be in
the Democratic party, either in North or South, as
much material for a secession similar to that of the
“‘bolters” of 1884 as was then shown to exist among
the Republicans.

The reader must be reminded of one capital differ-
‘ence between the Republican and Democratic parties

1 Since the above was put in type, I am informed that it has become
clear that they will not act as a distinct section in the campaign of 1888,

376 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART IIT

and the minor ones which have just been mentioned.
The two former are absolutely co-extensive with the
Union. They exist in every State, and in every corner
of every State. They exist even in the eight Territories,
though the inhabitants of Territories have no vote in
Federal elections. But the Labour party and the Pro-
hibition party, although each maintains a more or less
permanent organization in many States, do not attempt
to do so in all States,’ much less to fight all the elections
in those States. Where they are strong, or where some
question has arisen which keenly interests them, they
will run their man for State governor, or mayor, or will
put out a ticket for State senators or Assembly men: or
they will take the often more profitable course of fusing
for the nonce with one of the regular parties, giving it
their vote in return for having the party nominations to
one or more of the elective offices assigned to their own
nominee.” This helps to keep the party going, and gives
to its vote a practical result otherwise unattainable.

Is there not then, some European may ask, a Free
Trade party? Not in the American sense of the word.
Free trade doctrines are professed by most Democrats,
especially in the South and West, though rather in the
practical form of the advocacy of a reduced tariff than
in that of the general doctrine as it was preached by
Cobden, and by some few Republicans whose importance
is due not to their numbers, but to the influence they
exert as writers or teachers. There is a society which
seeks to educate opinion by publishing books and

1 In the election of 1880, votes were given for the Greenback candi-
date in all the States but three (308,578 votes in all), and for the Pro-
hibitionist in seventeen States out of the thirty-eight (10,305 votes in all).
In 1884, votes were given for the Greenback candidate in 29 States
(175,370 in all), and for the Prohibitionist in 33 States (150,869 in all).

2 The Greenbackers or Labour men seem to do this pretty frequently,
the Prohibitionists, I fancy, much more rarely.

CHAP. LVI OBSERVATIONS ON THE PARTIES 377

pamphlets on the subject; but it is no more a political
force than the similar society in France, or the Cobden
Club in England. There is no political organization
which agitates for free trade by the usual party methods,
much less does any one think of starting candidates
either for the Presidency or for Congress upon a pure
anti-protectionist platform,’ although the election of
‘1888 may probably turn upon this particular issue.

Why, considering the reluctant hesitancy of the old
parties in dealing with new questions, and considering
also that in the immense area of the United States, with
its endless variety of economic interests and social con-
ditions, we might expect local diversities of aim and
view which would crystallize, and so give rise to many
local parties—why are not the parties far more numerous?
Why, too, are the parties so persistent? In this change-
ful country one would look for frequent changes in
tenets and methods.

One reason is, that there is at present a strong feel-
ing in America against any sentiment or organization
which relies on or #ppeals to one particular region of
the country. Such localism or sectionalism is hateful,
because, recalling the disunionist spirit of the South
which led to the war, it seems anti-national and un-
patriotic. By the mere fact of its springing from a
local root, and urging a local interest, a party would set
all the rest of the country against it. As a separately
organized faction seeking to capture the Federal govern-
ment, it could not succeed against the national parties,
because the Union as a whole is so vast that it would be
outvoted by one or other of them. But if it is content

1 It would of course be absurd to run candidates for State office or

municipal office on such a platform, inasmuch as the tariff is a matter
purely for the national legislature.

378 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART II

to remain a mere opinion or demand, not attacking
either national party, but willing to bestow the votes it
can control on whichever will meet its wishes, it is
powerful, because the two great parties will bid against
one another for its support by flatteries and concessions.
For instance, the question which interests the masses on
the Pacific coast is that of excluding Chinese immigrants,
because they compete for work with the whites and bring
down wages. Now if the “anti-Mongolians” of California
Nevada and Oregon were to create a national party,
based on this particular issue, they would be insignificant,
for they would have little support over five-sixths of the
Union. But by showing that the attitude of the two
great parties on this issue will determine their own
attitude towards these parties, they control both, for as
each desires to secure the vote of California, Nevada,
and Oregon, each vies with the other in promising and
voting for anti-Chinese legislation. The position of the
Irish extremists is similar, except of course that they
are a racial and not a geographical “section.” Their
power, which Congress has sometimes recognized in a way
scarcely compatible with its dignity or with international
courtesy, lies in the fact that as the Republicans and
Democrats are nearly balanced, the congressional leaders
of both desire to “placate ” this faction, for which neither
has a sincere affection. An Irish party, or a German
party, or a Roman Catholic party, which should run
its candidates on a sectional platform, would stand self-
condemned in American eyes as not being genuinely
American. But so long as it is content to seek control
over parties and candidates, it exerts an influence
out of proportion to its numbers, and checked only by
the fear that if it demanded too much native Americans
might rebel, as they did in the famous Know-Nothing or

CHAP. LVI OBSERVATIONS ON THE PARTIES 379

“ American” party of 1852-60. ‘The same fate would
befall a party based upon some trade interest, such as
protection to manufactures, or the stimulation of cattle-
breeding, or on the defence of the claims of the New
England fishermen. Such a party might succeed for a
time in a State, and might dictate its terms to one or
both of the national parties; but when it attempted to be
a national party it would become ridiculous and fall.

A second cause of the phenomenon which I am en-
deavouring to explain may be found in the enormous
trouble and expense required to found a new national
party. To influence the votes, even to reach the ears of
a population of sixty millions of people, is an undertaking
to be entered on only when some really great cause fires
the national imagination, disposes the people to listen,
persuades the wealthy to spend freely of their substance.
It took six years of intense work to build up the
Republican party, which might not even then have
triumphed in the election of 1860, but for the split in
the ranks of its opponents. The attempt made in
1872 to form a new independent party out of the dis-
contented Republicans and the Democrats failed lament-
ably. The Independent Republicans of 1884 did not
venture to start a programme or candidate of their own,
but were prudently satisfied with helping the Demo-
cratic candidate, whom they deemed more likely than
the nominee of the Republican party convention to
give effect to the doctrine of civil service reform which
they advocate.

The case of these Independents, or Mugwumps, is an
illustrative one. For many years past there have been
complaints that the two old parties were failing to deal
with issues now of capital importance, such as the tariff,
the currency, the improvements of methods of business in

380 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART IIr

Congress, the purification of the civil service, and extinc-
tion of the so-called Spoils system. These complaints,
however, have not come from the men prominent as
practical statesmen or politicians in the parties, but
from outsiders, and largely from the men of intellectual
cultivation and comparatively high social standing.
Very few of these men take an active part in “ politics,”
however interested they may be in public affairs. They
are amateurs as tegards the practical work of “‘ running ”
ward meetings and conventions, of framing “tickets,”
and bringing up voters to the poll, in fact of working as
well as organizing that vast and cémplicated machinery
which an American party needs. Besides, it is a costly
machinery, and they might be unable to find the money.
Hence they recoil from the effort, and aim at creating a
sentiment which may take concrete form in a vote,
given for whichever of the parties seems at any particular
time most likely to adopt, even if insincerely, the prin-
ciples, and give effect, even if reluctantly, to the Tieaxares
which the Independents advocate.

Why, however, do not the prvfessional politicians
who ‘know the ropes,” and know where to get the
necessary funds, more frequently seek to wreck a party
in order to found a new one more to their mind? Be-
cause they are pretty well satisfied with the sphere
which existihg parties give them, and comprehend from
their practical experience how hazardous such an experi-
ment would be.

These considerations may help to explain the re-
markable cohesion of parties in America, and the
strength of party loyalty, a phenomenon more natural in
Europe, where momentous issues inflame men’s’ passions,
and where the bulk of the adherents are ignorant men,
caught by watchwords and readily attracted to a leader,

CHAP, LVI OBSERVATIONS ON THE PARTIES 381
a ERs See Oe ee ee ET ae eens
than in a republic where no party has any benefit to
promise to the people which it may not as well get from
the other, and where the voter is a keen-witted man,
with little reverence for the authority of any individual.
There is however another reason flowing from the char-
acter of the American people. They are extremely fond
of associating themselves, and prone to cling to any
organization they have once joined. They are sensitive
to any charge of disloyalty. They are gregarious, each
man more disposed to go with the multitude and do as
they do than to take a line of his own,’ and they enjoy
“campaigning” for its own sake. These are char-
acteristics which themselves require to be accounted for,
but the discussion of them belongs to later chapters. A
European is surprised to see prominent politicians sup-
porting, sometimes effusively, a candidate of their own
party whom they are known to dislike, merely because
he is the party candidate. There is a sort of military
discipline about party life which has its good as well
as its bad side, for if it sometimes checks the expression
of honest disapproval, it also restrains jealousy, abashes
self-seeking, prevents recrimination.

Each of the American parties is far less under the
control of one or two conspicuous leaders than are
European parties. So far as this is due to the absence
of men whose power over the people rests on the
possession of brilliant oratorical or administrative gifts,
it is a part of the question why there are not more such
men in American public life, why there are fewer
striking figures than in the days of Jefferson and
Hamilton, of Webster and Calhoun. It is however also

1 That is to say, they respect the authority of the mass, to which

they themselves belong, though seldom that of individual leaders, See
post, Chapter LXXXIV.—* The Fatalism of the Multitude.”

382 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

due to the peculiarities of the Constitution. The want
of concentration of power in the legal government is
reflected in the structure of the party system. The
separation of the legislative from the executive depart-
ment lowers the importance of leadership in parties, as
it wéakens both these departments. The President,
who is presumably among the leading men, cannot
properly direct the policy of his party, still less speak
for it in public, because he represents the whole nation.
His ministers cannot speak to the people through
Congress. In neither House of Congress is there
necessarily any person recognized as the leader on either
side. As neither House has the power over legislation
and administration possessed by such an assembly as the
French or Italian Chamber, or the English House of
Commons, speeches delivered or strategy displayed in it
do not tell upon the country with equal force and
directness. There remains the stump, and it is more by
the stump than in any other way that an American
statesman speaks to the people. But what distances to
be traversed, what fatigues to be encountered before he
can be a living and attractive personality to the electing
masses! An English statesman leaves London at three
o'clock, and speaks in Birmingham, or Leeds, or
Manchester, the same evening. In a few years, every
great town! knows him like its own mayor, while the
active local politicians who frequently run up from their
homes to London hear him from the galleries of the House
of Commons, wait on him in deputations, are invited to
the receptions which his wife gives during the season.
Even railways and telegraphs cannot make America a
compact country in the same sense that Britain is.

Since the Civil War ended, neither Republicans nor
Democrats have leaned on and followed any one man as

CHAP, LVI OBSERVATIONS ON THE PARTIES 383
i ee A |

Mr. Gladstone and Lord Beaconsfield, as befure them
Lords Derby, John Russell, and Palmerston, as still
earlier Sir Robert Peel and Lord Melbourne, were
followed in England. No one since Mr. Seward has
exercised even so much authority as Mr. Bright has done
when out of office, or as Gambetta did in France, or as
Mr. Parnell does in Ireland, over the sections of opinion
which each of these eminent men has represented.

How then are the parties led in Congress and the
eountry ? Who directs their policy? Who selects their
candidates for the chief posts? These are questions
which cannot be adequately answered till the nature
of the party machinery has been described. For the
moment I must be content to suggest the following as
provisional answers :—

The most important thing is the selection of can-
didates. This is done in party meetings called con-
ventions. When a party has any policy, it is settled in
such a convention and declared in a document called a
platform. When it has none, the platform is issued
none the less. Party. tactics in Congress are decided on
by meetings of the party in each Ilouse of Congress
called. caucuses. Leaders have of course much to do
with all three processes. But they often efface them-
selves out of respect to the sentiment of equality, and
because power concealed excites less envy.

How do the parties affect social life? At present not
very much, at least in the northern and middle States,
because it is a slack time in politics. Your dining
acquaintances, even your intimate friends, are not
necessarily of the same way of voting as yourself, and
though of course political views tend to become heredi-
tary, there is nothing to surprise any one in finding
sons belonging to different parties from their fathers,

384 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

In the South, where the recollections of the great
struggle are kept alive by the presence of a negro voting
power which has to be controlled, things are different :
and they were different in the North till the passions of
civil strife had abated.

So far, I have spoken of the parties only as national
organizations, struggling for and acting on or through
the Federal government. But it has already been
observed (Chapter XLVI.) that they exist also as State
and city organizations, contending for the places
which States and cities have to give, seeking to
control State legislatures and municipal councils.
Every circumscription of State and local government,
from the State of New York with its six millions of
inhabitants down to the “city” that has just sprung
up round a railway junction in the West, has a regular
Republican ‘party organization, confronted by a similar
Democratic organization, each running its own ticket
(z.e. list of candidates) at every election, for any office
pertaining to its own circumscription, and each federated,
so to speak, to the larger organizations above it, repre-
sented in them and working for them in drilling and
“energizing” the party within the area which is*the
sphere of its action.

What have the tenets of such national parties as the
Republicans and Democrats to do with the politics of
States and cities? Very little with those of States,
because a matter for Federal legislation is seldom also a
matter for Statg legislation, Still less with those of
cities or counties. Cities and counties have not strictly
speaking any political questions to deal with; their
business is to pave and light, to keep the streets clean,
maintain an efficient police and well-barred prisons,
administer the poor law and charitable institutions with

CHAP, LVI OBSERVATIONS ON THE ais ae 385

integrity, judgment, and economy. The laws regulating
these matters have been already made by the State, and
the city or county authority has nothing to do but ad-
minister them. Hence at city and county elections the
main objects ought to be to choose honest and careful
men of business, The opinions of candidates as to free
trade, or the respective rights of the Union and the
States do not signify, because they cannot apply these
opinions to the questions which will come before them
officially. It need make no difference to the action
of a mayor or school trustee in any concrete question
whether he holds Democratic or Republican views.
However, the habit of party warfare has been so
strong as to draw all elections into its vortex; nor
would either party feel safe if it neglected the means of
rallying and drilling its supporters, which State and
local contests supply. There is this advaniage in the
system, that it stimulates the political interest of the
people, which is kept alive by this perpetual agitation.
But the multiplicity of contests has the effect of making
politics too absorbing an occupation for the ordinary
citizen who has his profession or business to attend to :
while the result claimed by those who in England defend
the practice of fighting municipal elections on party
lines, viz. that good men are induced to stand for local
office for the sake of their party, is the last result
desired by the politicians, or expected by any one. It
is this constant labour which the business of politics in-
volves, this ramification of party into all the nooks and
corners of local government, that has produced the class
of professional politicians, of whom it is now time to speak.

VOL. II 2C¢

CHAPTER LVII
THE POLITICIANS

Instrrurions are said to form men, but it is no less true
that men give to institutions their colour and tendency.
It profits little to know the legal rules and methods and
observances of government, unless one also knows some-
thing of the human beings who tend and direct this
machinery, and who, by the spirit in which they work
it, may render it the potent instrument of good or evil
to the people. These men are the politicans.

What is one to include under this term? In England
it usually denotes those who are actively occupied in
administering or legislating, or discussing administration
and legislation. That is to say, it includes ministers of
the Crown, members of Parliament (though some in the
House of Commons and the majority in the House of
Lords care little about politics), a few leading journalists,
and a smadl number of miscellaneous persons, writers,
lecturers, organizers, agitators, who occupy themselves
with trying to influence the public. Sometimes the term
is given a wider sweep, being taken to include all who
labour for their political party in the constituencies, as
e.g. the chairmen and secretaries of local party associa-
tions, and the more active committee men of the same
bodies.’ The former, whom we may call the Inner Circle

1 In America (Canada as well as the United States) people do not

CHAP, LVII THE POLITICIANS 387
+

men, ate professional politicians in this sense, and in
this sense only, that politics is the main though seldom
the sole business of their lives. But at present ex-
tremely few of them make anything by it in the way of
money. A handful hope to get some post; a some-
what larger number find that a seat in Parliament
enables them to push their financial undertakings or
gives them at least a better standing in the commercial
world. But the making of a. livelihood does not come
into the view of the great majority at all. The other
class, who may be called the Outer Circle, are not pro-
fessionals in any sense, being primarily occupied with
their own avocations; and none of them, except here
and there an organizing secretary, paid lecturer, or regis-
tration agent, makes any profit out of the work. The
“phenomena of .France and Italy and Germany are
generally similar, that is to say, those who devote their
whole time to politics are a very small class, those
who make a living by it an even smaller one.? Of all
the countries of Europe, Greece is that in which per-
sons who spend their life in politics seem to bear the
largest proportion to the whole population; and in Greece
the pursuit of politics is usually the pursuit of place.

To see why things are different in the United States,
why the Inner Circle is much larger both absolutely and
relatively to the Outer Circle than in Europe, let us go

say “politicians,” but “the politicians,” because the word indicates a class
with certain defined characteristics,

1 Of course now and then a man who has worked hard for his party
is rewarded by a place. Barristers who have spent their substance in
contesting seats have a better chance of judgeships, and there are usually
five or six practising counsel in the House of Commons who are supposed
to contemplate the possibility of their obtaining legal office. But these
cases are so few as to make no practical difference.

2 The number of persons who live off politics by getting places or by
manipulating finance is said to have increased in France of late years,

* But it cannot be very large even now.

388 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

back a little and ask what are the conditions which
develop a political class) The point has so important’
a bearing on the characteristics of American politicians
that I do not fear to dwell somewhat fully upon it.

In self-governing communities of the simpler kind
—for one may leave absolute monarchies and feudal
monarchies on one side—the common affairs are every-
body’s business and nobody’s special business. Some
few men by their personal qualities get a larger share
of authority, and are repeatedly chosen to be archons,
or generals, or consuls, or burgomasters, or landammans,
but even these rarely give their whole time to the state,
and make little or nothing in money out of it. This was
the condition of the Greek republics, of early Rome,’
of the cities of medizeval Germany and Italy, of the
cantons of Switzerland till very recent times.

When in a large country public affairs become more
engrossing to those who are occupied in them, when the
sphere of government widens, when administration is
more complex and more closely interlaced with the indus-
trial interests of thé community and.of the world at large,
so that there is more to be known and to be considered,
the business of a nation falls into the hands of the men
eminent by rank, wealth, and ability, who form a sort
of governing class, largely hereditary. The higher civil
administration of the state is in their hands; they fill
the chief council or legislative chamber and conduct its
debates. They have residences in the capital, and
though they receive salaries when actually filling an
office, the majority possess independent means, and
pursue politics for the sake of fame, power, or excite-

1 The principal business in life of Cincinnatus was to till his fields,
and a dictatorship a mere interlude. When I waited on the president of
the Republic of Andorra, one of the oldest states in Europe, some years
ago, I found him with his coat off wielding a flail on the floor of his barn.

CHAP. LVII THE POLITICIANS 389

ment. Those few who have not independent means
can follow their business or profession in the capital, or
can frequently visit the place where their business is
earried on. This was the condition of Rome under the
later republic,) and of England and France till quite
lately—indeed it is lurgely the case in England still—
as well as of Prussia and Sweden.’
Let us see what are the conditionsof the United States.
There is a relatively small leisured class of persons
engaged in no occupation and of wealth sufficient to
leave them free for public affairs. So far as such per-
sons are to be found in the country, for some are to be
sought abroad, they are to be found in a few great cities.
There is no class with a hereditary prescription to
public office, no great families whose names are known
to the people, and who, bound together by class
sympathy and ties of relationship, help one another
by keeping offices in the hands of their own members.
The country is a very large one, and has its politi-
cal capital in a city without trade, without manufactures,
without professional’ careers. Even the seats of State
governments are often placed in comparatively small
towns.» Hence a man cannot carry on his gainful
occupation at the same time that he attends to “ Inner
Circle ” politics.

1 Rome in the later days of the republic had practically become a
country, that is to say, the range of her authority and the mass of her
public business were much greater than in any of the Greek cities, even
in Athens in the days of Pericles.

2 Norway, the most democratic of the monarchical countries of Europe,
is the one which has probably the smallest class of persons continuously
occupied with politics.

3 E.g. The seat of government for Maryland is Annapolis, not Balti-
more ; for Ohio, Columbus, not Cincinnati ; for Dlinois, Springfield, not
Chicago ; for California, Sacramento, not San Francisco ; for Washington
Territory, Olympia, not Seattle or Walla Walla ; for Louisiana, Baton
Rouge, not New Orleans.

390 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

Members of Congress and of State legislatures
are invariably chosen from the places where they
reside. Hence a person belonging to the leisured class
of a great city cannot get into the House of Repre-
sentatives or the legislature of his State except as
member for a district of his own city.

The shortness of terms of office, and the large
number of offices filled by election, make elections
very frequent. All these elections, with trifling excep-
tions, are fought on party lines, and the result of a
minor one for some petty local office, such as county
treasurer, affects one for a more important post, e.g. that
of member of Congress. Hence constant vigilance, con-
stant exertions on the spot, are needed. The list of
voters must be incessantly looked after, newly-admitted
or newly-settled citizens enrolled, the active local men
frequently consulted and kept in good humour, meetings
arranged for, tickets (i.e. lists of candidates) for all
vacant offices agreed upon. One election is no sooner
over than another approaches and has to be provided
for, as the English sporting man reckons his year by
“ events,” and thinks of Newmarket after Ascot, and of
Goodwood after Newmarket.

Now what do these conditions amount to? To this
—A great déal of hard and dull election and other local
political work to be done. Few men of leisure to do it,
and still fewer men of leisure likely to care for it.
Nobody able to do it in addition to his regular busi-
ness or profession. Little motive for anybody, whether
leisured or not, to do the humbler and local parts of it
(t.e. so much as concerns the minor elections), the parts
which bring neither fame nor power.

If the work is to be done at all, some inducement,
other than fame or power, must clearly be found. Why

CHAP, LVII THE POLITICIANS 391
$$$ $$]

not, some one will say, the sense of public duty? I will
speak of public duty presently : meantime let it suffice
to remark that to rely on public duty as the main motive
power in politics is to assume a commonwealth of angels.
Men such as we know them must have some other in-
ducement. Even in the Christian Church there are other
than spiritual motives to lead its pastors to spiritual
work; nor do all poets write because they seek to ex-
press the passion of their souls. In America we discover
a palpable inducement to undertake the dull and toilsome
work of election politics. It is the inducement of places
in the public service. To make them attractive they
must be paid. They are paid, nearly all of them, member-
ships of Congress’ and other Federal places, State places
(including memberships of State legislatures), city and
county places. Here then is the inducement, the
remuneration for political work performed in the way
of organizing and electioneering. Now add that besides
the paid administrative and legislative places which a
democracy bestows by election, judicial places are also
in most of the States elective, and held for terms of
years only ; and add further, that the holders of nearly
all those administrative places, Federal, State, and
municipal, which are not held for a fixed term, are
liable to be dismissed, and have been hitherto in practice
dismissed, whenever power changes from one party to
another,? so that those who belong to the party out of
office have a direct chance of office when their party comes
in. The inducement to undertake political work we

1 Though, as observed in a previous chapter, the payment of mem-
bers of Congress does not seem to have any marked effect in lowering the
type of members. It is the offices rather than legislative posts that sustain
the professional class.

2 I am speaking of the practice up to within the last two or three
years. It has been slightly modified lately in consequence of the progress
of the civil service reform movement.

392 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART II

have been searching for is at once seen to be adequate,
and only too adequate. The men for the work are
certain to appear because remuneration is provided.
Politics has now become a gainful profession, like
advocacy, stockbroking, the dry goods trade, or the
getting up of companies. People go into it to live
by it, primarily for the sake of the salaries attached
to the places they count on getting, secondarily
in view of the opportunities it affords of making
incidental and sometimes illegitimate gains. Every
person in a high administrative post, whether Federal,
State, or municipal, and, above all, every member of
Congress, has opportunities of rendering services to
wealthy individuals and companies for which they are
willing to pay secretly in money or in money’s worth.
The better officials and legislators—they are the great
majority, except in large cities—resist the temptation.
The worst succumb to it, and the prospect of these
illicit profits renders a political career distinctly more
attractive to an unscrupulous man.?

We find therefore that in America all the conditions
exist for producing a class of men specially devoted to
political work and making a livelihood by it. It is
work much of which cannot be done in combination with
any other kind of regular work, whether professional
or commercial. Even if the man who unites wealth
and leisure to high intellectual attainments were a
frequent figure in America, he would not take to this
work ; he would rather be a philanthropist or cultivate
arts and letters. It is work which, steadily pursued
by an active man, offers an income. Hence a large
number of persons are drawn into it, and make it

1 As to the extent to which ‘corruption prevails, see post, Chapter
LXVIL.

CHAP, LVI THE POLITICIANS 393
a

the business of their life; and the fact that they
are there as professionals has tended to keep amateurs
out of it.

There are, however, two qualifications which must
be added to this statement of the facts, and which it is
best to add at once. One is that the mere pleasure of
polities counts for something. Many people in America
as well as in England undertake even the commonplace
work of local canvassing and organizing for the sake
of a little excitement, a little of the agreeable sense
of self-importance, or from that fondness for doing
something in association with others which makes a
man become secretary to a cricket club or treasurer of
a fund raised by subscription for some purpose he
may not really care for. And the second qualification
is that pecuniary motives operate with less force in
rural districts than in cities, because in the former
the income obtainable by public office is too small
to induce men to work long in the hope of getting
it. Let it therefore be understood that what is said
in this chapter refers" primarily to cities, and of course
also to persons aiming at the higher Federal and State
offices; and that I do not mean to deny that there
is plenty of work done by amateurs as well as by
professionals.

Having thus seen what are the causes which produce
professional politicians, we may return to inquire how
large this class is, compared with the corresponding class
in the free countries of Europe, whom we have called
the Inner Circle.

In America the Inner Circle, that is to say, the
persons who make political work the chief business of
their lives,’ includes :—

1 Of course I do not mean the business of their whole lives, for men

394 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART II

Firstly. All members of both Houses of Congress.

Secondly. All Federal office-holders except the
judges, who are irremovable, and who have sometimes
taken no prominent part in politics.

Thirdly. A large part of the members of State
legislatures. How large a part, it is impossible to
determine, for it varies greatly from State to State. I
should guess that in New York, Pennsylvania, New
Jersey, California, Maryland, and Louisiana, half the
members were professional politicians ; in Ohio,
Virginia, Illinois, Texas, less than half; in Massa-
chusetts, Vermont, Georgia, Kentucky, Iowa, Oregon,
not more than one-fourth; in some other States, per-
haps even less. But the line between a professional
and non-professional politician is too indefinite to make
‘any satisfactory estimate possible.

Fourthly. Nearly all State office-holders, excluding
the judges in a few States, and most of the judges in
the rest.

Fifthly. Nearly all holders of paid offices in the
greater and in many of the smiiller cities, and many
holders of paid offices in the counties. There are, how-
ever, great differences in this respect between different
States, the New England States and the newer States
of the North-west, as well as some Southern States,
choosing many of their county officials from men who are
not regularly employed on politics, although members of
the dominant party.

Sixthly. A large number of people who hold no office
but want to get one. This category includes, of course,
many of the “workers” -of the party which does not
command the majority for the time being, in State and

change their occupation frequently and lightly in America, but their chief
business for the time being.

CHAP, LVIT THE POLITICIANS 395

municipal affairs, and which has not, through the Presi-
dent, the patronage of Federal posts. It also includes
many expectants belonging to the party for the time
being dominant, who are earning their future places by
serving the party in the meantime.’

All the above may fairly be called professional or
Inner Circle politicians, but of their number I can form
no estimate, save that it must be counted by hundreds
of thousands, inasmuch as it practically includes nearly
all office-holders and most expectants of public office.?

It must be remembered that the “work” of politics
means in America the business of winning elections, and

1 But, as already observed, there are also in the rural districts and
smaller towns many workers and expectants who do not look for
places,

2 The Inner Circle may in England be roughly taken to include :-—

Members of the House of Lords, say . . 100
Meinbers of the House of Commons. 670
Editors, managers, and chief writers on leading
newspapers, say . 280
Expectant candidates for House of Commons, say 450

Persons who in each constituency devote most
of their time to ‘politics, eg. secretaries of
political associations, registration agents,
etc, say. . . : . 2000

3500

Comparatively few newspapers are primarily political, and in many
constituencies (eg. Irish and Highland counties) there are very few
persons occupied in political work. I do not, therefore, think this
estimate too low.

In the United States there are stated to be now about 120,000
Federal offices. Allowing one expectant for each office (a small allowance),
and assuming the State and local offices bestowed as the reward for
political services to be equal in number to Federal offices (they are, of
course, far more numerous), and allowing one expectant to each such
office, we should have a total of 120,000 x 4= 480,000. Deducting from
this total those who, though they work for office, do not make such
work their main business, and those who work with no special eye to
office, we should still have a very large total, probably over 200,000,
of persons whose chief occupation and livelihood lies in politics.

396 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

that this work is incomparably heavier and more complex
than in England, because :—

(1) The voters are a larger proportion of the
population; (2) The government is more complex
(Federal, State, and local) and the places filled by
election are therefore far more numerous; (3) Elections
come at shorter intervals ; (4) The machinery of nominat-
ing candidates is far more complete and intricate ; (5) The
methods of fighting elections are far more highly devel-
oped, ze. they are matters requiring more technical
knowledge and skill; (6) Ordinary private citizens do
less election work, because they are busier than in
England, and the professionals exist to do it for them.

I have observed that there are also plenty of men
engaged in some trade or profession who interest them-
selves in politics and work for their party without any
definite hope of office or other pecuniary aim. They
correspond to what we have called the Outer Circle
politicians of Europe. It is hard to draw a line between
the two classes, because they shade off into one another,
there being many farmers or lawyers or saloon-keepers,
for instance, who, while pursuing their regular calling,
bear a hand in politics, and look to be some time or
other rewarded for doing so. When this expectation
becomes a gonsiderable part of the motive for exertion,
such an one may fairly be called a professional, at least
for the time being, for although he has other means
of livelihood, he is apt to be impregnated with the
habits and sentiments of the professional class.

The proportion between Outer Circle and Inner
Circle men is in the United States a sort of ozonometer
by which the purity and healthiness of the political
atmosphere may be tested. Looking at the North only,
for I have no tolerable data as to the South, and ex-

CHAP. LVII THE POLITICIANS 397

cluding congressmen, the proportion of men who exert
themselves in politics without pecuniary motive is
largest in New England, in the country parts of New
York, in Northern Ohio, and the North-western States,
while the professional politicians most abound in the
great cities—New York, Philadelphia, Boston, Balti-
more, Buffalo, Cincinnati, Chicago, St. Louis, New
Orleans, San Francisco, This is because these cities
have the largest masses of ignorant voters, and also
because their municipal governments, handling large
revenues, offer the largest facilities for illicit gains.

I shall presently return to the Outer Circle men.
Meantime let us examine the professionals somewhat
more closely; and begin with those of the humbler
type, whose eye is fixed on a municipal or other local
office, and seldom ranges so high as a seat in Congress.

This species, like the weeds which follow human
dwellings, thrives best in cities, and even in the most
crowded parts of cities. It is known to the Ameri-
cans as the “ward politician,” because the city ward is
the chief sphere of its aetivity, and the ward meeting the
first scene of its triumphs. A statesman of this type
usually begins as a saloon or bar-keeper, an occupation
which enables him to form a large circle of acquaintances,
especially among the “loafer” class who have votes but
no reason for using them one way more than another,
and whose interest in political issues is therefore as
limited as their stock of political knowledge. But he
may have started as a‘lawyer of the lowest kind, or
lodging-house keeper, or have taken to politics after
failure in store-keeping. The education of this class is
only that of the elementary schools: if they have come
after boyhood from Europe, it is not even that. They
have of course no comprehension of political questions

398 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART II

or zeal for political principles; politics mean to them
merely a scramble for places. They are usually vulgar,
sometimes brutal, more rarely criminal, or at least the
associates of criminals. They it is who move about
the populous quarters of the great cities, form groups
through whom they can reach and control the ignorant
voter, pack meetings with their creatures.

Their methods and their triumphs must be reserved
for a later chapter. Those of them who are Irish, an
appreciable proportion in three or four great cities, have
seldom Irish patriotism to redeem the mercenary quality
of their politics. They are too strictly practical for that,
being regardful of the wrongs of Ireland only so far as
these furnish capital fo be used with Irish voters. Their
most conspicuous virtues are shrewdness, a sort of rough
good-fellowship with one another, and loyalty to their
chiefs, from whom they expect promotion in the ranks
of the service. The plant thrives in the soil of any
party, but its growth is more vigorous in whichever
party is for the time dominant in a given city.

English critics, taking their cue from American
pessimists, have often described these men as specimens of
the whole class of politicians. This is misleading. The men
are bad enough both as an actual force and as a symptom.
But they are confined to a few great cities, those eight or
nine I have already mentioned ; it is their exploits there,
and particularly in New York, where the mass of ignor-
ant immigrants is largest, that have made them famous.

In the sinaller cities, and in the country generally,
the minor politicians are mostly native Americans, less
ignorant and more respectable than these last-mentioned
street vultures. The bar-keeping element is represented
among them, but the bulk are petty lawyers, officials,
Federal as well as State and county, and people who for

CHAP, LVII THE POLITICIANS 399

want of a better, occupation have turned office-seekers,
with a fair sprinkling of store-keepers, farmers, and
newspaper men. The great majority have some regular
avocation, so that they are by no means wholly profes-
sionals. Law is of course the business which best fits in
with politics. They are not below the level of the class
to which they belong, which is what would be called in
England the lower middle, or in France the petite bour-
geoisie, and they often suppose themselves to be fighting
for Republican or Democratic principles, even though in
fact concerned chiefly with place-hunting. It is not so
much positive moral defects that are to be charged: on
them as a slightly sordid and selfish view of politics and
a laxity in the use of electioneering methods.

These two classes do the local work and dirty work
of politics. They are the rank and file. Above them
stand the officers in the political army, the party
managers, including the members of Congress and
chief men in the State legislatures, and the editors of
influential newspapers. Some of these have pushed their
way up from the humbler ranks. Others are men of
superior ability and education, often college graduates,
lawyers who have had practice, less frequently merchants
or manufacturers who have slipped into politics from
business. There are all sorts among them, creatures
clean and unclean, as in the sheet of St. Peter’s vision,
but that one may say of politicians in all countries. What
characterizes them as compared with the corresponding
class in Europe is that their whole time is more fire-
quently given to political work, that most of them draw
an income from politics and the rest hope to do so,
that they come more largely from the poorer and
less cultivated than from the higher ranks of society,
and that they include but few men who have pur-

400 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

sued any of those economical, social, or constitutional
studies which form the basis of politics and legislation,
although many are proficients in the arts of popular
oratory, of electioneering, and of party management.
They show a high average level of practical clever-
ness and versatility, and a good deal of legal knowledge.
They are usually correct in life, for intoxication as well
as sexual immorality is condemned by American more
severely than by European opinion, but are often charged
with a low tone, with laxity in pecuniary matters, with a
propensity to commit or to excuse jobs, with a deficient
sense of the dignity which public office confers and the
responsibility it implies. I shall elsewhere discuss the
validity of these charges, and need only observe here that
even if the last thirty years have furnished some grounds
for accusing the class as a whole, there are many bril-
liant exceptions, many leading politicians whose honour
is as stainless and patriotism as pure as that of the best
European statesmen. In this general description I am
simply repeating what non-political Americans them-
selves say. It is possible that with their half-humorous
tendency to exaggerate they dwell too much on the
darker side of their public life. My own belief is that
things are healthier than the newspapers and common
talk lead a traveller to believe, and that the black-
ness of thd worst men in the large cities has been
allowed to darken the whole class of politicians as the
smoke from a few factories will darken the sky over a
whole town. However, the sentiment I have described is
no doubt the general sentiment. “ Politician” is a term
of reproach, not merely among the “superfine philoso-
phers ” of New England colleges, but among the better sort
of citizens over the whole Union. ‘“ How did such a job
come to be perpetrated?” I remember once asking a casual

CHAP. LVH THE POLITICIANS 4o1

acquaintance who had been pointing out some scandalous
waste of public money. ‘ Why, what can you expect
from the politicians ?” was the surprised answer.
Assuming these faults to exist, to what causes are they
to be ascribed? Granted that politics has to become a
gainful profession, may it not still be practised with as
much integrity as other professions? Do not the higher
qualities of intellect, the ripe fruits of experience and
study, win for a man ascendency here as in Europe?
Does not the suspicion of dishonour blight his influence
with a public which is itself at least as morally exacting
as that of any European country? These are questions
which can be better answered when the methods of party
management have been described, the qualities they evoke
appreciated, their reaction on men’s character understood.
It remains to speak of the non-professional or Outer
Cirele politicians, those who work for their party without
desiring office. These men were numerous and zealous
shortly before and during the Civil War, when the
great questions of the exclusion of slavery from the
Territories and the preservation of the Union kindled
the enthusiasm of the noblest spirits of the North,
women as well as men. No country ever produced
loftier types of dauntless courage and uncompromising
devotion to principle than William Lloyd Garrison and
his fellow-workers in the Abolitionist cause. Office
came to Abraham Lincoln, but he would have served
his party just as earnestly if there had been no office
to reward him.’ Nor was there any want of high-
souled patriotism in the South. The people gave their

1 Lincoln was never a professional politician, for he continued to
practise as a lawyer till he became President : but he was so useful to his
party that for some years before 1860 he had heen obliged to spend great
part of his time in political work, and probably some would have called
him a professional.

VOL. If 2D

402 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART It

blood freely, and among the leaders there were many
who offered up fine characters as well as brilliant talents
on an altar which all but themselves deemed unhallowed.
When these great issues were finally settled, and the
generation whose manhood they filled began to pass
away, there was less motive for ordinary citizens to
trouble themselves about public affairs. Hence the pro-
fessional politicians had the field left free; and as they
were ready to take the troublesome work of organizing,
the ordinary citizen was contented to be superseded, and
thought he did enough when he went to the poll for his
party. Still there are districts where a good deal
of unpaid and disinterested political work is done.
In some parts of New England, New York, and Ohio,
for instance, citizens of position bestir themselves to
rescue the control of local elections from the ward poli-
ticiaus. In the main, however, the action of the Outer
Circle consists in voting, and this the ordinary citizen
does more steadily and intelligently than anywhere in
Europe, unless perhaps in Switzerland. Doubtless much
of the work which Outer Circle politicians do in Europe
is in America done by professionals. But that lively
interest in politics which the English Outer Circle feels,
and which is not felt by the English public generally,
is in America felt by almost the whole of the nation,
that is to say, by the immense majority of native
white Americans, and even by the better sort of immi-
grants, or, in other words, the American Outer’ Circle
comes far nearer to including the whole nation than
does the Outer Circle of England. Thus the influence
which counterworks that of professionals is the influence
of public opinion expressing itself constantly through
its countless voices in the press, and more distinctly
at frequent intervals by the ballot-box.

CHAPTER LVIII
WHY THE BEST MEN DO NOT GO INTO POLITICS

“Bur,” some one will say, who has read the reasons
just assigned for the development of a class of pro-
fessional politicians, “you allow nothing for public
spirit. It is easy to show why the prize of numerous
places should breed a swarm of oftice-seekers, not so
easy to understand why the office-seekers should be
allowed to have this arena of public life in a vast
country, a free country, an intelligent country, all to
themselves. There ought to be patriotic citizens ready
to plunge into the stream and save the boat from drifting
towards the rapids. They would surely have the support
of the mass of the people who must desire honest and
economical administration. If such citizens stand aloof,
there are but two explanations possible. Hither public
life must be so foul that good men cannot enter it, or
good men must be sadly wanting in patriotism.”

This kind of observation is so common in European
mouths as to need an explicit answer. The answer is
two-fold.

In the first place, the arena is not wholly left to
the professionals. Both the Federal and the State
legislatures contain a fair proportion of upright and dis-
interested men, who enter chiefly, or largely, from a

404 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

sense of public duty, and whose presence keeps the
-mere professionals in order. So does public opinion, de-
terring even the bad men from the tricks to which they
are prone, and often driving them, when detected in a
seridus offence, from place and power.

However, this first answer is not a complete answer,
for it must be admitted that the proportion of men of
intellectual and social eminence who enter public life is
smaller in America than it has been during the present
century in each of the free countries of Europe. Does
this fact indicate a want of public spirit ?

It is much to be wished that in every country public
spirit were the chief motive propelling men into public
life. But is it soanywhere now? Has it been so at any
time in a nation’s history? Let any one in England,
dropping for the moment that self-righteous attitude of
which Englishmen are commonly accused by foreigners,
ask himself how many of those whom he knows as mixing
in the public life of his own country have entered it from
motives primarily patriotic, how many have been actuated
by the love of fame or power, the hope of advancing
their social pretensions or their business relations. There
is nothing necessarily wrong in such forms of ambition ;
but if we find that they count for much in the public
life of one country, and for comparatively little in the
public life of another, we must expect to find the latter
able to reckon among its statesmen fewer persons of
eminent intelligence and energy.

Now there are several conditions present in the
United States, conditions both constitutional and social,
conditions independent either of political morality or of
patriotism, which make the ablest citizens less disposed
to enter political life than they would otherwise be, or
than persons of the same class are in Europe. I have

cHap. Lvur WHY THE BEST DO NOT ENTER POLITICS 405

already referred to some of these, but recapitulate them
shortly here because they are specially important in this
connection.

The want of a social and commercial capital is such
acause. To be a Federal politician you must live in
Washington, that is, abandon your circle of home friends,
your profession or business, your local public duties.
But to live in Paris or London is of itself an attraction
to many Englishmen and Frenchmen.

There is no class in America to which public poli-
tical life comes naturally, as it still does to a certain
class in England ; no families with a sort of hereditary
right to serve.the state. Nobody can get an early and
easy start on the strength of his name and connections,
as still happens in several European countries.

In Britain or France a man seeking to enter the
higher walks of public life has more than five hundred
seats for which he may stand. If his own town or
county is impossible he gues elsewhere. In the United
States he cannot. If his own district is already filled by
a member of his own "party, there is nothing to be done,
unless he will condescend to undermine and supplant at
the next nominating convention the sitting member.
If he has been elected. and happens to lose his own
re-nomination or re-election, he cannot re-enter Congress
by any other door. The fact that a man has served
gives him no claim to be allowed to go on serving. In
the West, rotation is the rule. No wonder that, when a
political career is so precarious, men of worth and
capacity hesitate to embrace it. They cannot afford to
be thrown out of their life’s course by a mere accident.?

1 The tendency in Switzerland to re-elect the same men to the legis-
lature and to public office has doubtless worked as'much for good in
politics there as the opposite tendency works for evil in the United States.
Men who have supported measures which their constituency disapproves

406 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

Politics are less interesting than in Europe. The two
kinds of questions which most attract eager or ambitious
minds, questions of foreign policy and of domestic
constitutional change, are generally absent, happily
absent. Currency and tariff questions and financial
affairs generally, internal improvements, the regulation
of railways and so forth, are important, no doubt, but
to some minds not fascinating. How few people in
the English or French legislatures have mastered them,
or would relish political life if it dealt with little else!
There are no class privileges or religious inequalities
to be abolished. Religion, so powerful a political force
in Europe, is outside politics altogether.

In most European countries there has been for
many years past an upward pressure of the poorer or
the unprivileged masses, a pressure which has seemed
to threaten the wealthier and more particularly the
landowning class. Hence members of the latter class
have had a strong motive for keeping tight hold of
the helm of state. They have felt a direct personal
interest in sitting in the legislature and controlling the
administration of their country. This has not been so
in America. Its great political issues have not been
class issues. On the contrary there has been so great
and general a sense of ecohomic security, whether well
or ill founded I do not now inquire, that the wealthy
and educated have been content to leave the active work
of politics alone.

The division of legislative authority between the
Federal Congress and the legislatures of the States
further lessens the interest and narrows the opportuni-
ties of a political career. Some of the most useful mem-

are often re-elected because they are thought honest and capable. The
existence of the referendum facilitates this.

cnaP. ivi WHY THE BEST DO NOT ENTER POLITICS 407

bers of the English Parliament have been led to enter it
by their zeal for philanthropic schemes and social reforms.
Others enter because they are interested in foreign
polities or in commercial questions. In the United
States fureign politics and commercial questions belong
to Congress, so no one will be led by them to enter the
legislature of his State. Social reforms and philan-
thropic enterprises belong to the State legislatures, so
no one will be led by them to enter Congress. The
limited sphere of each body deprives it of the services
of many active spirits who would have been attracted
by it had it dealt with both these sets of matters,
or with the particular set of matters in which their
own particular interest happens to lie.

In America there are more easy and attractive open-
ings into other careers than in most European countries.
The settlement of the great West, the making and
financing of railways, the starting of industrial or
mercantile enterprises in the newer States, all offer a
tempting field to ambition, ingenuity, and self-con-
fidence. A man witlfout capital or friends has a better
chance than in Europe, and as the scale of undertakings
is vaster, the prizes are more seductive. Hence much of
the practical ability which in the Old World goes to
Parliamentary politics or to the civil administration of
the state, goes in America into business, especially into
railways and finance. No class strikes one more by its
splendid practical capacity than the class of railroad men.
It includes administrative rulers, generals, diplomatists,
financiers, of the finest gifts. And in point of fact (as
will be more fully shown later) the railroad kings have
of late years swayed the fortunes of American citizens
more than the politicians.

The fascination which politics have for many people

408 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART IIT

in England is largely a social fascination. Those who
belong by birth to the upper classes like to support
their position in county society by belonging to the
House of Commons, or by procuring either a seat in the
House of Lords, or the lord-lieutenancy of their county,
or perhaps a post in the royal household. The easiest
path to these latter dignities lies through the Commons.
Those who spring from the middle class expect to find by
means of politics an entrance into a more fashionable
society than they have hitherto frequented. Their wives
will at least be invited to the party receptions, or they
may entertain a party chieftain when he comes to ad-
dress a meeting in their town. Such inducements
scarcely exist in America. A congressman, a State
governor, a city mayor, gains nothing socially by his
position. There is indeed, except in a few Eastern cities
with exclusive sets, really nothing in the nature of a
social prize set before social ambition, while the career of
political ambition is even in those cities wholly disjoined
from social success. The only exception to this rule
occurs in Washington, where a senator or cabinet
minister enjoys ex officio a certain social rank.’

None of these causes is discreditable to America,
yet, taken together, they go far to account for the large
developrhent of the professional element among poli-

1 It is the same in some, though by no means in all, of the cantons
of Switzerland. Office carries little or no social consideration with it.
In some cantons the old families have so completely withdrawn or becoine
so completely shit out from public office, federal or cantonal, that it
would be assumed that a politician was necessarily a plebeian. I re-
member to have heen told in Bern of a foreign diplomatist who, walking
one day with one of the old patricians of the city, stopped at the door of
the Government offices. “Where are you going?” asked the patrician.
“To see one of your ministers on business,” ‘You don’t mean that you
are guing to speak to one of that canaille!” was the reply. The minister

was, as Swiss statesmen generally are, a perfectly respectable man ; but
to a Bernese Junker his being a minister was enough to condemn him.

cHAaP, Lvl IVTHY THE BEST DO NOT ENTER POLITICS 409

ticlans. Putting the thing broadly, one may say that
in America, while politics are relatively less interesting
than in Europe and lead to-less, other careers are rela-
tively more interesting and lead to more.’

It may however be alleged that J have omitted one
significant ground for the distaste of “the best people”
for public life, viz. the bad company they would have
to keep, the general vulgarity of tone in politics, the
exposure to invective or ribaldry by hostile speakers
and a reckless press.

I omit this ground because it seems insignificant.
In every country a politician has to associate with men
whom he despises and distrusts, and those whom he most
despises and distrusts are sometimes those whose so-called
social rank is highest—the sons or nephews of great
nobles. In every country he is exposed to misrepre-
sentation and abuse, and the most galling misrepresent-
ations are not the coarse and incredible ones, but those
which have a semblance of probability, which delicately
discolour his motives and ingeniously pervert his words.
A statesman must soon learn, even in decorous England
or punctilious France or polished Italy, to disregard all
this, and rely upon his conscience for his peace of
mind, and upon his conduct for the respect of his
countrymen. If he can do so in England or France
or Italy, he may do so in America also. No more
there than in Europe has any upright man been written
down, for though the American press is unsparing, the
American people are shrewd, and sometimes believe
too little rather than too much evil of a man whom
the press assails. Although therefore one hears the

1 This is true even of eminence in letters or art. <A great writer
or eloquent preacher is relatively more honoured and valued in America
than in England.

410 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART UI

pseudo - European American complain of newspaper
violence, and allege that it keeps him and his friends
from doing their duty by the country, I could not
learn the name of any able and high-minded man of
whom it could be truly said that through this cause his
gifts and virtues had been reserved for private life.
The roughness of politics has, no doubt, some influence
on the view which wealthy Americans take of a public
career, but these are just the Americans who think
that European politics are worked, to use the common
phrase, “with kid gloves,” and they are not the class
most inclined anyhow to come to the front for the
service of the nation. Without denying that there is
recklessness in the American press, and a want of
refinement in politics generally, I do not believe that
these phenomena have anything like the importance
which European visitors are taught, and willingly learn,
to attribute to them. Far more weight is to be laid
upon the difficulties which the organization of the party
system, to be described in the following chapters, throws
in the way of men who seek to enter public life. There
is, as we shall see, much that is disagreeable, much that
is even humiliating, in the initial stages of a political
career, and doubtless many a pilgrim turns back after a
short experience of this Slough of Despond.

To explain the causes which keep so much of the
finest intellect of the country away from national busi-
ness is one thing, to deny the unfortunate results would
be quite another. Unfortunate they certainly are. But
the downward tendency observable since the end of the
Civil War seems to have heen arrested. When the
war was over, the Union saved, and the curse of slavery
gone for ever, there came a season of contentment and of
lassitude. A nation which had surmounted such dangers

cHaP.Lvil IWHY THE BEST DO NOT ENTER POLITICS 411

seemed to have nothing more to fear. Those who had
fought with tongue and pen and rifle, might now
rest on their laurels. After long-continued strain and
effort, the wearied nerve and muscle sought repose. It
was repose from political warfare only. For the end
of the war coincided with the opening of a time of swift
material growth and abounding material prosperity, in
which industry and the development of the West absorbed
more and more of the energy of the people. Hence a
neglect of the details of politics such as had never been
seen before. The last few years have brought a revival of
interest in public affairs, and especially in the manage-
ment of cities. There is more speaking and writing
and thinking, practical and definite thinking, upon the
principles of government than at any previous epoch.
Good citizens are beginning to put their hands to the
machinery of government; and it is noticed that those
who do so are, more largely than formerly, young men,
who have not contracted the bad habits which the
practice of politics has engendered among many of their
elders, and who will in’ a few years have become an even
more potent force than they are now. If the path to
Congress and the State legislatures and the higher
municipal offices were cleared of the stumbling- blocks
and dirt heaps which now encumber it, cunningly placed
there by the professional politicians, a great change
would soon pass upon the composition of legislative
bodies, and a new spirit be felt in the management of
State and municipal as well as of national affairs.

CHAPTER LIX
PARTY ORGANIZATIONS

Tue Americans are, to use their favourite expression, a
highly executive people, with a greater ingenuity in
inventing means, and a greater promptitude in adapting
means to an end, than any European race. Nowhere
are large undertakings organized so skilfully ; nowhere
ig there so much order with so much complexity; no-
where such quickness in correcting a suddenly discovered
defect, in supplying a suddenly arisen demand.
Government by popular vote, both local and national,
is older in America than in continental Europe. It is far
more complete than even in Englarid. Jt deals with larger
masses of men. Its methods have engaged a greater
share of attention, enlisted more ingenuity and skill in
their service, than anywhere else in the world. They
have therefore become more elaborate and, so far as
mere mechanism goes, more perfect than elsewhere.
The greatest discovery ever made in the art of war
was when men began to perceive that organization and
discipline count for more than numbers. This dis-
covery gave the Spartan infantry a long career of victory
in Greece, and the Swiss infantry a not less brilliant
renown in the later Middle Ages. The Americans made
a similar discovery in politics some fifty or sixty years
ago. By degrees, for even in America great truths do

CHAP. LIX PARTY ORGANIZA TIONS 413

not burst full-grown upon the world, it was perceived
that the victories of the ballot-box, no less than of the
sword, must be won by the cohesion and disciplined
docility of the troops, and that these merits can only
be secured by skilful organization and long-continued
training. Both parties flung themselves into the task,
and the result has been an extremely complicated system
of party machinery, firm yet flexible, delicate yet
quickly set up and capable of working well in the
roughest communities. Strong necessity, long practice,
and the fierce competition of the two great parties, have
enabled this executive people to surpass itself in the
sphere of electioneering politics. Yet the principles are
so simple that it will be the narrator’s fault if they are
not understood.

One preliminary word upon the object of a party
organization. To a European politician, by which I
mean one who knows politics but does not know
America, the aims of a party organization, be it local or
general, seem to be four in number—

Union—to keep the-party together and prevent it from

wasting its strength by dissensions and schisms.

Recruiting—to bring in new voters, e.g. immigrants
when they obtain citizenship, young men as they
reach the age of suffrage, new-comers, or residents
hitherto indifferent or hostile.

Enthusiasm—to excite the voters by the sympathy
of numbers, and the sense of a common purpose,
rousing them by speeches or literature.

Instruction—to give the voters some knowledge of
the political issues they have to decide, to in-
form them of the virtues of their leaders, and
the crimes of their opponents.

These aims, or at least the first three of them, are

414 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART IIE

pursued by the party organizations of America with
eminent success. But they are less important than a
fifth object which has been little regarded in Europe,
though in America it is the mainspring of the whole
mechanism. This is the selection of party candidates ;
and it is important not only because the elective places
are so numerous, far more numerous than in any
European country, but because they are tenable for short
terms, so that elections frequently recur. Since the
parties, having of late had no really distinctive principles,
and therefore no well-defined aims in the direction of
legislation or administration, exist practically for the
sake of filling certain offices, and carrying on the
machinery of government, the choice of those members
of the party whom the party is to reward, and who are
to strengthen it by the winning of the offices, becomes
a main end of its being.

There are three ways by which in self-governing
countries candidates may be brought before electors.
One is by the candidate’s offering himself, appealing to
his fellow-citizens on the strength of his personal
merits, or family connections, or wealth, or local in-
fluence. This was a common practice in most English
constituencies till our own time; and seems to be the
practide over parliamentary Europe still. Another
is for a group or junto of men influential in the
constituency to put a candidate forward, intriguing
secretly for him or openly recommending him to the
electors. This also largely prevailed in England, where
in counties four or five of the chief landowners used to
agree as to the one of themselves who should stand for the
county ; or chose the eldest son of a duke or marquis
as the person whom his rank designated.’ So in Scotch

1 Thus in Mr. Disraeli’s novel of Tancred the county member, a man

CHAP, LIX PARTY ORGANIZA TIONS 415

boroughs a little knot of active bailies and other citizens
combined to bring out a candidate, but generally kept
their action secret, for “the clique” was always a term of
reproach. The practice is common in France now, where
the committees of each party recommend a candidate.

The third system is that in which the candidate is
chosen neither by himself nor by the self-elected group,
but by the people themselves, ze. by the members
of a party, whether assembled in mass or acting
through representatives chosen for the purpose. This
plan offers several advantages. It promises to secure
a good candidate, because presumably the people will
choose a suitable man. It encourages the candidate,
by giving him the weight of party support, and there-
fore tends to induce good men to come fotward. It
secures the union of the party, because a previous vote
has determined that the candidate is the man whom the
majority prefer, and the minority are therefore likely,
having had their say and been fairly outvoted, to fall
into line and support him. This is the system which
now prevails from Maine to California, and is indeed
the keystone of transatlantic politics. But there is a
further reason for it than those I have mentioned.

That no American dreams of offering himself for a
post unless he has been chosen by the party’ is due
not to the fact that few persons have the local pre-
eminence which the social conditions of Europe bestow
on the leading landowners of a neighbourhood, or on
some great merchants or employers in a town, nor again
to the modesty which makes an English candidate delay
presenting himself as a candidate for Parliament until

of good birth and large estates, offers to retire in order to make room for
the eldest son of the Duke when he comes of aye.

1 It may sometimes, though rarely, be a schismatic or recalcitrant
section of the varty, as will be seen hereafter.

416 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART HI

he has got up a requisition to himself to stand, but to the
notion that the popular mind and will are and must be
all in all, that the people must not only create the office-
bearer by their votes, but even designate the persons for
whom votes may be given. For a man to put himself
before the voters is deemed presumptuous, because an
encroachment on their right to say whom they will even
so much as consider. The theory of popular sovereignty
requires that the ruling majority must name its own
standard-bearers and servants, the candidates, must de-
fine its own platform, must in eyery way express its own
mind and will. Were it to leave these matters to the
initiative of candidates offering themselves, or candidates
put forward by an unauthorized clique, it would subject
itself to them, would be passive instead of active, would
cease to be worshipped as the source of power. A
system for selecting candidates is therefore not a mere
contrivance for preventing party dissensions, but an
essential feature of matured democracy.

It was not however till democracy came to maturity
that the system was perfected.. As far back as the
middle of last century it was the custom in Massachusetts,
and probably in other colonies, for a coterie of leading
citizens to put forward candidates for the offices of
the town or colony, and their nominations, although
clothed with no authority but that of the individuals
making them, were generally accepted. This lasted on
after the Revolution, for the structure of society still
retained a certain aristocratic quality. Clubs sprang
up which, especially in New York State, became the
organs of groups and parties, brought out candidates, and
conducted election campaigns; while in New England
the clergy and the men of substance continued to act as
leaders. Presently, as the democratic spirit grew, and

CHAP, LIX PARTY ORGANIZATIONS 417

people would no longer acquiesce in self-appointed chiefs,
the legislatures began to be recognized as the bodies
to make nominations for the higher Federal and State
offices. Each party in Congress nominated the candi-
date to be run for the presidency, each party in a State
legislature the candidate for governor, and often for
other places also. This lasted during the first two or
three decades of the present century, till the electoral
suffrage began to be generally lowered, and a generation
which had imbibed Jeffersonian principles had come to
manhood, a generation so filled with the spirit of
democratic equality that it would recognize neither the
natural leaders whom social position and superior in-
telligence indicated, nor the official leadership of legis-
lative bodies. As party struggles grew more bitter,
a party organization became necessary, which better
satisfied the claims of petty local leaders, which knit the
voters in each district together and concentrated their
efforts, whileit expressed the absolute equality of all
voters, and the right of each to share in determining his
candidate and his party platform. The building up of
this new organization was completed for the Democratic
party about the year 1835, for the Whig party not till
some years later. When the Republican ‘party arose
about 1854, it reproduced so closely, or developed on
lines so similar, the methods which experience had
approved, that the differences between the systems of
the two great parties are now unimportant, and may
be disregarded in the sketch I have to give.

The essential feature of the system is that it is from
bottom to top strictly representative. This is because

1 What makes it hard to present a perfectly accurate and yet concise
description is that these are variations between the arrangements in cities
and those in rural districts, as well as between the arrangements in
different States.

VOL. IT 25

418 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

it has power, and power can flow only from the people.
An organization which exists, like the political associa-
tions of England, solely or mainly for the sake of canvass-
ing, conducting registration, diffusing literature, getting
up courses of lectures, holding meetings and passing
resolutions, has little or no power. Its object is to excite,
or to persuade, or to manage such business as the
defective registration system of the country leaves to be
fulfilled by voluntary agencies. So too in America the
committees or leagues which undertake to create or stimu-
late opinion have no power, and need not be strictly
representative. But when an organization which the
party is in the habit of obeying, chooses a party candi-
date, it exerts power, power often of the highest import,
because it practically narrows the choice of a party, that
is, of about a half of the people, to one particular person
out of the many for whom they might be inclined to
vote.’ Such power would not be yielded to any but a
representative body, and it is yielded to the bodies I
shall describe because they are, at least in theory,
representative.

1 The rapid change in the practice of England in this point is a curious
symptom of the progress of democratic ideas and usages there. As late
as the general elections of 1868 and 1874, nearly all candidates offered
themselves, to the electors, though some professed to do so in pursuance
of requisitions emanating from the electors. In 1880 many—I think
most—Liberal candidates in boroughs, and some in counties, were chosen
by the local party associations, and appealed to the Liberal electors on the
ground of having been so chosen. In 1885 nearly all new candidates
were so chosen, and a man offering himself against the nominee of the

association was d&nounced as an interloper and traitor to the party. The
same process has been going on in the Tory party, though more slowly.

CHAPTER LX
THE MACHINE

THE organization of an American party consists of two
distinct, but intimately connected, sets of bodies, the
one permanent, the other temporary. The function of
the one is to manage party business, of the other to
nominate party candidates.

The first of these is a system of managing committees.
In some States every election district has such a com-
mittee, whose .functions cover the political work of the
district. Thus in country places there is a township
committee, in cities a ward committee. There is a com-
mittee for every city, for every district, and for every
county. In other States it is only the larger areas,
cities, counties, and congressional or State Assembly
districts that have committees. There is, of course, a
committee for each State, with a general supervision of
such political work as has to be done in the State as a
whole. There is a national committee for the political
business of the party in the Union as a whole, and
especially for the presidential contest.* The whole
country is covered by this network of committees, each
with a sphere of action corresponding to some con-

1 Within the State Committees and National Committee there is a
small Executive Committee which practically does most of the work and
exercises most of the power.

420 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

stituency or local election area, so that the proper
function of a city committee, for instance, is to attend
to elections for city offices, of a ward committee to
elections for ward offices, of a district committee to
electidns for district offices. Of course the city com-
mittee, while supervising the general conduct of city
elections, looks to each ward organization to give
special attention to the elections in its own ward; and
the State committee will in State elections expect
similar help from, and be entitled to issue directions to,
all bodies acting for the minor areas—districts, counties,
townships, cities, and wards—comprised in the State.
The smaller local committees are in fact autonomous for
their special local purposes, but subordinate in so far as
they serve the larger purposes common to the whole
party. The ordinary business of these committees is to
raise and apply funds for election purposes and for
political agitation generally, to organize meetings when
necessary, to disseminate political tracts and other
information, to look after the press, to attend to the ad-
mission of immigrants as citizens and their enrolment
on the party lists. At election times they have also to
superintend the canvass, to procure and distribute tickets
at the polls, to allot money for various election services ;
but they are often aided, or virtually superseded, in
this work by “campaign committees” specially created
for the occasion. Finally, they have to convoke at the
proper times those nominating assemblies which form the
other parallel but distinct half of the party organization.

These committees are permanent bodies, that is to

1 In many States a person who has resided for a certain specified
period may vote even though he has not been naturalized as a citizen,

The business of registration is, I think, in all States undertaken by
the public authority for the locality, instead of being, as in England,
partially left to the action of the individual citizen or of the parties.

CH AED ER THE MACHINE 421
ta eta gt ey fe

say, they are always in existence and capable of being
called into activity at short notice. They are re-
appointed annually by the Primary (hereinafter men-
tioned) or Convention for their local area, as the case
may be, and of course their composition may be com-
pletely changed on a re-appointment. In practice it is
but little changed, the same men continuing to serve
year after year, because they hold the strings in their
hands, because they know most and care most about the
party business. In particular, the chairman is apt to
be practically a permanent official, and (if the committee
be one for a populous area) a powerful and important
official, who has large sums to disburse and quite an
army of workers under his orders. The chairmanship
of the organizing committee of the county and city of
New York (these areas being the same), for instance, is
a post of great responsibility and influence, in which high
executive gifts find a worthy sphere for their exercise.

One function and one only is beyond the competence
of these committees—the choice of candidates. That
belongs to the other ‘and parallel division of the party
organization, the nominating assemblies.

Every election district, by which I mean every
local area or constituency which chooses a person for
any office," has a party meeting to select the party
candidate for that office. This is called Nomin-
ating. If the district is not subdivided, 2.e. does not
contain any lesser districts, its meeting is called a
Primary. A primary has two duties. One is to select
the candidates for its own local district offices. Thus in
the country a township primary’? nominates the can-

1 Including under the term “ office” the post of representative in any

legislative assembly or municipal council.
2 T take township and ward as examples, but in parts of the country

422 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

didates for township offices, in a city a ward primary
nominates those for ward offices (if any). The other
duty is to elect delegates to the nominating meetings of
larger areas, such as the county or congressional district
in which the township is situate, or the city to which the
ward belongs. The primary is composed of all the
party voters resident within the bounds of the town-
ship or ward. They are not too numerous, for in
practice the majority do not attend, to meet in one
room, and they are assumed to be all alike interested.
But as the party voters in such a large area as a county,
congressional district, or city, are too numerous to be
able to meet and deliberate in one room, they must act
through representatives. The choice of candidates for
office in such larger areas is therefore entrusted to a
body called’ a Nominating Convention. It is a repre-
sentative body composed of delegates from all the
primaries within its limits, who have been chosen at
those primaries for the sole purpose of sitting in the
convention and there selecting the candidates.
Sometimes a convention of this kind has itself to
choose delegates to proceed to a still higher conven-
tion for a larger area. The greatest of all nominating
bodies, that which is called the National Convention
and nominates the party candidate for the presidency,
is entirely composed of delegates from other conven-
tions, no primary being directly represented in it. Asa
tule, however, there are only two sets of nominating
authorities, the primary which selects candidates for
its own petty offices, the convention composed of the
delegates from all the primaries in the local circum-
scriptions of the district for which the convention acts.

where the township is not the unit of local government (see Chapter
XLVIII. ante), the local unit, whatever it is, must be substituted.

CHAP, LX THE MACHINE 423
SS ———— ae ee

A primary, of course, sends delegates to a number
of different conventions, because its area, let us say the
township or ward, is included in a number of different
election districts, each of which has its own convention.
Thus the same primary will in a city choose delegates
to at least the following conventions, and probably to
one or two others.’ (a) To the city convention, which
nominates the mayor and other city officers. (b) To the
Assembly district convention, which nominates candi-
dates for the lower house of the State legislature. (c)
To the senatorial district convention, which nomi-
nates candidates for the State Senate. (d) To the
congressional district convention, which nominates can-
didates for Congress. (¢) To the State convention,
which nominates candidates for the governorship and
other State offices. Sometimes, however, the nomina-
ting body for an Assembly district is a primary and not
a convention. In New York City the Assembly dis-
trict is the unit, and each of the twenty-four has its
primary.

This seems complex: but it is a reflection of the
complexity of government, there being everywhere
three authorities, Federal, State, and Local (this last
further subdivided), covering the same ground, yet the
two former quite independent of one another, and the
third for many purposes distinct from the second.

The course of business is as follows :—A township
or ward primary is summoned by the local party man-
aging committee, who fix the hour and place of meeting,
or if there be not such a committee, then by some per-
manent officer of the organization in manner prescribed
by the bye-laws. A primary for a larger area is usually

1 There may be also a county convention for county offices, and a
judicial district convention to nominate for judgeships.

424 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

summoned by the county committee. If candidates
have to be chosen for local offices, various names are
submitted and either accepted without a division
or put to the vote, the person who gets most votes
being declared chosen to be the party candidate.
He is said to have received the party nomination.
The selection of delegates to the various conventions
is conducted in the same way. The local committee
has usually prepared beforehand a list of names of
persons to be chosen to serve as delegates, but any
voter present may bring forward other names. All
names, if not accepted by general consent, are then voted
on. At the close of the proceedings the chairman signs
the list of delegates chosen to the approaching conven-
tion or conventions, if more than one, and adjourns the
meeting sine die.

The delegates so chosen proceed in due course to
their respective conventions, which are usually held a few
days after the primaries, and a somewhat longer period
before the elections for offices." The convention is sum-
moned by the managing committee for the district it
exists for, and when a sufficient number of delegates are
present, some one proposes a temporary chairman, or the ©
delegate appointed for the purpose by the committee of
the district for which the convention is being held “ calls
the meeting to order” as temporary chairman. This
person names a Committee on Credentials, which forth-
with examines the credentials presented by the dele-
gates from the primaries, and admits those whom it
deems duly accredited. Then a permanent chairman is
proposed and placed in the chair, and the convention

1 In the case of elections to the Presidency and to the Governorship

of a State the interval between the nominating convention and the election
is much longer—in the former case about four months.

CHAP. LX THE MACHINE 425

”?

is held to be “ organized,” «.e. duly constituted. The
managing committee have almost always arranged be-
forehand who shall be proposed as candidates for
the party nominations, and their nominees are usually
adopted. However, any delegate may propose any per-
son he thinks fit, bemg a recognized member of the
party, and carry him on a vote if he can. The person
adopted by a majority of delegates’ votes becomes the
party candidate, and is said to have “ received the nomi-
nation.” The convention sometimes, but not always, also
amuses itself by passing resolutions expressive of its
political sentiments; or if it is a State convention or a
National convention, it adopts a platform, touching
on, rather than dealing with, the main questions of the
day. It then, having fulfilled its mission, adjourns sene
die, and the rest of the election business falls to the
managing committee. It must be remembered that
primaries and conventions, unlike the local party asso-
ciations of England, are convoked but once, make their
nominations, and vanish. They are swans which sing
their one song and dié.

The national convention held every fourth year
before a presidential election needs a fuller descrip-
tion, which I shall give presently. Meantime three
features of the system just outlined may be adverted to.

Every voter belonging to the party in the local area
for which the primary is held, is presumably entitled to
appear and vote in it. In rural districts, where every-
body knows everybody else, there is no difficulty about

1 It is true that according to what has been sometimes called the
“ Birmingham system,” an English party council in a constituency is
renewed every year by a fresh election in the wards. But such a “Three
Hundred” is a body permanent during the year, and may be summoned

to pass resolutions on some political question, or take such other action
as it can,

426 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART Ill

admission, for if a Democrat came into a Republican
primary, or a Republican from North Adams tried to vote
in the Republican primary of Lafayetteville, he would be
recognized as an intruder and expelled. But in cities
where people do not know their neighbours by head-
mark, it becomes necessary to have regular lists of the
party voters entitled to a voice inthe primary. These
are made up by the local committee, which may exclude
persons whom, though they call themselves Republicans
(or Democrats, as the case may be), it deems not loyal
members of the party. The usual test is, Did the claimant
vote the party ticket at the last important election,
generally the presidential election, or that for the State
governorship? If he did not, he may be excluded.
Frequently, however, the local rules of the party require
every one admitted to the list of party voters to be ad-
mitted by the votes of the existing members, who may
reject him at their pleasure, and also exact from each
member two pledges, to obey the local committee, and
to support the party nominations, the breach of either
pledge being punishable by expulsion. In many primaries
voters supposed to be disagreeably independent are kept
out either by the votes of the existing members or by the
application of these strict tests. Thus it happens that
three-fourths or even four-fifths of the party voters in a
primary area may not be on the list and entitled to
raise their voice in the primary for the selection of
candidates or delegates. Another regulation, restricting
nominations to those who are enrolled members of the
regular organization, makes persons so kept off the list
ineligible as party candidates.

Every member of a nominating meeting, be it a
primary or a convention of delegates, is deemed to be
bound by the vote of the majority to support the can-

CHAP, LX THE MACHINE 427

didate whom the majority select, whether or no an
express pledge to that effect has been given. And.
in the case of a convention a delegate is generally held
to bind those whom he represents, 2.e. the voters at
the primary which sent him. Of course no compul-
Sion is possible, but long usage and an idea of fair play
have created a sentiment of honour (so-called) and
party loyalty strong enough, with most people and in all
but extreme cases, to secure for the party candidate the
support of the whole party organization in the district.
It is felt that the party must be kept together, and that
he who has come into the nominating meeting hoping to
carry his own candidate must abide by the decision of
the majority. The vote of a majority has a sacredness
in America not yet reached in Europe.

As respects the freedom left to delegates to vote at
their own pleasure or under the instructions of their
primary, and to vote individually or as a solid body, the
practice is not uniform. Sometimes they are sent up to
the nominating convention without instructions, even
without the obligatiorf to “go solid.” Sometimes they
are expressly directed, or it is distinctly understood by
them and by the primary, that they are to support the
claims of a particular person to be selected as candidate,
or that they are at any rate to vote all together for one
person. Occasionally they are even given a list arranged
in order of preference, and told to vote for A. B., failing
him for C. D., failing him for E. F., these being persons
whose names have already been mentioned as probable
candidates for the nomination. This, however, would
only happen in the case of the greater offices, such as
those of member of Congress or governor of a State.

1 The obligation is however much less strict in the case of municipal
electiors than it is in Federal or State elections.

428 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART IIT

The point is in practice less important than it seems,
because in most cases, whether there be any specific and
avowed instruction or not, it is well settled beforehand
by those who manage the choice of delegates what can:i-
date any set of delegates are to support, or at least whose
lead they are to follow in the nominating convention.

Note further how complex is the machinery needed
to enable the party to concentrate its force in support of
its candidates for all these places, and how large the
number of persons constituting the machinery. Three
sets of offices, municipal or county, State, Federal, have to
be filled; three different sets of nominating bodies are
therefore needed. If we add together all the members of
all the conventions included in these three sets, the
number of persons needed to serve as delegates will
be found to reach a high total, even if some of them
serve in more than one convention. Men whose time is
valuable will refuse the post of delegate, gladly leaving
to others who desire it the duty of selecting candidates
for offices to which they seldom themselves aspire.
However, as we shall see, such men are but rarely
permitted to become delegates, even when they desire
the function.

“Why these tedious details,” the European reader
may exclaim. “Of what consequence can they be com-
pared to the Constitution and laws of the country.”
Patience. These details have more significance and
make more difference to the working of the govern-
ment than many of the provisions of the Constitution
itself. The mariner feels the trade winds which sweep
over the surface of the Pacific and does not perceive the
coral insects which are at work beneath its waves, but
it is by the labour of these insects that islands grow, and
reefs are built up on which ships perish.

CHAPTER LXI

WHAT THE MACHINE HAS TO DO

Tue system I have described is simple in principle, and
would be simple in working if applied in a European
country where elective offices are few. The complexity
which makes it puzzle many Americans, and bewilder
all Europeans, arises from the extraordinary number of
elections to which it is applied, and from the way in
which the conventions for different election districts
cross and overlap one another. A few instances may
serve to convey to the reader some impression of this
profusion of elections and intricacy of nominating
machinery.

In Europe a citizen rarely votes more than twice or
thrice a year, sometimes less often, and usually for only
one person at a time. Thus in England any house-
holder, say at Manchester or Liverpool, votes once a
year for a town councillor (if there is a contest); once
in three years for members of a school board (if there is
a contest) ; once in four or five years (on an average) for
a member of the House of Commons.’ Allowing for the

1 He may also vote once a year for guardians of the poor, but this
office is usually so little sought that the election excites slight interest
and comparatively few persons vote. The voting is by voting papers left

at the voter’s house for him to mark. If he goes to a vestry meeting
he may, in places where there is a select vestry, vote for its members,

430 THE PARTY SYSTEM . PART Ill

frequent cases in which there is no municipal contest in
his ward, he will not on an average vote more than one
and a half times each year. It is much the same in
Scotland, nor do elections seem to be more frequent
in France, Germany, or Italy.

Now compare the elections held to fill offices in the .
great State of Ohio, which is fairly typical of the older
western or middle States, Citizens vote at the polls for
the following five sets of offices. For simplicity I take
the case of a city instead of a rural district, but the num-
ber of elective offices is nearly the same in the latter.’

I. Feperar Orrices.— Election held :—Once in every
four years—Electors of the President of the United’
States. Once in every two years—Members of the
House of Representatives of the United States.

II. State Orrices.—Once in each year—Member of
the Board of Public Works (to serve for three years) ;
Judge of the Supreme Court (to serve for five years).
Once in two years—Governor of the State of Ohio;
Lieutenant-Governor of Ohio; Secretary of State of
Ohio; Treasurer of Ohio; Attorney-General of Ohio;
State Senators (elected in each Senatorial district) ;
Members of the State House of Representatives (elected
in each Representative district). Once in three years—
State Commissioner of Common Schools; Clerk of the
Supreme Court. Once in four years—Auditor of the
State.

III. District Orrices.—Once in two years—Circuit
Judge (to serve for six years). Once in five years—
Judge of the Court of Common Pleas (to serve for five
years). Once in ten years—Member of the State Board
of Equalization.

1 T have compiled what follows from the Ohio Voters’ Manual, by
W.S. Collins (Cleveland, Ohio, 1884),

CHAP. LXI WHAT THE MACHINE HAS TO DO 431

IV. County Orrices.—Once in each year—County
Commissioner (to serve for three years); Infirmary
Directors (to serve for three years). Once in two years
—County Treasurer; Sheriff; Coroner. Once in three
years—County Auditor; Recorder; Surveyor; Judge
of Probate; Clerk of Court of Common Pleas; Prose-
cuting Attorney.

V. Crry OrrFices.—Once in each year—Members of
the Board of Police Commissioners (in most cities) ;
Members of Board of Infirmary Directors (to serve for
three years) ; Trustee of Water Works (to serve for three
years). Oncein two years—Mayor ; City Clerk ; Auditor
(if any); Treasurer; Solicitor; Police Judge (in large
cities); Prosecuting Attorney of the Police Court (in
large cities); Clerk of Police Court (in large cities) ;
City Commissioner (in cities of the second class); Mar-
shal (not in the largest cities); Street Commissioner ;

tivil Engineer (if elected at the polls); Fire Surveyor
(if elected at the polls);' Superintendent of Markets (if
elected at the polls).

I have omitted from the above list—

All offices to which the council of a city appoints,
because these are not conferred by popular election.

All unpaid elective offices, although many of these
furnish opportunities for gain and influence.?

All offices which are found only in one or both of
the two great cities of Cincinnati and Cleveland.

This list shows a total of seven elections at the polls
taking place annually, twenty-one to twenty-six (accord-

1 The city council has power to determine whether these officers shall
be appointed by them or elected at the polls,

2 The ward offices are omitted from the above list, because they are
usually unpaid, and the township offices because they represent in the

rural districts what the ward offices are in the towns. The candidates
for ward and tcwnship offices are nominated in primaries.

432 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

ing to circumstances) taking place biennially, edyht
taking place triennially, two yuadrennially, one quin-
quennially, one decennially,—giving an average in round
numbers of twenty-two elections in each year. Of
course this does not mean that there are twenty-two
separate and distinct elections, fur many of the State _
offices are filled up at one and the same election, as
also most of the city offices at one and the same election.
It means that there are, on an average, twenty-two
different paid offices’ which a voter has annually to
allot by his vote—that is to say, he must in each and
every year make up his mind as to the qualifications of
twenty-two different persons or sets of persons to fill cer-
tain offices. As nearly all these offices are contested on
political lines, though the respective principles (if any)
of Republicans and Democrats have no more to do with
the discharge of the duties of the State and local offices
than the respective principles of Methodists and Bap-
tists, nominations to them are made by the respective
party organizations. Candidates for all, or nearly all,
the above offices are nominated in conventions composed
of delegates from primaries. I cannot give the precise
number of conventions, but there must be at least
seven or eight, although one or two of these will not
be held every year. As the areas with their respective
conventions overlap, the same primary will in each
year send different sets of delegates to as many different
nominating conventions, six or seven at least, as there
are sets of offices to be filled up in that year. The
number and names of the elective offices differ in dif-

1 If the unpaid offices were included, the average would rise to about
twenty-five, and some of these offices (eg. that of Alderman) are fought
on political lines because they vive influence and patronage. The text
therefore understates the case. In sume cities the ottive of alderman is
paid, in most it is much sought after.

CHAP, LXI WHAT THE MACHINE HAS ro DO 433

ferent States of the Union, but the general features of
the system are similar.

Let us now take another illustration from Massa-
chusetts, and regard the system from another side by
observing how many sets of delegates a primary will
shave to send to the several nominating conventions
which cover the local area to which the primary
belongs.’

A Massachusetts primary will choose the following
sets of persons, including committee-men, candidates,
and delegates :—

1. Ward and city committees in cities, and town committees in
towns.”

2. In cities, candidates for common council ; in towns, candi-
dates for town offices, i.e. selectmen, school committee, overseers of
poor, town clerk and treasurer, assessors of taxes, etc.

3. In cities, delegates to a convention to nominate city officers.

4. Delegates to a convention to nominate county officers.”

5. Candidates for representatives to State legislature, or dele-
gates to a convention to nominate the same.

6. Delegates to a convention for nominating candidates for
State Senate.

7. Delegates to a convention for nominating candidates for State
Governor’s council.

8. Delegates to a convention for nominating candidates for
State offices (e.g. Governor, Lieutenant-Governor, etc.)

The above areannual. Then every two years—

9. Delegates to a congressional district convention for nominat-
ing candidates for representatives to Congress.

1 TI owe the following list, and the explanatory note at the end of the
volume to the kindness of a friend in Massachusetts (Mr. G. Bradford
of Cambridge), who has given much attention to the political methods
of his country.

2 A “town” in New England is the unit of local government cor-
responding to the township of the Middle and Western States. It is
a rural not an urban area. See Chapter XLVIII. ante,

VOL. II 2p

434 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

Then every four years—

10. Delegates to a district convention for nominating other
delegates (corresponding to the members of Congress) to the
national Presidential Convention of the party ; and

11. Delegates to a general convention for nominating four
delegates at large (corresponding to United States senators) to
national Presidential Convention.?

In New York City there are usually from one hundred
and sixty to two hundred candidates to be voted for at
the November elections, eyen when the year is not one
of those when presidential electors are chosen ; and all
these have been nominated at primaries or conventions.
But I need not weary the reader with further examples,
for the facts above stated are fairly illustrative of what
goes on over the whole Union.

It is hard to keep one’s head through this mazy
whirl of offices, elections, and nominating conventions.
In America itself one finds few ordinary citizens who
can state the details of the system, though these are of
course familiar to professional politicians.

The first thing that strikes a-European who contem-
plates this organization is the great mass of work it has to
do. In Ohio, for instance, there are, if we count in such
unpaid offices as are important in the eyes of politicians,
on a average some thirty offices to be filled annually
by election. Primaries or conventions have to select
candidates for all of these. Managing committees have
to organize the primaries, “run” the conventions,
conduct the elections. Here is ample occupation for a
class of professional men.

What are the results which one may expect this
abundance of offices and elections to produce ?

1 See further the note to this chapter in Appendix to this volume
on the managing and nominating party organizations of Massachusetts,

cuap,.uxt WHAT THE MACHINE HAS TO DO 435

The number of delegates needed being large, since
there are so many conventions, it will be hard to find
an adequate number of men of any mark or superior
intelligence to act as delegates. The bulk will be
persons unlikely to possess, still more unlikely to
exercise, a careful or independent judgment. The
unctions of delegate being in the case of most con-
ventions humble and uninteresting, because the offices
are unattractive to good men, persons whose time is
valuable will not, even if they do exist in sufficient
numbers, seek it. Hence the best citizens, 7.e. the men
of position and intelligence, will leave the field open to
inferior persons who have any private or personal reason
for desiring to become delegates. I do not mean to
imply that there is necessarily any evil in this as regards
most of the offices, but mention the fact to explain why
few men of good social position think of the office of
delegate, except to the National Convention once in four
years, as one of trust or honour.

The number of places to be filled by election
being very large, ordinary citizens will find it hard to
form an opinion as to the men best qualified for the
offices. Their minds will be distracted among the multi-
plicity of places. In large cities particularly, where
people know little about their neighbours, the names of
most candidates will be unknown to them, and there
will be no materials, except the recommendation of a
party organization, available for determining the re-
spective fitness of the candidates put forward by the
several parties.

Most of the elected officials are poorly paid. Of
those above enumerated in Ohio, none, not even the
governor, receives more than $4000 (£800) a year,
the majority very much less. The duties of most offices

436 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

require no conspicuous ability, but can be discharged
by any honest man of good sense and business habits.
Hence they will not be sought by persons of ability and
energy, because such persons can do better for them-
selves in private business; it will be hard to say which
of many candidates is the best; the selection will rouse.
little stir among the people at large.

Those who have had experience of public meetings
know that to make them go off well, it is as desirable
to have the proceedings prearranged as it is to have a
play rehearsed. You must select beforehand not only
your chairman, but also your speakers. Your resolu-
tions must be ready framed; you must be prepared
to meet the case of an adverse resolution or hostile
amendment. This is still more advisable where the
meeting is intended to transact some business, instead
of merely expressing its opinion; and when certain
persons are to be selected for any duty, prearrange-
ment becomes not merely convenient but indispens-
able in the interests of the meeting itself, and of
the business which it has to ‘despatch. ‘Does not
prearrangement practically curtail the freedom of the
meeting?” Certainly it does. But the alternative is con-
fusion and a hasty unconsidered decision. Crowds need
to be leds if you do not lead them they will go astray,
will follow the most plausible speaker, will break into
fractions and accomplish nothing. Hence if a primary
is to discharge properly its function of selecting candi-
dates for office or a number of delegates to a nominating
convention, it is necessary to have a list of candidates
or delegates settled beforehand. And for the reasons
already given, the more numerous the offices and the
delegates, and the less important the duties they have
to discharge, so much the more necessary is it to have

CHAP. LXI WHAT THE MACHINE HAS T oO DO 437

such lists settled; and so much the more likely to be
accepted by those present is the list proposed.

The reasons have already been stated which make
the list of candidates put forth by a primary or by a
nominating convention carry great weight with the
.yoters. They are the chosen standard-bearers of the
party. A European may remark that the citizens are
not bound by the nomination; they may still vote for
whom they will. Ifa bad candidate is nominated, he
may be passed over. That is easy enough where, as in
England, there are only one or two offices to be filled
at an election, where these few offices are important
enough to excite general interest, and where therefore
the candidates are likely to be men of mark, But in
America the offices are numerous, they are mostly
unimportant, and the candidates are usually obscure.
Accordingly guidance is eagerly welcomed, and the
party as a whole votes for the person who receives the
party nomination from the organization authorized to
express the party view. Hence the high importance
attached to “getting ‘the nomination”; hence the care
bestowed on constructing the nominating machinery ;
hence the need for prearranging the lists of delegates to
be submitted to the primary, and of candidates to come
before the convention.

I have sought in this chapter firstly to state how the
nominating machine is constituted, and what work it
has to do, then to suggest some of the consequences
which the quantity and nature of that work may be
expected to entail. We may now go on to see how the
work turns out in practice to be done.

CHAPTER LXII
HOW THE MACHINE WORKS

Notuine seems fairer or more conformable to the
genius of democratic institutions than the system I have
described, whereby the choice of party candidates for
office is vested in the mass of the party itself. The
existence of a method which selects the candidate likely
to command the greatest support prevents the dissension
and consequent waste of strength which the appearance
of rival candidates of the same party involves ; while the
popular character of that method excludes the dictation
of a clique, and recognizes the sovereignty of the people.
It is a method simple, uniform, and agreeable throughout
to its leading principle.

To understand how it actually works one must dis-
tinguish between two kinds of constituencies or voting
areas. Ohe kind is to be found in the great cities—places
whose population exceeds, speaking roughly, 100,000
souls, of which there are now about thirty in the
Union. The ather kind includes constituencies in small
cities and rural districts. What I have to say will refer
chiefly to the Northern States—z.e. the former Free -
States, because the phenomena of the Southern States
are still exceptional, owing to the vast population of
ignorant negroes, among whom the whites, or rather
the better sort of whites, still stand as an aristocracy.

CHAP, LXII HOW THE MACHINE WORKS 439

The tests by which one may try the results of the
system of selecting candidates are two. Is the choice of
candidates for office really free—z.e. does it represent
the unbiassed wish and mind of the voters generally ?
Are the offices filled by good men, men of probity and
eqpacity sufficient for the duties ?

In the country generally, z.e. in the rural districts
and small cities, both these tests are tolerably well
satisfied. It is true that many of the voters do not
attend the primaries. The selection of delegates and
candidates is left to be made by that section of the popu-
lation which chiefly interests itself in politics; and in
this section local attorneys and office-seekers have much
influence. The persons who seek the post of delegate,
as well as those who seek office, are seldom the most
energetic and intelligent citizens; but that is because
these men have something better todo. An observer
from Europe who looks to see men of rank and culture
holding the same place in State and local government as
they doin England, especially rural England, or in Italy,
or even in parts of rutal France and Switzerland (one
cannot explain these things except by comparisons), will
be disappointed. But democracies must be democratic.
Equality will have its perfect work; and you cannot
expect citizens who are pervaded by its spirit to go cap
in hand to their richer neighbours begging them to act
as delegates, or city or county officials, or congressmen.
This much may be said, that although there is in America
no difference of rank in the European sense, superior
wealth or intelligence does not prejudice a man’s candi-
dature, and in most places improves its chances. If
such men are not commonly chosen, it is for the same
reason which makes them comparatively scarce among
the town-councillors of English municipalities.

440 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART HI

In these primaries and conventions the business is
always prearranged—that is to say, the local party
committee come prepared with their list of delegates or
candidates. This list is usually, but not invariably,
accepted, or if serious opposition appears, alterations
may be made to disarm it and preserve the unity of the-
party. The delegates and candidates chosen are gener-
ally the members of the loca] committee, their friends or
creatures. Except in very small places, they are rarely the
best men. But neither are they the worst. In moder-
ately-sized communities men’s characters are known, and
the presence of a bad man in office brings on his fellow-
citizens evils which they are not too numerous to feel
individually. Hence tolerable nominations are made, the
general sentiment of the locality is not outraged; and
although the nominating machinery is worked rather in
the name of the people than by the people, the people
are willing to have it so, knowing that they can inter-
fere if necessary to prevent serious harm.

In large cities the results are different because the
circumstances are different. We find there, besides
the conditions previously enumerated, viz. numerous
offices, frequent elections, universal suffrage, an absence
of stimulating issues, three others of great moment—

A vast population of ignorant immigrants.

The leading men all intensely occupied with business.

Communities so large that people know little of
one another,.and that the interest of each individual
in good government is comparatively small.

Any one can see how these conditions affect the
problem. The immigrants vote, that is, they obtain
votes after three or four years’ residence at most,
and often less, but they are not fit for the suffrage.

1 Federal law prescribes a residence of five years as the pre-requisite

CHAP, LXII HOW THE MACHINE WORKS 441

They know nothing of the institutions of the country,
of its statesmen, of its political issues. Neither from
Germany nor from Ireland do they bring much know-
ledge of the methods of free government, and from
Ireland they bring a suspicion of all government. In-
competent to give an intelligent vote, but soon finding
that their vote has a value, they fall into the hands
of the party organizations, whose officers enrol them in
their lists, and undertake to fetch them to the polls.
I was taken to watch the process of admitting to
citizenship in New York. Droves of squalid men, who
looked as if they had just emerged from an emigrant
ship, and had perhaps done so only a few weeks
before, for the law prescribing a certain term of resid-
ence is frequently violated, were brought up to a
magistrate by the ward agent of the party which
had captured them, declared their allegiance to the
United States, and were forthwith placed on the roll.
Such a sacrifice of common sense to abstract principles
has seldom been made by any country. Nobody pre-
tends that such persons are fit for civic duty, or will be
dangerous if kept for a time in pupilage, but neither
party will incur the odium of proposing to exclude them.
The real reason for admitting them, besides democratic
theory, was that the party which ruled New York ex-
pected to gain their votes.’ It is an afterthought to
argue that they will sooner become good citizens by
being immediately made full citizens. A stranger must
not presume to say that the Americans have been im-
prudent, but he may doubt whether the possible ulti-
mate gain compensates the direct and certain danger.

for naturalization, but the term which enables a vote to be acquired is
often shorter under State laws.

1 At one time a speedy admission to citizenship was adopted as an
inducement to immigrants ; but this motive has ceased to have force in
most States,

442 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

In these great transatlantic cities, population is far
less settled and permanent than in the cities of Europe.
In New York, Brooklyn, Chicago, St. Louis, San Fran-
cisco, a very small part of the inhabitants are natives of
the city, or have resided in it for twenty years. Hence
they know but little of one another, or even of those
who would in Europe be called the leading men. There
are scarcely any old families, families associated with
the city,’ whose name recommends one of their scions
to the confidence of his fellow-citizens. There are few
persons who have had any chance of becoming generally
known, except through their wealth; and the wealthy
have neither time nor taste for political work. Political
work is a bigger and heavier affair than in small com-
munities: hence ordinary citizens cannot attend to it
in addition to their regular business. Moreover, the
population is so large that an individual citizen feels
himself a drop in the ocean. His power of affecting
public affairs by his own intervention seems insignificant.
His pecuniary loss through over-taxation, or jobbery, or
malversation, is trivial in comparison with the trouble
of trying to prevent such evils.

As party machinery is in great cities most easily per-
verted, so the temptation to pervert it is there strongest,
because the prizes are great. The offices are well paid,
the patronage is large, the opportunities for jobs, com-
missions on contracts, pickings, and even stealings, are
enormous. Hence it is well worth the while of un-
scrupulous men to gain control of the machinery by
which these prizes may be won.?

1 In New York and Boston a few such families still exist, but their
members do not often enter “ politics”

2 Although what is here stated is generally true of Machines in large

cities, there may be, even in such cities, districts inhabited by well-to-do
people, in which the political organizations, being composed of men of

CHAP, LXII HOW THE MACHINE WORKS 443

Such men, the professional politicians of the great
cities, have two objects in view. One is to seize the
local city and county offices. A great city of course
controls the county in which it is situate. The other
is so to command the local party vote as to make good
terms with the party managers of the State, and get
from them a share in State offices, together with such
legislation as is desired from the State legislature, and
similarly to make good terms with the Federal party
managers, thus securing a share in Federal offices, and
the means of influencing legislation in Congress. How
do the city professionals move towards these objects ?

There are two stages in an election campaign. The
first is to nominate the candidates you desire: the
second to carry them at the polls. The first of these
is often the more important, because in many cities the
party majority inclines so decidedly one way or the
other (e.g. New York City is steadily Democratic, Phila-
delphia Republican), that nomination is in the case of
the dominant party equivalent to election. Now to
nominate your candidates you must, above all things,
secure the primaries. They require and deserve un-
sparing exertion, for everything turns upon them.

The first thing is to have the kind of primary you
want. Now the composition of a primary is determined
by the roll or “ check list,” as it is called, of ward voters
entitled to appear init. This is prepared by the managing
committee of the ward, who are naturally desirous to
have on it only such men as they can trust or control.
They are aided in securing this by the rules requiring
members to be admitted by the votes of those already
on the list, and exacting from persons admitted a pledge

good character and standing, are honestly worked. The so-called “ brown-
stone districts” in New York City have, I believe, good Machines,

444 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

to obey the committee, and abide by the party nomi-
nations." Men of independent temper often refuse
this pledge, and are excluded. Many of the ward
voters do not apply for admission. Of those who do
apply and take the pledge, some can be plausibly re-
jected by the primary on the ground that they have
on some recent occasion failed to vote the party ticket.
Thus it is easy for an active committee to obtain a sub-
servient primary, composed of persons in sympathy
with it or obedient to it. In point of fact the rolls of
membership of many primaries are largely bogus rolls.
Names of former members are kept on when these men
have left the district or died : names are put on of men
who do not belong to the district at all, and both sets of
names are so much “voting stock,” applicable at the

1 The rules of the Tammany Hall (Democratic) organization in New
York City have, for many years past, made the consent of a majority of
the members of each primary necessary to the admission of a new mem-
ber. <A similar system seems to have been adopted by the Republican
party in that city. “The organization of the twenty-four Republican
primaries (one for each Assembly district) is as complicated, and the access
to membership as difficult, as that of any private club. The name of the
applicant must be posted on a bulletin, and there stand until the next
monthly meeting before it can even go to the committee on adraissions.
If favourably reported, it must yet gain a majority of those present at a
monthly meeting of the primary ; a result quite problematical, if the
pliant obedience of the candidate is not made clear, or if he is not a
member of the faction, or the follower of the boss dominant in his
primary ; and his application must be to the primary of his district. If
he secures a majority he must yet not only take in substance the old
Tammany pledge, ‘to obey all orders of the general committee’ (whose action
is secret), and ‘to support all nominations approved by that committee,’
but he must also bind himself not to join any organization which does
not recognize the authority of the primary association he seeks to juin !
This is of course intended to prevent all movements for reform. If
elected, he may at any time be expelled by a majority of the members at
any meeting of the association, if he is held to have violated any of those
pledges. After an expulsion he can get back only by a vote of the
primary. Such is the liberty of a member. The s:rvile conditions of
membership have repelled the better class of citizens.”—-Mr. D, B. Eaton,
in Amer. Cyclup. of Polit. Science, art. “ Primary Elections.” The Republi-
cans have, however, within the last two years reformed this system.

CHAP. LXII HOW THE MACHINE WORKS 445

will and needs of the local party managers, who can
admit the latter to vote, and recognize men person-
ating the former. In fact, their control of the lists
enables them to have practically whatever primary they
desire.?

The next thing is to get the delegates chosen whom
you wish for. The committee when it summons the
primary settles in secret conclave the names of the
delegates to be proposed, of course selecting men it can
trust, particularly office-holders bound to the party which
has put them in, and “ workers” whom the prospect of
office will keep faithful. When the meeting assembles
a chairman is suggested by the committee and usually
accepted. Then the list of delegates, which the com-
mittee has brought down cut and dry, is put forward.
If the meeting is entirely composed of professionals,
office-holders, and their friends, it is accepted without
debate. If opponents are present, they may propose
other names, but the official majority is almost always
sufficient to carry the official list, and the chairman is
prepared to exert, in'favour of his friends, his power
of ruling points of order. In extreme cases a disturb-
ance will be got up, in the midst of which the chair-
man may plausibly declare the official list carried, or

1 In 1880 it was computed that out of 58,000 Republican voters
in New York City not more than 6000, or 8000 at most, were members
of the Republican organization, and entitled to vote in a primary.

The numbers present in a primary are sometimes very small. “At
the last Republican primaries in New York City only 8 per cent of the
Republican electors took part. In only eight out of twenty-four districts
did the percentage exceed 10, in some it was as low as 2 per cent. In
the Twenty-first Assembly District Tammany Primary, 116 delegates, to
choose an Assembly candidate, were elected by less than fifty voters, In
the Sixth Assembly District County Democracy Primary, less than 7
per cent of the Democratic voters took part, and of those who did, sixty-
nine in number, nearly one-fourth were election officers, The primary
was held in a careless way in a saloon while card-playing was going on.”
—Mr. A. C. Bernheim in Pol. Science Quarterly for March 1888.

446 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

the meeting is adjourned in the hope that the opposi-
tion will not be at the trouble of coming next time,
a hope likely to be realized, if the opposition consists
of respectable citizens who dislike spending an evening
in such company. Sometimes the professionals will
bring in roughs from other districts to shout down
opponents, and if necessary threaten them with violence.
One way or another the “ official” or committee’s list
of delegates is almost invariably carried.

The scene now shifts to the Nominating Convention,
which is also summoned by the appropriate committee.
When it is “called to order” a temporary chairman is
installed, the importance of whose position consists in
his having (usually) the naming of a committee on
credentials, or contested seats, which examines the titles
of the delegates from the various primaries to vote in
the convention. Being himself in the interest of the
professionals, he names a committee in their interest,
and this committee does what it can to exclude delegates
who are suspected of an intention to oppose the can-
didates whom the professionals have prearranged. The
primaries have almost always been so carefully packed,
and so skilfully “run,” that a majority of trusty delegates
has been secured ; but sometimes a few primaries have
sent delegates belonging to another faction of the party,
or to some independent section of the party, and
then there may be trouble. Occasionally two sets of
delegates appear, each claiming to represent their
primary. The dispute generally ends by the exclusion
of the Independents or of the hostile faction, the
committee discovering a flaw in their credentials, but
sometimes, though rarely, the case is so clear that they
must be admitted. In doubtful cases a partisan chair-
man is valuable, for, as it is expressed, “he is a solid

CHAP, LXII HOW THE MACHINE WORKS 447

8 to 7 man all the time.” When the credentials have
been examined the convention is deemed to be duly
organized, a permanent chairman is appointed, and the
business of nominating candidates proceeds. A spokes-
man of the professionals proposes A. B. in a speech, dwell-
ing on his services to the party. If the convention has
Been properly packed, he is nominated by acclamation.
If there be a rival faction represented, or if independent
citizens who dislike him have been sent up by some
primary which the professionals have failed to secure,
another candidate is proposed and a vote taken. Here
also there is often room for a partial chairman to influence
the result; here, as in the primary, a tumult or a hocus
pocus may in extreme cases be got up to enable the
chairman to decide in favour of his allies.

Americans are, however, so well versed in the rules
which govern public meetings, and so prepared to
encounter all sorts of tricks, that the managers do not
consider success certain unless they have a majority
behind them. This they almost certainly have; at least
it reflects discredit on their handling of the primaries
if they have not. The chief hope of an opposition there-
fore is not to carry its own candidate but so to frighten
the professionals as to make them abandon theirs, and
substitute some less objectionable name. The candidate
chosen, who, ninety-nine times out of a hundred, is the
person predetermined by the managers, becomes the
party nominee, entitled to the support of the whole party.
He has received “the regular nomination.” If there
are other offices whereto nominations have to be made,
the convention goes on to these, which being despatched,
it adjourns and disappears for ever.

I once witnessed such a convention, a State con-
vention, held at Rochester, N.Y., by the Democrats of

448 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

New York State, at that time under the control of the
Tammany Ring of New York City. The most prominent
figure was the famous Mr. William M. Tweed, then in
the zenith of his power. There was, however, little or
nothing in the public proceedings from which an observer
could learn anything of the subterranean forces at work,
During the morning, a tremendous coming and going and
chattering and clattering of crowds of men who looked
at once sordid and flashy, faces shrewd but mean and
sometimes brutal, vulgar figures in good coats forming
into small groups and talking eagerly, and then dissolv-
ing to form fresh groups, a universal camaraderie, with
no touch of friendship about it; something between a
betting-ring and the flags outside the Liverpool Ex-
change. It reminded one of the swarming of bees in
tree boughs, a ceaseless humming and buzzing which
betokens immense excitement over proceedings which
the bystander does not comprehend. After some hours
all this settled down; the meeting was duly organized ;
speeches were made, all dull and thinly declamatory,
except one by an eloquent Irishman; the candidates for
State offices were proposed and carried by acclamation ;
and the business ended. Everything had evidently
been prearranged; and the discontented, if any there
were, had been talked over during the swarming hours.
After each of the greater conventions it is usual to
hold one or more public gatherings, at which the candi-
dates chosen are solemnly adopted by the crowd present,
and rousing speeches are delivered. Such a gathering is
called a “ratification” meeting. It has no practical im-
portance, being of course attended only by those pre-
pared to support the nominations made. The candidate is
now launched, and what remains is to win the election.
The above may be thought, as it is thought by many

CHAP. LXII HOW THE MACHINE WORKS 449

Americans, a travesty of popular choice.’ Observing the
forms of consulting the voters, it substantially ignores
them, and forces on them persons whom they do not
know, and would dislike if they knew them. It substi-
tutes for the party voters generally a small number of
professionals and their creatures, extracts prearranged
nominations from packed meetings, and calls this con-
sulting the pleasure of the sovereign people.

Yet every feature of the Machine is the result of patent
eauses. The elective offices are so numerous that ordinary
citizens cannot watch them, and cease to care who gets
them. The conventions come so often that busy men
cannot serve in them. ‘he minor offices are so un-
attractive that able men do not stand for them. The
primary lists are so contrived that only a fraction of the
party get on them; and of this fraction many are too
lazy or too busy or too careless to attend. The mass of
the voters are ignorant; knowing nothing about the per-
sonal merits of the candidates, they are ready to follow
their leaders like sheep. Even the better class, however
they may grumble, are swayed by the inveterate habit
of party loyalty, and prefer a bad candidate of their own
party to a (probably no better) candidate of the other
party. It is less trouble to put up with impure officials,
costly city government, a jobbing State legislature, an
inferior sort of congressman, than to sacrifice one’s own
business in the effort to set things night. Thus the
Machine works on, and grinds out places, power, and the
opportunities for illicit gain to those who manage it.

1 Governor Cornell wrote in 1871 (being then chairman of the Re-
publican State Committee) of the primaries of New York City, “The
elections of delegates in nearly all of the districts were mere farces.”

VOL. IL 2G

CHAPTER LXAIIT
RINGS AND BOSSES

Tuis is the external aspect of the Machine; these
the phenomena which a visitor taken round to see a
number of Primaries and Nominating Conventions would
record. But the reader will ask, How is the Machine
run? What are the inner springs that move it? What
is the source of the power the committees wield? What
force of cohesion keeps leaders and followers together ?
What kind of government prevails among this army of
professional politicians ?

The source of power and the- cohesive force is the
desire for office, and for office as a means of gain. This
one cause is sufficient to account for everything, when it
acts, as it does in these cities, under the condition of the
suffrage of a host of ignorant and pliable voters.

Those who in great cities form the committees and
work the machine are persons whose chief aim in life is
to make their living by office. Such a man generally
begins by acquiring influence among a knot of voters
who live in his neighbourhood, or work under the same
employer, or frequent the same grog-shop or beer saloon,
which perhaps he keeps himself. He becomes a member
of his primary, attends regularly, attaches himself to
some leader in that body, and is forward to render

CHAP. LXIII RINGS AND BOSSES 451

service by voting as his leader wishes, and by doing
duty at elections. He has entered the large and active
class called, technically, “‘ workers,” or more affection-
ately, “the Boys.” Soon he becomes conspicuous in the
primary, being recognized as controlling the votes of
others—“ owning them” is the technical term—and is
chosen delegate to a convention. Loyalty to the party
there and continued service at elections mark him out
for further promotion. He is appointed to some petty
office in one of the city departments, and presently is
himself nominated for an elective office. By this time
he has also found his way on to the ward committee,
whence by degrees he rises to sit on the central com-
mittee, having carefully nursed his local connection and
surrounded himself with a band of adherents, who are
called his “‘heelers,” and whose loyalty to him in the
primary, secured by the hope of “something good,” gives
weight to his words. Once a member of the central
committee he discovers what everybody who gets on
in the world discovers sooner or later, by how few
persons the world is ‘governed. He is one of a small
knot of persons who pull the wires for the whole
city, controlling the primaries, selecting candidates,
“running ” conventions, organizing elections, treating on
behalf of the party in the city with the leaders of the
party in the State. Each of this knot, which is prob-
ably smaller than the committee, because every com-
mittee includes some ciphers put on to support a leader,
and which may include one or two strong men not on
the committee, has acquired in his upward course a
knowledge of men and their weaknesses, a familiarity
with the wheels, shafts, and bands of the party machine,
together with a skill in working it. Each can command
some primaries, each has attached to himself a group of

452 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

dependants who owe some place to him, or hope for some
place from him. The aim of the knot is not only to get
good posts for themselves, but to rivet their yoke upon
the city by garrisoning the departments with their own
creatures, and so controlling elections to the State legis-
lature that they can procure such statutes as they desire,
and prevent the passing of statutes likely to expose or
injure them. They cement their dominion by combina-
tion, each placing his influence at the disposal of the others,
and settle all important measures in secret conclave.

Such a combination is called 4 Ring.

The power of such a combination is immense, for
it ramifies over the whole city. There are, in New
York City, for instance, over ten thousand persons
employed by the city authorities, all dismissible by
their superiors at short notice and without cause
assigned. There are two thousand five hundred per-
sons employed in the Custom-House, Post-Offive, and
other branches of the Federal service, most of whom
are similarly dismissible by the proper Federal autho-
rity ;' and there are also State‘ servants, responsible
to and dismissible by the State authority. If the
same party happens to be supreme in city politics, in
the Federal government, and in the State govern-
ment, all this army of employés is expected to work
for the party leaders of the city, in city primaries con-
ventions and elections, and is virtually amenable to
the orders of these leaders.? If the other party holds
the reins of Federal government, or of both the Federal
government and State government, then the city wire-
pullers have at any rate their own ten thousand or more,

1 Mr. Dorman B. Eaton, late one of the Federal Civil Service Com-
missioners, in article “ Primary,” in the Amer. Cyclop. of Polit. Science.

2 Assuming, as one usually may, that the city leaders are on good
terms with the Federal and State party managers,

CHAP. LXIII RINGS AND BOSSES 453

while other thousands swell the army of ‘ workers” for
the opposite party. Add those who expect to get
offices, and it will be seen how great and how dis-
ciplined a force is available to garrison the city and
how effective it becomes under strict discipline. Yet
jt is not larger than is needed, for the work is heavy.
Tantae molis erat Romanam condere gentem.

In a Ring there is usually some one person who holds
more strings in his hand than do the others. Like
them he has worked himself up to power from small
beginnings, gradually extending the range of his influ-
ence over the mass of workers, and knitting close bonds
with influential men outside as well as inside politics,
perhaps with great financiers or railway magnates,
whom he can oblige, and who can furnish him with
funds. At length his superior skill, courage, and force
of will make him, as such gifts always do make their
possessor, dominant among his fellows. An army led
by a council seldom conquers: it must have a com-
mander-in-chief, who settles disputes, decides in emer-
gencies, inspires fear or attachment. The head of the
Ring is such a general. He dispenses places, rewards
the loyal, punishes the mutinous, concocts schemes,
negotiates treaties. He generally avoids publicity,
preferring the substance to the pomp of power, and is
all the more dangerous because he sits, like a spider,
hidden in the midst of his web. He is a Boss.

Although the career I have sketched is that whereby
most Bosses have risen to greatness, some attain it by
a shorter path. There have been brilliant instances of
persons stepping at once on to the higher rungs of the
ladder in virtue of their audacity and energy, especially
if coupled with oratorical power. The first theatre of
such a man’s successes may have been the stump rather

454 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART IIE

than the primary: he will then become potent in con-
ventions, and either by hectoring or by plausible
address, for both have their value, spring into popu-
lar favour, and make himself necessary to the party
managers. It is of course a gain to a Ring to have
among them a man of popular gifts, because he helps tg
conceal the odious features of their rule, gilding it by
his rhetoric, and winning the applause of the masses
who stand outside the circle of workers. However, the
position of the rhetorical boss is less firmly rooted
than that of the intriguing boss, and there have been
instances of his suddenly falling to rise no more.

A great city is the best soil for the growth of a
Boss, because it contains the largest masses of manage-
able voters as well as numerous offices, and plentiful
opportunities for jobbing. But a whole State some-
times falls under the dominion of one intriguer. To
govern so large a territory needs high abilities ; and the
State boss is always an able man, somewhat more of a
politician, in the European sense, than a city boss need
be. He dictates State nominations, and through his
lieutenants controls State and sometimes Congressional
conventions, being in diplomatic relations with the
chief city bosses and local rings in different parts of
the State. His power over them mainly springs from
his influence with the Federal executive and in Congress.
He is usually, almost necessarily, a member of Congress,
probably a sen&tor, and can procure, or at any rate
can hinder, such legislation as the local leaders desire
or dislike. The President cannot ignore him, and the
President’s ministers, however little they may like him,
find it worth while to gratify him with Federal appoint-
ments for persons he recommends, because the local
votes he controls may make all the difference to their

CHAP. LXIII RINGS AND BOSSES 455

own prospects of getting some day a nomination for
the presidency. Thus he uses his Congressional position
to secure State influence, and his State influence to
strengthen his Federal position. Sometimes however
he is: rebuffed by the powers at Washington and then
his State thanes fly from him. Sometimes he quarrels.
with a powerful city boss, and then honest men come
by their own.

It must not be supposed that the members of Rings,
or the great Boss himself, are wicked men. They are
the offspring of a system. Their morality is that of
their surroundings. They see a door open to wealth
and power, and they walk in. The obligations of
patriotism or duty to the public are not disregarded by
them, for these obligations have never been present to
their minds. A State boss is usually a native American
and a person of some education, who avoids the grosser
forms of corruption, though he has to wink at them
when practised by his friends) He may be a man
of personal integrity." A city boss is often of foreign
birth and humble origin; he has grown up in an
atmosphere of oaths and cocktails: ideas of honour
and purity are as strange to him as ideas about the
nature of the currency and the incidence of taxation :
politics is merely a means for getting and distributing
places. “‘ What,” said an ingenuous delegate at one of
the National Conventions at Chicago in 1880, ‘ what
are we here for except the offices?” It is no wonder
if he helps himself from the city treasury and allows
his minions to do so. Sometimes he does not rob,
and, like Clive, wonders at his own moderation. And
even he improves as he rises in the world. Like a

1 So too a rural boss is often quite pure, and blameworthy rather for
his intriguing methods than for his aims.

456 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

tree growing out of a dust heap, the higher he gets, the
cleaner do his boughs and leaves become. America is
a country where vulgarity is scaled off more easily than
in England, and where the general air of good nature
softens the asperities of power. Some city bosses are
men from whose decorous exterior and unobtrusive
manners no one would divine either their sordid be-
ginnings or their noxious trade. As for the State
boss, whose talents are probably greater to begin with,
he must be of very coarse metal if be does not take
a polish from the society of Washington.

A city Ring works somewhat as follows. When the
annual or biennial city or State elections come round,
its members meet to discuss the apportionment of
offices. Each may desire something for himself, unless
indeed he is already fully provided for, and anyhow
desires something for his friends. The common sort
are provided for with small places in the gift of some
official, down to the place of a policeman or doorkeeper
or messenger, which is thought good enough for a
common “ward worker.” Better men receive clerkships
or the promise of a place in the custom-house or post-
office to be obtained from the Federal authorities. Men
still more important aspire to the elective posts, seats
in the State legislature, a city aldermanship or commis-
sionership, perhaps even a seat in Congress. All the
posts that will have to be filled at the coming elections
are considered “with the object of bringing out a party
ticket, z.e. a list of candidates to be supported by the
party at the polls when its various nominations have
been successfully run through the proper conventions.
Some leading man, or probably the Boss himself,
sketches out an allotment of places; and when this
allotment has been worked out fully, it results in a

CHAP. LXIII RINGS AND BOSSES 457

Blate, 7.e. a complete draft list of candidates to be pro-
posed for the various offices... It may happen that the
slate does not meet everybody’s wishes. Some member
of the ring or some local boss—most members of a ring
are bosses each in his own district, as the members of
a cabinet are heads of the departments of state, or as
the cardinals are bishops of dioceses near Rome and
priests and deacons of her parish churches—may com-
plain that he and his friends have not been adequately
provided for, and may demand more. In that case the
slate will probably be modified a little to ensure good
feeling and content; and will then be presented to
the Convention.

But there is sometimes a more serious difficulty to
surmount. A party in a State or city may be divided
into two or more factions. Success in the election
will be possible only by uniting these factions upon
the same nominees for office. Occasionally the factions
may each make its list and then come together in
the party convention to fight out their differences.
But the more prudent course is for the chiefs of each
faction to arrange matters in a private conference.
Each comes wishing to get the most he can for his
clansmen, but feels the need for a compromise. By
a process of “ dickering” (i.e. bargaining by way of
barter), various offers and suggestions being made all
round, a list is settled on which the high contracting

1 A pleasant story is told of a former Boss of New York State, who sat
with his vassals just before the convention, preparing the Slate. There
were half a dozen or more State offices fur which nominations were to be
made. The names were with deliberation selected and set down, with
the exception of the very unimportant place of State Prison Inspector.
One of his subordinates ventured to call the attention of the Boss to what
he supposed to be an inadvertence, and asked who was to be the man for
that place, to which the great man answered, with an indulgent smile, “I
guess we will leave that to the convention.”

458 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART II

parties agree. This is a Deal, or Trade, a treaty which
terminates hostilities for the time, and brings about
“harmony.” The list so settled is now a Slate, unless
some discontented magnate objects and threatens to
withdraw. To do so is called “ breaking the slate.” If
such a “sore-head” persists, a schism may follow, with
horrible disaster to the party; but usually a new slate
is prepared and finally agreed upon. The accepted
Slate is now ready tu be turned by the Machine into
a Ticket, and nothing further remains but the compara-
tively easy process of getting the proper delegates
chosen by packed primaries, and running the various
parts of the ticket through the conventions to which
the respective nominations belong. Internal dissen-
sion among the chiefs is the one great danger; the
party must at all hazards be kept together, for the
power of a united party is enormous. It has not only
a large but a thoroughly trained and disciplined army
in its office-holders and office-seekers; and it can con-
centrate its force upon any point where opposition is
threatened to the regular party nominations.’ All
these office-holders and office-seekers have not only the
spirit of self-interest to rouse them, but the bridle of
fear to check any stirrings of independence. Discip-
line is very strict in this army. Even city politicians
must have a moral code and moral standard. It is not
the code of an ordinary unprofessional citizen. It does
not forbid falsehood, or malversation, or ballot stuffing,
or “repeating.” But it denounces apathy or cowardice,
disobedience, and above all, treason to the party. Its
typical virtue is “solidity,” unity of heart, mind, and

1 As for instance by packing the primaries with its adherents from

other districts, whom a partisan chairman or committee will suffer to be
present and perhaps to vote.

CHAP. LXIII RINGS AND BOSSES 459

effort among the workers, unquestioning loyalty to the
party leaders, and devotion to the party ticket. He
who takes his own course is a Kicker or Bolter; and
is punished not only sternly but vindictively. The
path of promotion is closed to him; he is turned out
of, the primary, and forbidden to hope for a delegacy to
a convention ; he is dismissed from any office he holds
which the Ring can command. Dark stories are even
told of a secret police which will pursue the culprit who
has betrayed his party, and of mysterious disappear-
ances of men whose testimony against the Ring was
feared. Whether there is any foundation for such tales
I do not undertake to say. But true it is that the bond
between the party chiefs and their followers is very
close and very seldom broken. What the client was
to his patron at Rome, what the vassal was to his lord
in the Middle Ages, that the heelers and workers are to
their boss in these great transatlantic cities. They
render a personal feudal service, which their suzerain
repays with the gift of a livelihood ; and the relation is
all the more cordial because the lord bestows what costs
him nothing, while the vassal feels that he can keep his
post only by the favour of the lord.

European readers must again be cautioned against
drawing for themselves too dark a picture of the Boss.
He is notademon. He is not regarded with horror even
by those “good citizens” who strive to shake off his yoke.
He is not necessarily either corrupt or mendacious,
though he grasps at place, power, and wealth. He is a
leader to whom certain peculiar social and political con-
ditions have given a character dissimilar from the party
leaders whom Europe knows. It is worth while to point
out in what the dissimilarity consists.

A Boss needs fewer showy gifts than a European

460 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART II

demagogue. His special theatre is neither the halls of
the legislature nor the platform, but the committee-
room. A power of rough and ready repartee, or a turn
for florid declamation, will help him; but he can dis-
pense with both. What he needs are the arts of intrigue
and that knowledge of men which teaches him when
to bully, when to cajole, whom to attract by the hope of
gain, whom by appeals to party loyalty. Nor are so-
called “social gifts” unimportant. The lower sort of
city politicians congregate in clubs and bar-rooms; and
as much of the cohesive strength of the smaller party
organizations arises from their being also social bodies,
so also much of the power which liquor dealers exercise
is due to the fact that “heelers” and “ workers” spend
their evenings in drinking places, and that meetings for
political purposes are held there. Of the 1007 primaries
and conventions of all parties held in New York City
preparatory to the elections of 1884, 633 took place
in liquor saloons. A Boss ought therefore to be hail
fellow well met with those who frequent these places,
not fastidious in his tastes, fond'of a drink and willing
to stand one, jovial in manners, and ready to oblige
even a humble friend.

The aim of a Boss is not so much fame as power,
and not so much power over the conduct of affairs as
over persons. Patronage is the sort of power he seeks,
patronage understood in the largest sense in which it
covers the disposal of lucrative contracts: and other
modes of enrichment as well as salaried places. The
dependants who surround him desire wealth, or at least
a livelihood ; his business is to find this for them, and in
doing so he strengthens his own position.’ It is as the

1 “ A Boss is able to procure positions for many of his henchmen on
horse-railroads, the elevated roads, quarry works, ete. Great corporations

CHAP. LXIII RINGS AND BOSSES 461

bestower of riches that he holds his position, like the
leader of a band of condottieri in the fifteenth century.
The interest of a Boss in political questions is
usually quite secondary. Here and there one may be
found who is a politician in the European sense, who,
whether sincerely or not, purports and professes to be
interested in some principle or measure affecting the
welfare of the country. But the attachment of the
ringster is usually given wholly to the concrete party,
that is to the men who compose it, regarded as office-
holders or office-seekers ; and there is often not even a
profession of zeal for any party doctrine. As a noted
politician happily observed to a friend of mine, ‘“ You
know, Mr. R., there are no politics in politics.” Among
bosses, therefore, there is little warmth of party spirit.
The typical boss regards the boss of the other party
much as counsel for the plaintiff regards counsel for the
defendant. They are professionally opposed, but not
necessarily personally hostile. Between bosses there
need be no more enmity than results from the fact that
the one has got what the other wishes to have. Accord-
ingly it sometimes happens that there is a good under-
standing between the chiefs of opposite parties in cities ;
they will even go the length of making (of course
secretly) a joint “deal,” 2.e. of arranging for a distribu-
are peculiarly subject to the attacks of demagogues, and they find it greatly
to their interest to be on good terms with the leader in each district who
controls the vote of the assemblyman and alderman; and therefure the
former is pretty sure that a letter of recommendation from him on behalf
of any applicant for work will receive most favourable consideration.
The leader also is continually helping his supporters out of difficulties,
pecuniary and otherwise: he lends them a dollar now and then, helps
out, when possible, such of their kinsmen as get into the clutches of the
law, gets a hold over such of them as have done wrong and are afraid of
being exposed, and learns to mix bullying judiciously with the rendering

of service.””— Mr. Theodore Roosevelt, in an article in the Century
magazine for November 1886.

462 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART HI

tion of offices whereby some of the friends of one shall
get places, the residue being left for the friends of the
other. A well-organized city party has usually a dis-
posable vote which can be so cast under the directions
of the managers as to effect this, or any other desired
result. The appearance of hostility must, of course, be
maintained for the benefit of the public; but as it is for
the interest of both parties to make and keep these
private bargains, they are usually kept when made,
though of course it is seldom possible to prove the fact.
The real hostility of the Boss is not to the opposite
party, but to other factions within his own party. Often
he has a rival leading some other organization, and
demanding, in respect of the votes which that organiza-
tion controls, a share of the good things going. The
greatest cities can support more than one faction within
the same party; thus New York has long had three
democratic organizations, two of which are powerful and
often angrily hostile. If neither can crush the other, it
finds itself obliged to treat, and to consent to lose part
of the spoils to its rival. Still more bitter, however, is
the hatred of Boss and Ring towards those members of
the party who do not desire and are not to be appeased
by a share of the spoils, but who agitate for what they
call reform. They are natural and permanent enemies ;
nothing but the extinction of the Boss himself and of
bossdom altogether will satisfy them. They are more-
over the common enemies of both parties, that is, of
bossdom in both parties. Hence in ring-governed
cities professionals of both parties will sometimes unite
against the reformers, or will rather let their opponents
secure a place than win it for themselves by the help of
the ‘“‘independent vote.” Devotion to “party govern-
ment,” as they understand it, can hardly go farther.

CHAP. LXIII RINGS AND BOSSES 463

This great army of workers is mobilized for elections,
the methuds of which form a wide and instructive
department of political science. Here I have to refer
only to their financial side, because that is intimately
connected with the Machine. Elections need money,
in America a great deal of money. Where, then, does
the money come from, seeing that the politicians them-
selves belong to, or emerge from, a needy class ?

The revenues of a Ring, that is, their collective, or,
as one may say, corporate revenues, available for party
purposes, flow from five sources.

I. The first is public subscriptions. For important
elections such as the biennial elections of State officers,
or perhaps for that of the State legislature, a “ campaign
fund,” as it is called, is raised by an appeal to wealthy
members of the party. So strong is party feeling that
many respond, even though they suspect the men who
compose the Ring, disapprove its methods, and have no
great liking for the candidates.

II. Contributions are sometimes privately obtained
from rich men who, though not directly connected with
the Ring, may expect something from its action. Con-
tractors, fur instance, have an interest in getting pieces
of work from the city authorities. Railroad men have
an interest in preventing State legislation hostile to their
lines. Both, therefore, may be willing to help those
who can so effectively help them. This source of income
is only available for important elections. Its incidental
mischief in enabling wealth to control a legislature
through a Ring is serious.

ITI. An exceptionally audacious Ring will some-
times make an appropriation from the city or (more
rarely) from the State treasury for the purposes not of
the city or the State, but of its own election funds.

464 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

It is not thought necessary to bring such an appro-
priation’ into the regular accounts to be laid before
the public; in fact, pains are taken to prevent the
item from appearing, and the accounts have often to
be manipulated for that purpose. The justification, if
any, of conduct not authorized by the law, must be
sought in precedent, in the belief that the other side
would do the same, and in the benefits which the
Ring expects to confer upon the city it administers.
It is a method of course available only when Ring
officials have the control of thé public funds, and
cannot be resorted to by an opposition.

IV. A tax is levied upon the office-holders of the
party, varying from one to four or even five per cent
upon the amount of their annual salaries. The aggre-
gate annual salaries of the city officials in New York
City amount to $11,000,000 (£2,200,000 sterling),
and those of the two thousand five hundred Federal
officials, who, if of the same party, might also be
required to contribute? to $2,500,000 (£500,000
sterling). An assessment at two per cent on these
amounts would produce over £45,000 and £10,000
respectively, quite a respectable sum for election ex-
penses.? Even policemen in cities, even office boys,
and workmen in Federal dockyards, have been
assessed by their respective parties. As a tenant had

1 The practice of openly taking from Parliament a sum for secret
service money, which svas usually applied by the government in power
for electioneering purposes, has just been finally extinguished (1887) in
England. <A sum is still voted for foreign secret service. In England,
however, the money was regularly voted each session for the purpose,
and though no account was rendered, it was well understood how it went.

? Federal officials, would, as a rule, contribute only to the fund for
Federal elections ; but when the contest covered both Federal and city
offices the funds would be apt to be blended.

3 To make the calculation complete we should have to reckon in also
the State officials and assessments payable by them.

CHAP. LXIII RINGS AND BOSSES 465

in the days of feudalism to make occasional money
payments to his lord in addition to the military service
he rendered, so now the American vassal must render
his aids in money as well as give knightly service
at the primaries, in the canvass, at the polls. His
liabilities are indeed heavier than those of the feudal
tehant, for the latter could relieve himself from duty
in the field by the payment of scutage, while under
the Machine a money payment never discharges from
the obligation to serve in the army of “ workers.” As
in the days of the Anglo-Norman kings, forfeiture
and the being proclaimed as “nithing” is the penalty
for failure to discharge the duties by which the vassal
holds. Efforts which began with an order issued by
President Hayes in 1877 applying to Federal offices,
have lately been made to prevent by administrative
action and by legislation the levying of this tribute on
officials, but they have not as yet proved completely suc-
cessful, for the subordinate fears to offend his superiors.

VY. Another useful expedient has been borrowed
from European monarehies in the sale of nominations
and occasionally of offices themselves... A person who
seeks to be nominated as candidate for one of the more
important offices, such as a judgeship or a seat in the
State Senate, or in Congress, is often required to con-
tribute to the election fund a sum proportioned to
the importance of the place he seeks, the excuse given
for the practice being the cost of elections; and the
same principle is occasionally applied to the gift of
non-elective offices, the right of appointing to which is
vested in some official member of a Ring—e.g. a mayor.
The price of a nomination for a seat in the State legis-

1 As judicial places were sold under the old French monarchy, and
commissions in the army in England till sixteen years ago.

VOL. II 2H

466 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART Ill

lature is said to run from $500 up to $1000, and for
one of the better judgeships as high as $5000; but
this is largely matter of conjecture.’ Of course much
less will be given if the prospects of carrying the election
are doubtful: the prices quoted must be taken to
represent cases where the party majority makes success
certain. Naturally, the salaries of officials have to ‘be
raised in order’ to enable them to bear this charge, so
that in the long run it may be thrown upon the public ;
and a recent eminent boss of New York City defended,
before a committee of the legislature, the large salaries
paid to aldermen, on the ground that ‘“ heavy demands
were made on them by their party.” ?

1“ A judgeship,” says Mr. F. W. Whitridge, “costs in New York about
$15,000; the district atturneyship the same; for a nomination to Congress
the price is about $4000, though this is variable ; an aldermanic nomination
is worth $1500, and that for the Assembly from $600 to $1500. The
amount realized from these assessments cannot be exactly estimated but the
amount raised by Tammany Hall, which is the most complete political
organization, may be fixed very nearly at $125,000 (£25,000). This
amount is collected and expended by a small executive committve who
keep no accounts and are responsible only to each other.” —Article “ Assess-

ments” in Amer. Cyclop. of Political Science.
f In 1887 the Democratic Rings in New York City demanded $25,000
for the numination to the Comptrollership, and $5000 for that to a
State Senaturship. The salary of the Comptroller is $10,000 for three
years, that of Senator $1500 for two years, te. the senatorial candidate is
expected to pay $2000 more than his salary.

2 “ Before a committee of the New York legislature the county clerk
testified that his income was nearly $80,000 a year, but with refreshing
frankness admitted that his own position was practically that of a figure-
head, and that all the work was done by his deputy on a small fixed
salary. As the county clerk’s term is three years, he should nominally
receive $240,000, bift as a matter of fact two-thirds of the money prub-
ably goes to the political organizations with which he is connected,”—-Mr.
T. Roosevelt in Century magazine fur Nov. 1886. A county officer
answered the same committee, when they put what was meant to be a
formal question as to whether he performed his public duties faithfully,
that he did so perform them whenever they did not conflict with his
political duties! meaning thereby, as he explained, attending to his local
organizations, seeing politicians, “fixing” primaries, bailing out those of
his friends who were summoned to appear befure a justice of peace, etc.

CHAPTER LXIV
LOCAL EXTENSION OF RINGS AND BOSSES

To determine the extent to which the Ring and Boss
system sketched in the preceding chapters prevails over
the United States would be difficult even for an Ameri-
can, because it would require a minute knowledge of
the local affairs of all the States and cities. Much more,
then, is it difficult for a European. I can do no more
than indicate generally the results of the inquiries I
have made, commending the details of the question to
some future investigator.

It has been pointed out that rings and bosses are
the product not of democracy, but of a particular form
of democratic government, acting under certain peculiar
conditions. They belong to democratic government,
as the old logicians would say, not s¢mpliciter but
secundum quid: they are not of its essence, but are
merely separable accidents. We have seen that these
conditions are—

The existence of a Spoils System (= paid offices given

and taken away for party reasons).

Opportunities for illicit gains arising out of the pos-

session of office.

The presence of a mass of ignorant and pliable

voters.

468 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

The insufficient participation in politics of the “ good

citizens.”

If these be the true causes or conditions producing
the phenomenon, we may expect to find it most fully
developed in the places where the conditions exist
in fullest measure, less so where they are more limited,
absent where they do not exist.

A short examination of the facts will show that
such is the case.

It may be thought that the Spoils System is a con-
stant, existing everywhere, and therefore not admitting
of the application of this method of concomitant varia-
tions. That system does no doubt prevail over every
State of the Union, but it is not everywhere an equally
potent factor, for in some cities the offices are much
better paid than in others, and the revenues which their
occupants control are larger. In some small communities
the offices, or most of them, are not paid at all.1_ Hence
this factor also may be said to vary.

We may therefore say with truth that all of the
four conditions above named are most fully present
in great cities. Some of the offices are highly paid;
many give facilities for lucrative jobbing. The voters
are 80 numerous that a strong and active organization is
needed to drill them; the majority so ignorant as to be
easily led. The best citizens are engrossed in business
and cannot give to political work the continuous atten-
tion it demands. Such are the phenomena of New
York, Philadelphia, Chicago, Brooklyn, St. Louis,
Cincinnati, San Francisco, Baltimore, and New Orleans,
In these cities Ring-and-bossdom has attained its amplest
growth, overshadowing the whole field of politics.’

1 For instance, the “selectmen” of a New England Town are not paid.
2 Of course the results are not equally bad in all these cities.

cHar.LxIvV. EXTENSION OF RINGS AND BOSSES 469

Of the first two of these I need not speak in detail
here, proposing to describe their phenomena in later
chapters. Chicago, Baltimore, and San Francisco are
little if at all better. I subjoin some remarks bearing
on five other cities, with which ] have been favoured by
leading citizens resident therein, in reply to interroga-
tories which I addressed to them. The importance of
the subject may excuse the length of these quotations.
Knowing how apt a stranger is to imagine a greater
uniformity than exists, I am anxious to enable the
reader to understand to what extent the description I
have given is generally true, and with what local
diversities its general truth is compatible.

Cincinnati (population in 1880, 255,139)—

“Our Ring is in a less formal shape than is sometimes seen,
but dishonest men of both parties do in fact combine for common
profits at the public expense. As regards a Boss, there is at this
moment an interregnum, but some ambitious men are observed to
be making progress towards that dignity. Rings are both the effect
and the cause of peculation. They are the result of the general
law of combination to further the interest of the combiners.

“Where a Ring exists it can always exclude from office a good
citizen known to be hostile to it. But a good easy man who will
not fight and will make a reputable figurehead may be an excellent
investment.

“The large cities are the great sufferers from the Spoils System,
because in them power gives the greatest opportunity for profit and
peculation. In them also it is easy to make a more or less open
combination of keepers of tippling shops and the ‘bummers,’ etc.,
who congregate in them. Here, too, is the natural home of the
class of vagabonds who will profess devotion to the party or the
man who will pay them, and who combine to levy blackmail upon
every candidate, and in turn are ready to stuff ballot-boxes, to buy
votes, to ‘repeat,’ etc. These scoundrels ‘live by politics’ in their
way, and force their services upon more prominent men, till there
comes to be a sort of ‘solidarity’ in which men of national reputa-
tion find themselves morally compromised by being obliged to

470° THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

recognize this sort of fraternity, and directly or indirectly to make
themselves responsible for the methods of these ‘henchmen’ and
followers, They dare not break with this class because its enmity
would defeat their ambitions, and the more unscrupulous of them
make fullest use of the co-operation, only rendering a little homage
to decency by seeking to do it through intermediates, so as not too
disgustingly to dirty their own hands,

“In such a condition of things the cities become the prey of the
‘criminal class’ in politics, in order to ensure the discipline and
organization in State and national politics which are necessary to
the distinguished leaders for success. As a result it goes almost with-
out saying that every considerable city has its rings and its actual
or would-be bosses. There are occasional ‘ revolutions of the palace’
in which bosses are deposed, or ‘choked off,’ because they are grow-
ing too fat on the spoils, and there is no such permanence of tenure
as to enable the uninitiated always to tell what boss or what ring
is in power. They do not publish an Almanach de Gotha, but we
feel and know that the process of plunder continues. A man of
genius in this way, like a Tweed or a Kelly, comes occasionally to
the front, but even in the absence of a ruler of this sort the ward
politicians can always tell where the decisive influences reside.

“The size of the city in which the system reaches full bloom
depends upon its business and general character. Small towns with
@ proportionately large manufacturing population are better fields for
rings than more homogeneous communities built up as centres of mer-
cantile trade. The tendency however is to organize an official body
of ‘workers’ in even the smallest community ; and the selfishness
of man naturally leads to the doctrine that those who do the work
shall live by it. Thus, from the profits of ‘rotation in office’ and
the exercise of intrigue and trick to get the place of the present
incumbent, there is the facilis descensus to regarding the profits of
peculation and the plunder of the public as a legitimate corrective
for the too slow acéumulation from legal pay. Certain salaries
and fees in local offices are notoriously kept high, so that the in-
cumbent may freely ‘bleed’ for party use, or, what is the same
thing, for the use of party ‘bummers.’ Thus we have had clerks
of courts and sheriffs getting many times as much pay as the judges
on the bench, ete. From this, jobbing in contracts, bribery, and un-
blushing stealing are reached by such easy steps that perhaps the local
politician is hardly conscious of the progress in his moral education.”

CHAP, LXIV EXTENSION OF RINGS AND BOSSES 471

St. Louis (population in 1880, 350,518)—

“There are always Rings in both parties more or less active
according to circumstances.

“Two or perhaps three men are the recognized Bosses of the
Democratic party (which is in the majority), one man of the
Republican.

*“The Rings are the cause of both peculation and jobbery,
although St. Louis has had no ‘big steal.’

“A good citizen seeking office would be excluded by the action
of the Rings in our large cities, except in times of excitement, when
good people are aroused to a proper sense of duty.”

Louisville (Kentucky), population in 1880, 123,758—

“Tt can hardly be said that there is a regular Ring in Louis-
ville. There are corrupt combinations, but they are continually
shifting. The higher places in these combinations are occupied by
Democrats, these being the ruling party, but they always contain
some Republicans.

“The only Boss there is in Louisville to-day is the Louisville
Gas Company. It works mainly through the Democratic party, as
it is easier to bribe the ‘Republican’ negroes into the support of
Democratic candidates than white Democrats to support Republicans.

“There is very little peculation in Kentucky now—no great
disclosure for over five years ; but there is a great deal of jobbery.

“The effect of the combinations is of course towards excluding
good and capable men from office and to make room for mere
favourites and local politicians.”

Minneapolis (Minnesota), population in 1880, 46,887,
now estimated at 200,000—

“There has been for several years past a very disreputable Ring,
which has come into power by capturing the machinery of the
Democratic party, through (1) diligent work in the ward caucuses ;
(2) by its active alliance with the liquor dealers, gamblers, and so
forth, and the support of ‘lewd fellows of the baser sort,’ regardless
of national political preferences; (3) by a skilful and plausible
championship of ‘labor’ and a capture of the labor vote.

“The Boss of this gang is thoroughly disliked and distrusted by
the responsible and reputable element of his party in Minnesota,

472 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

but they tolerate him on account of his popularity and because
they cannot break him down. He has operated chiefly through
control of the police system. Instead of suppressing gambling
houses, for example, he, being a high official, has allowed several of
them to run under police protection, himself sharing in their large
gains. Until recently the liquor saloon licences have been $500
(£100) a year. He and the heads of the police department have
allowed a number of places to retail liquor somewhat secretly out-
side the police patrol limits, within which we restrict the liquor
traffic, and from these illicit publicans the Ring has collected large
sums of money.

“The Ring has seemed to control the majority in the Common
Council, but the system of direct taxation and of checking expendi-
ture is so open, and the scrutiny of the press and public so constant,
that there has been little opportunity for actual plunder. In the
awarding of contracts there is sometimes a savour of jobbery, and
several of the councilmen are not above taking bribes. But they
have been able to do comparatively little mischief; in fact, nothing
outrageous has occurred outside of the police department. The
Ring has lately obtained control of the (elective) Park Board, and
some disreputable jobs have resulted. So there have been mal-
practices in the department of health and hospitals, in the manage-
ment of the water system and in the giving away of a street railway
franchise. But we are not a badly-plyndered city by any means ;
and we have just succeeded in taking the control of the police out
of the hands of the Ring officials and vested it in a Metropolitan
Police Board, with excellent results. Two of the Ring are now
under indictment of the county grand jury for malpractices in
office.”

St. Paul (Minnesota), population in 1880, 41,473,
now over 160,000—

“There is no regular Ring in St. Paul. It has for many years
been in the hands of a clique of municipal Democratic politicians,
who are fairly good citizens, and have committed no very outrageous
depredations. The city is run upon a narrow partisan plan, but in
its main policies and expenditures the views of leading citizens as .
formulated in the Chamber of Commerce almost invariably prevail.

“The Rings of Western cities (adds my informant) are not
deliberately organized for plunder or jobbery. They grow out of

CHAP. LXIV EXTENSION OF RINGS AND BOSSES 473

our party politics. Certain of the worse elements of a party find
that their superior diligence and skill in the manipulation of
precinct and ward caucuses put them in control of the local
machinery of their party organization. The success of their party
gives them control of municipal affairs. They are generally men
who are not engaged in successful trade or professional life, and
make city politics their business. They soon find it profitable to
engage in various small schemes and jobs for profit, but do not
usually perpetrate anything very bold or bad.”

I have taken the two cities of Minneapolis and St.
Paul because they illustrate the differences which one
often finds between places whose population and other
conditions seem very similar. The centres of these two
cities are only ten miles apart; their suburbs will soon
begin to touch. Minneapolis is younger, and has
grown far more rapidly, and the manufacturing element
in its population is larger. But in most respects it
resembles its elder sister—they are extremely jealous of
one another—so closely that an Old World observer who
has not realized the swiftness with which phenomena
come and go in the West is surprised to find the political
maladies of the one so much graver than those of the
other. In a few years’ time Minneapolis may have re-
gained health, St. Paul perhaps have lost it.

In cities of the second rank (say from ten thou-
sand to one hundred thousand inhabitants) some of
the same mischiefs exist, but on a smaller scale. The
opportunities for jobbing are limited. The offices are
moderately paid. The population of new immigrants,
politically incompetent, and therefore easily pervertible,
bears a. smaller ratio to the native Americans. The
men most prominent by their wealth or capacity are
more likely to be known to the mass of the voters, and
may have more leisure to join in local politics. Hence,
although we find rings in many of these cities, they

474 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART II

are less powerful, less audacious, less corrupt. There
are, of course, differences between one city and another,
differences sometimes explicable by its history and the
character of its population. A very high authority writes
me from Michigan, a State above the average—

“T have heard no charge of the reign of Bosses or Rings for the
‘purposes of peculation’ in any of the cities or towns of Michigan
or Indiana, or indeed in more than a few of our cities generally, and
those for the most part are the large cities. In certain cases rings
or bosses have managed political campaigns for partisan purposes,
and sometimes to such an extent, say in Detroit (population in
1880, 116,340), that good citizens have been excluded from office
or have declined to run. But robbery was not the aim of the
rings. In not a few of our cities the liquor-saloon keepers have
combined to ‘run politics’ so as to gain control and secure a
municipal management friendly to them. That is in part the
explanation of the great uprising of the Prohibition party. I think
the country is not to be afflicted in the future as it has been in the
past, with rings and bosses. The people, evén in the larger cities,
have at last been awakened.”

The cities of New York State seem to suffer
more than those of New England or the West. Albany
(a place of 90,000 people) has long groaned under its
bosses, but as the seat of the New York legislature
it is a focus of intrigue. Buffalo (with 155,000) has a
large Irish and German population. Rochester and Troy
are ruled by local cliques; the latter is full of fellows
who go to serve as “repeaters” at Albany elections.
Syracuse is smaller and better than any of the four
preceding, but hes of late years shown some serious
symptoms of the same disease. Cleveland in Ohio
is a larger place than any of these, but having, like
the rest of Northern Ohio, a better quality of popu-
lation, its rings have never carried things with a high
hand, nor stolen public money. The same may be said
of Milwaukee in Wisconsin, and such New England cities

CHAP, LXIV EXTENSION OF RINGS AND BOSSES 475

as Providence, Augusta, Hartford, Lowell. The system
more or less exists in all of these, but the bosses have
not ventured to exclude respectable outsiders from office,
nor have they robbed the city, debauched the legisla-
ture, retained their power by election frauds after the
manner of their great models in New York and Phila-
delphia. And this seems to hold true also of the
Western and Southern cities of moderate size.

As regards Ohio a judicious authority says—

“Rings are much less likely to exist in the smaller cities,
though a population of 30,000 or 40,000 may occasionally support

them. We should hardly find them in a city below 10,000: any
corruption there would be occasional, not systematic.”

As regards Missouri I am informed that—

“We have few or no Rings in cities under 60,000 inhabitants.
The smaller cities are not favourable to such kinds of control.
Men know one another too well. There is no large floating irre-
sponsible following as in large cities.”

A similar answer from Kentucky adds that Rings have
nevertheless been heard of in cities so small as Lexing-
ton (25,000 inhabitants) and Frankfort (6500).

In quite small towns and in the rural districts—in
fact, wherever there is not a municipality, but govern-
ment is either by a town meeting and selectmen
or by township or county officials—the dangerous
conditions are reduced to their minimum. The new
immigrants are not generally planted in large masses
but scattered among the native population, whose
habits and modes of thinking they soon acquire.
The Germans and Scandinavians who settle in the
country districts have been (for the quality of the most
recent immigrants is lower) among the best of their race,
and have formed a valuable element. The country voter,
whether native or foreign, is exposed to fewer tempta-

476 THE PARFY SYSTEM PART ITI

tions than his brother of the city, and is less easy either
to lead or to drive. He is parsimonious, and pays his
county or town officials on a niggardly scale. A boss
has therefore no occupation in such a place. His
talents would be wasted. If a ring exists in a small
city it is little more than a clique of local lawyers who
combine to get hold of the local offices, each in his turn,
and to secure a seat for one of themselves in the State
legislature, where there may be pickings to be had. It
is not easy to draw the line between such a clique,
which one may find all the world over, and a true
Ring: but by whichever name we call the weed, it
does little harm to the crop. Here and there, how-
ever, one meets with a genuine Boss even in these
seats of rural innocence. I know a New England Town,
with a population of about ten thousand people, which
has long been ruled by such a local wirepuller. I do
not think he steals. But he has gathered a party
of voters round him, by whose help he carries the
offices, and gets a chance of perpetrating jobs which
enrich himself and supply work for his supporters. The
circumstances, however, are exceptional. Within the
taxing area of the Town there lie many villas of wealthy
merchants, who do business in a neighbouring city, but
are taxed on their summer residences here. Hence the
funds which this Town has to deal with are much larger
than would be the case in most towns of its size, while
many of the rich-tax-payers are not citizens here, but vote
in the city where they live during the winter.1 Hence
they cannot go to the town meeting to beard the boss,
but must grin and pay while they watch his gambols.

1 Jt will be remembered that in the United States, though a man
may pay taxes on his real estate in any number of States or counties
or cities, he can vote, even in purely local elections or on purely local
matters, in one place only—that in which he is held to reside.

cHap.LxIv. EXTENSION OF RINGS AND BOSSES 477

Speaking generally, the country places and the
smaller cities are not ring-ridden. There is a tendency
everywhere for the local party organizations to fall into
the hands of a few men, perhaps of one man. But
this happens not so much from an intent to exclude
others and misuse power, as because the work is left
to’those who have some sort of interest in doing it, that,
namely, of being themselves nominated to an office.
Such persons are seldom professional office-seekers, but
lawyers, farmers, or store-keepers, who are glad to add
something to their income, and have the importance, not
so contemptible in a village, of sitting in the State legis-
lature. Nor does much harm result. The administra-
tion is fairly good ; the tax-payers are not robbed. Ifa
leading citizen, who does not belong to the managing
circle, wishes to get a nomination, he will probably
succeed ; in fact, no one will care to exclude him. In
many places there is a non-party “ citizens’ committee ”
which takes things out of the hands of the two organiza-
tions by running as candidates respectable men irre-
spective of party. Such candidates are often carried,
and will be carried if the local party managers have
offended public sentiment by bad nominations. In
short, the materials for real ring government do not
exist, and its methods are inapplicable, outside the large
cities. No one needs to fear it, or does fear it.

What has been said refers chiefly to the Northern,
Middle, and Western States. The circumstances of the
South are different, but they illustrate equally well the
general laws of ring growth. In the Southern cities
there is scarcely any population of European immigrants.
The lowest class consists of negroes and “ poor whites.”
The negroes are ignorant, and would be danger-
ously plastic material in the hands of unscrupulous

478 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

wirepullers, as was amply shown after the Civil
War. But they have hitherto mostly belonged to
the Republican party, and the Democratic party has
so completely regained its ascendency that the bosses
who controlled the negro vote can do nothing. In
most parts of the South the men of ability and stand-
ing have interested themselves in politics so far ‘as
to dictate the lines of party action. Their position
when self-government was restored and the carpet-
baggers had to be overthrown forced them to exertions.
Sometimes they use or tolerate a ring, but they do not
suffer it to do serious mischief, and it is usually glad to
nominate one of them, or any one whom they recom-
mend. The old traditions of social leadership survive
better in the South than in the North, so that the
poorer part of the white population is more apt to
follow the suggestions of eminent local citizens and
to place them at its head when they will accept the
position. Moreover, the South is a comparatively poor
‘ country. Less is to be gained from office (including
membership of a legislature), either in the way of
salary or indirectly through jobbing contracts or
influencing legislation. The prizes in the profession
of politics being fewer, the profession is not prosecuted
with the sdme earnestness and perfection of organiza-
tion. There are, however, some cities where conditions
similar to those of large Northern cities reappear, and
there Ring-and-bossdom reappears also. New Orleans
is the best example, and in Arkansas and Texas, where
there never was a plantation aristocracy like that of the
Atlantic Slave States, rings are pretty numerous, though,
as the cities are small and seldom rich, their exploits
attract little attention.

CHAPTER LXV
SPOILS

Aw illustration of the familiar dictum regarding the
wisdom with which the world is governed may be found
in the fact that the greatest changes are often those
introduced with the least notion of their consequence,
and the most fatal those which encounter least resist-
ance. So the system of removals from Federal office
which began some sixty years ago, though disapproved
of by some of the leading statesmen of the time, includ-
ing Clay, Webster, and Calhoun, excited comparatively
little attention in the country, nor did its advocates
foresee a tithe’of its far-reaching results.

The Constitution of the United States vests the
right of appointing to Federal offices in the President,
requiring the consent of the Senate in the case of the
more important, and permitting Congress to vest the
appointment of inferior officers in the President alone,
in the courts, or in the heads of departments. It
was assumed that this clause gave officials a tenure
at the pleasure of the President—+.e. that he had the
legal right of removing them without cause assigned.
But the earlier Presidents considered the tenure as
being practically for life or during good behaviour,
and did not remove, except for some solid reason,
persons appointed by their predecessors, Washington

480 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

in his eight years displaced only nine persons, and all
for cause, John Adams nine in four years, and those
not on political grounds. Jefferson in his eight years
removed thirty-nine, but many of these were persons
whom Adams had unfairly put in just before quit-
ting office; and in the twenty years that followed
(1808-28) there were but sixteen removals. In 1820,
however, a bill was run through Congress fixing four
years as the term for a large number of offices. This
was ominous of evil, and called forth the displeasure of
both Jefferson and Madison. The President, however,
and his heads of departments did not remove, so the
tenure of good behaviour generally remained. But
a new era began with the hot and heady Jackson,
who reached the presidential chair in 1828. He was a
raw rude Western, a man of the people, borne into
power by a popular movement, incensed against all who
were connected with his predecessor, a warm friend and
a bitter enemy, anxious to repay services rendered to
himself. Penetrated by extreme theories of equality,
he proclaimed in his Message that rotation in office was
a principle in the Republican creed, and obeyed both his
doctrine and his passions by displacing five hundred
post-masters in his first year, and appointing partisans
in their room. The plan of using office as a mere engine
in partisan warfare had already been tried in New York,
where the stress of party contests had led to an early
development of many devices in party organization ;
and it was a New York adherent of Jackson, Marcy,
who, speaking in the Senate in 1832, condensed the new
doctrine in a phrase that has become famous—“ To the
victor belong the spoils.” ?

1 Before 1820 Governor Clinton complained “of an organized and
disciplined corps of Federal officials interfering in State elections,”

CHAP. LXV SPOILS 481

From 1828 till a few years ago the rule with
both parties has been that on a change of President
nearly all Federal offices, from the legations to European
Courts down to village postmasterships, are deemed to
be vacant. The present holders may of course be con-
tinued or reappointed (if their term has expired); and
if*the new President belongs to the same party as his
predecessor, many of them will be; but they are not held
to have either a legal or a moral claim. The choice of
the President or departmental head has been absolutely
free, no qualifications, except the citizenship of the
nominee, being required, nor any check imposed on him,
except that the Senate’s consent is needed to the more
important posts.’

The want of knowledge on the part of the President
and his ministers of the persons who applied for places
at a distance, obliged them to seek information and
advice from those who, belonging to the neighbourhood,
could give it. It was natural for the senators from a
State or the representative in Congress from a district
within which a vacant office lay, to recommend to the
President candidates for it, natural for the President or
his ministers to be guided by this recommendation, of
course, in both cases, only when they belonged to the
same party as the President.? Although this usage
received no sanction from the Constitution, senators and
representatives maintained it so persistently, since it
strengthened themselves and their party in the locality,
Marcy’s speech was a defence of the system of partisan removals and short
terms from the example of his own State. “They [the New York poli-
ticians}] when contending for victory avow the intention of enjoying the
fruits of it. They see nothing wrong in the rule that to the victor belong
the spoils of the enemy.”

1 See on this subject, Chapter V. in Vol. I.
2 Not necessarily the majority, for the President may be of the party
which is in a minority in Congress,
VOL. II 21

482 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

that the executive virtually admitted the rights they
claimed, and suffered its patronage to be prostituted to
the purpose of rewarding local party service and con-
ciliating local party support. Now and then a President,
or a strong Minister controlling the President, has proved
restive ; yet the usage continues, being grounded on the
natural wish of the executive to have the good-will and
help of the senators in getting treaties and appointments
confirmed, and on the feeling that the party in every
district must be strengthened by a distribution of good
things, in the way which the local leader thinks most
serviceable. The essential features of the system are,
that a place in the public service is held at the absolute
pleasure of the appointing authority; that it is invari-
ably bestowed from party motives on a party man, as a
reward for party services (whether of the appointee or of
some one who pushes him) ; that no man expects to hold
it any longer than his party holds power; and that he
has therefore the strongest personal reasons for fighting
in the party ranks. Thus the conception of office among
politicians came to be not the ideal one, of its involving
a duty to the community, nor the “ practical” one, of its
being a snug berth in which a man may live if he does
not positively neglect his work, but the perverted one,
of its bding a salary paid in respect of party services,
past, present, and future.

The politicians, however, could hardly have riveted
this system on the country but for certain notions which
had become current among the mass of the people.
“Rotation in office” was, and indeed by most men
still is, held to be conformable to the genius of a
democracy. It gives every man an equal chance of
power and salary, resembling herein the Athenian
and Florentine system of choosing officers by lot.

CHAP. LXV SPOILS 483
Ra ha i es

It is supposed to stimulate men to exertion, to foster.
a laudable ambition to serve the country or the
neighbourhood, to prevent the growth of an official
caste, with its habits of routine, its stiffness, its arro-
gance. It recognizes that equality which is so dear
to the American mind, bidding an official remember
tliat he is the servant of the people and not their
master, like the bureaucrats of Europe. It forbids
him to fancy that he has any right to be where he is,
any ground for expecting to stay there. It ministers
in an odd kind of way to that fondness for novelty and
change in persons and surroundings which is natural in
the constantly-moving communities of the West. The
habit which grew up of electing State and city officers
for short terms tended in the same direction. If those
whom the people itself chose were to hold office only
for a year or two, why should those who were appointed
by Federal authority have a longer tenure? And the
use of patronage for political purposes was further
justified by the example of England, whose government
was believed by the Afnericans of fifty years ago to be
worked, as in last century it largely was worked, by the
Patronage Secretary of the Treasury in his function of dis-
tributing places to members of the House of Commons,
and honours (such as orders, and steps in the peerage)
to members of the House of Lords, ecclesiastical pre-
ferments to the relatives of both."

Another and a potent reason why the rotation plan
commended itself to the Americans is to be found in the
belief that one man is as good as another, and will do
well enough any work you set him to, a belief happily

1 Now of course the tables have been turned, and the examples of the

practically irremovable English civil service and of the competitive entrance
examinations in England are cited against the American system.

484 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

expressed by their old enemy King George the Third
when he said that “every man is good enough for
any place he can get.” In America every smart man
is expected to be able to do anything that he turns
his hand to, and the fact that a man has worked
himself into a place is some evidence of his smartness.
He is a “practical man.” This is at bottom George the
Third’s idea; if you are clever enough to make people
give you a place, you are clever enough to discharge its
duties, or to conceal the fact that you are not discharging
them. It may be added that most of these Federal
places, and those which come most before the eyes of the
ordinary citizen, require little special fitness. Any care-
ful and honest man does fairly well for a tide-waiter
or a lighthouse keeper. Able and active men had no
great interest in advocating appointment by merit or
security of tenure, for they sellom wanted places them-
selves ; and they had, or thought they had, an interest
in jobbing their poor relatives and unprosperous friends
into the public service. It is true that the relative
or friend ran the risk of being turned, out. But hope
is stronger than fear. The prospect of getting a
place affects ten people for one who is affected by the
prospect of losing it, for aspirants are many and places
relatively’ few.

Hitherto we have been considering Federal offices
only, the immense majority whereof are such petty posts
as those of pogtmaster in a village, custom-house officer
at a seaport, and so forth, although they also include
clerkships in the departments at Washington, foreign
ambassadorships and consulates, and governorships of
the Territories. The system of rotation had however laid
such a hold on the mind of the country that it soon
extended itself over State offices and city oitices also, in

CHAP, LXV SPOILS 485

so far as such offices remained appointive, and were not,
like the higher administrative posts and (in most of
the States and the larger cities) the judicial offices,
handed over to popular election. Thus appointment by
favour and tenure at the pleasure of the appointer
became the rule in every sphere and branch of govern-
ment, National, State, and municipal, down to that
very recent time of which I shall speak presently.
It may seem strange that a people so eminently prac-
tical as the Americans acquiesced in a system which
perverts public office from its proper function of
serving the public, destroys the prospect of that skill
which comes with experience, and gives nobody the
least security that he will gain a higher post, or even
retain the one he holds, by displaying the highest
efficiency. The explanation is that administration used
toe be conducted in a happy-go-lucky way, that the
citizens, accustomed to help themselves, relied very little
on their functionaries, and did not care whether they
were skilful or not, and that it was so easy and so
common for a man who fell out of one kind of business
to take to and make his living by another that depriva-
tion seemed to involve little hardship. However, the
main reason was that there was no party and no set of
persons specially interested in putting an end to the
system, whereas there soon came to be a set specially
concerned to defend it. It developed, I might almost
say created, the class of professional politicians, and
they maintained it, because it exactly suited them.
That great and growing volume of political work to be
done in managing primaries, conventions, and elections
for the city, State, and National governments, whereof I
have already spoken, and which the advance of demo-
cratic sentiment and the needs of party warfare evolved

486 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

from 1820 down to about 1850, needed men who should
give to it constant and undivided attention. These
men the plan of rotation in office provided. Persons
who had nothing to gain for themselves would soon
have tired of the work. The members of a permanent
civil service would have had no motive for interfering in
politics, because the political defeat of a public officer's
friends would have left his position the same as before,
and the civil service not being all of one party, but
composed of persons appointed at different times by
executives of different hues, would not have acted
together as a whole. Those, however, whose bread and
butter depend on their party may be trusted to work
for their party, to enlist recruits, look after the organiza-
tion, play electioneering tricks from which ordinary
party spirit might recoil, The class of professional
politicians was therefore the first crop which the spoils
system, the system of using public office as private
plunder, bore. Bosses were the second crop. In the old
Scandinavian poetry the special title of the king or chief-
tain is “ the giver of rings.” He attracts followers and
rewards the services, whether of the warrior or the
skald, by liberal gifts. So the Boss wins and holds
power by; the bestowal of patronage. Places are the
prize of victory in election warfare; he divides this
spoil before as well as after the battle, promising the
higher elective offices to the strongest among his fight-
ing men, and “dispensing the minor appointive offices
which lie in his own gift, or that of his lieutenants, to
combatants of less note but equal loyalty. Thus the
chieftain consolidates, extends, fortifies his power by
rewarding his supporters. He garrisons the outposts with
his squires and henchmen, who are bound fast to him
by the hope of getting something more, and the fear of

CHAP. LXV SPOILS 487

losing what they have. Most of these appointive offices
are too poorly paid to attract able men; but they form
a stepping-stone to the higher ones obtained by popular
election ; and the desire to get them and keep them
provides that numerous rank and file which the Ameri-
can system requires to work the Machine. In a country
like England office is an object of desire to a few
prominent men, but only to a few, because the places
which are vacated on a change of government are less
than fifty in all, while vacancies in other places happen
only by death or promotion. Hence an insignificant
number of persons out of the whole population have a
personal pecuniary interest in the triumph of their
party. In England, therefore, one has what may be
called the general officers and headquarters staff of an
army of professional politicians, but few subalterns and
no privates. And in England most of these general
officers are rich men, independent of official salaries.
In America the privates are proportioned in number to
the officers. They are a great host. As nearly all live
by politics, they are held together by a strong personal
motive. When their party is kept out of the spoils
of the Federal government, as the Democrats were out
from 1861 till 1885, they have a second chance in the
State spoils, a third chance in the city spoils; and the
prospect of winning at least one of these two latter sets
of places maintains their discipline and whets their
appetite, however slight may be their chance of captur-
ing the Federal offices.

It is these spoilsmen who have depraved and
distorted the mechanism of politics. It is they who
pack the primaries and run the conventions so as to
destroy the freedom of popular choice, they who con-
trive and execute the election frauds which disgrace

488 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART II!

some States and cities,—repeating and ballot-stuffing,
obstruction of the polls, and fraudulent countings in.’
In making every administrative appointment a
matter of party claim and personal favour, the system
has lowered the general tone of public morals, for it has
taught men to neglect the interests of the community,
and made insincerity ripen into cynicism. Nobody
supposes that merit has anything to do with promotion,
or believes the pretext alleged for an appointment.
Politics has been turned into the art of distributing
salaries so as to secure the maximum of support from
friends with the minimum of offence to opponents, To
this art able men have been forced to bend their minds :
on this Presidents and ministers have spent those hours
which were demanded by the real problems of the country.’
The rising politician must think of obscure supporters
seeking petty places as well as of those greater appoint-
ments by which his knowledge of men and his honesty
deserve to be judged. It is hardly a caricature in Mr.
Lowell’s satire when the intending presidential candi-
date writes to his maritime friend in New England,—

“Tf you git me inside the White House,
Your head with ile I’ kinder ’nint,
; By gittin’ you inside the light-house,
Down to the end of Jaalam pint.”

After this, it seems a small thing to add that rota-
tion in office has not improved the quality of the civil
service. Men selected for their services at elections or

1 The fact that in Canada the civil service is permanent may well be
thought to have something to do with the absence of such a regular party
Machine as the United States possess.

2 President Garfield said “ one third of the working hours of senators
and representatives is scarcely sufficient to meet the demands in reference
to the appointinents to office. . . . With a judicious system of civil service
the business of the departments could be better done at half the cost.”

CHAP, LXV SPOILS 489

in primaries have not proved the most capable servants
of the public. As most of the posts they fill need
nothing more than such ordinary business qualities as
the average American possesses, the mischief has not
come home to the citizens generally, but it has some-
times been serious in the higher grades, such as the
departments at Washington and some of the greater
custom-houses. Moreover, the official is not free to
attend to his official duties. More important, because
more influential on his fortunes, is the duty to his party
of looking after its interests at the election, and his
duty to his chiefs, the Boss and Ring, of seeing that the
candidate they favour gets the party nomination. Such
an official, whom democratic theory seeks to remind
of his dependence on the public, does not feel him-
self bound to the public, but to the city boss or senator
or congressman who has procured his appointment.
Gratitude, duty, service, are all for the patron. So far
from making the official zealous in the performance of his
functions, insecurity of tenure has discouraged sedulous
application to work, since it is not by such application
that office is retained and promotion won. The ad-
ministration of some among the public departments in
Federal and city government is more behind that of
private enterprises than is the case in European
countries ; the ingenuity and executive talent which the
nation justly boasts, are least visible in national or
municipal business. In short, the civil service is not
in America, and cannot under the system of rotation
become, a career. Place-hunting is the career, and
an office is not a public trust, but a means of requit-
ing party services, and also, under the method of
assessments previously described, a source whence party
funds may be raised for election purposes.

490 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART IIT

Some of these evils were observed as far back as
1853, when an Act was passed by Congress requiring
clerks appointed to the departments at Washington to
pass a qualifying examination.’ Neither this nor sub-
sequent legislative efforts in the same direction pro-
duced any improvement, for the men in office who
ought to have given effect to the law were hostile to it.
Similar causes defeated the system of competitive
examination, inaugurated by an Act of Congress in
1871, when the present agitation for civil service
reform had begun to lay hold of the public mind. Mr.
Hayes (1877-81) was the first President who seems to
have honestly desired to reform the civil service, but
the opposition of the politicians, and the indifference
of Congress, ‘which had legislated merely in deference
to the pressure of enlightened opinion outside, proved
too much for him. A real step in advance was how-
ever made in 1883, by the passage of what is called
from its author (late senator from Ohio) the Pendleton
Act, which instituted a board of civil service commis-
sioners (to be named by the President), directing them
to apply a system of competitive examinations to a
considerable number of offices in the departments at
Washington, and a smaller number in other parts of the
country. President Arthur named a good commission,
and under the rules framed by it some improvement
was effected. When Mr. Cleveland became President in
1885 it was feared that the hungry Democrats, having
been out of power since 1861, would fall like wolves
upon the offices, compelling the President to dismiss
the present place-holders to make room for his own

1 To have made places tenable during good behaviour would have

been open to the objection that it would prevent the dismissal of incom-
petent men against whom no specific charge could be proved.

CHAP. LXV SPOILS 491

partisans. Mr. Cleveland, however, if he has not
done all the good that sanguine reformeits hoped,
seems to have acquiesced in less evil than many re-
formers expected. I do not venture to express an
opinion on what is in America a matter of keen con-
troversy, but that he did not make a clean sweep of
office-holders, whether belonging to the classes covered
by the Pendleton Act or to any others, may be gathered
from the complaints that arose from Democratic spoils-
men, who think the presidency is hardly worth winning
if it does not bear fruit for the class they belong to.

The Act of 1883 applies to only about 14,000 out
of nearly 120,000 posts in the Federal government.
But its moral effect has been greater than this proportion
represents, and entitles it to the description given of
it at the time as “a sad blow to the pessimists.” It
strengthens the hands of any President who may desire
reform, and has stimulated the civil service reform
movement in States and municipalities. Several States
have now instituted examinations for admission to their
civil service ; and similar legislation has been applied to
New York, Brooklyn, Boston, and other cities. Some
years must pass before the result of these changes
upon the purification of politics can be fairly judged.
It is for the present enough to say that while the state of
things above described has been generally true both of
Federal and of State and city administration during
the last sixty years, there is now reason to hope tha’ the
practice of appointing for short terms, and dismissing
in order to fill vacancies with political adherents, has
been shaken; and that the extension of examinations
will tend more and more to exclude mere spoilsmen from
the public service.

CHAPTER LXVI
ELECTIONS AND THEIR MACHINERY

I cannot attempt to describe the complicated and vary-
ing election laws of the different States. But there are
some peculiarities of election usage common to most or
all States, which have told so much upon practical
politics, especially on the Machine politics of cities, as
to require a passing notice.

All expenses of preparing the polling places and
of paying the clerks and other election officers who re-
ceive and count the votes, are borne by the community,
not (as in England) by the candidates.

All popular elections, whether fot city, State, or
Federal offices, are in all States conducted by ballot,
which, however, was introduced, and has been re-
garded, not so much as a device for preventing bribery
or intimidation, but rather as the quickest and easiest
mode of taking the votes of a multitude. Secrecy has
not been specially aimed at, and in point of fact is not
generally secufed. Accordingly the preparation and
distribution to voters of the voting papers has been
(I think universally’) left to the candidates and their

1 TI do not venture to make statements concerning all the States,
because there are many variations in State laws. For the purpose of the
present chapter it is of small importance to ascertain exactly what rules
prevail in each and every State. What the text describes is the general
practice.

cHap. xvi ELECTIONS AND THEIR MACHINERY 493

friends, that is, to the parties, and the expense of print-
ing and distributing these papers is borne by the latter.

An election is a far more complicated affair in
America than in Europe. The number of elective
offices is greater, and as terms of office are shorter, the
number of offices to be voted for in any given year is
much greater. To save the expense of numerous dis-
tinct pollings it is usual, though by no means universal,
to take the pollings for a variety of offices at the same
time, that is to say, to elect Federal officials (presidential
electors and congressmen), State officials, county officials,
and city officials on one and the same day and at the
same polling booths. Presidential electors are chosen
only once in four years, congressmen once in two. But
the number of State and county and city places to be
filled is so large that a voter seldom goes to the polling
booth without having to cast his vote for at least eight
or ten persons, candidates for different offices, and some-
times he may vote for twenty or thirty.’

This has given rise to the system of slip tickets. A
slip ticket is a list, printed on a long strip of paper,
of the persons standing in the same interest, that is
to say, recommended by the same party or political
group for the posts to be filled up at any election.? It
is issued by the party organization on the eve of the
election, and contains the names of the party nominees,
with the offices for which they are respectively candi-
dates. Copies of the slip, proportioned to the number
of voters, are struck off by the party committee and

1 Sometimes as many as six distinct ballot boxes are placed to receive
votes for different sets of offices.

2 A ticket includes more names or fewer, according to the number of
offices to be filled, but usually more than a dozen. The Note at the end
of this chapter contains several specimen tickets used at elections in
1887.

494 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

handed to their agents, who take their stand in front
of the polling booths and distribute the tickets to the
voters as they come up and enter. ach party of
course looks first after its own adherents, but gladly
supplies its tickets to every voter who consents to take
them. There is no secrecy; the voter may be seen
taking the ticket from the agent of his party, and can
be followed by watchful eyes from the moment of his
having taken it till he deposits it in the ballot box. If
he is an average sort of person, he drops it in just as he
has received it. This is called voting the “ regular” or
“straight” ticket. If, however, he be a man of some in-
dlependence, and dislikes one or more of the names he
finds on his party ticket, he strikes out those names, and
probably writes in some other name instead. This is
called “scratching.” To facilitate such action, the prac-
tice has grown up for agents to be placed at the voting
place who supply small slips of paper gummed at the
back, and bearing on the front the name of some other
candidate for one or more of tke posts vacant. Such
slips are called “ pasters ” or “ stickers,” because the inde-
pendent voter pastes them over the ‘name or names of
the person or persons he objects to on the ticket which
he is about to place in the box, thus saving himself the
trouble of “scratching,” and securing the result he desires,
that of voting his party ticket subject to the variations
he prefers. Thus the degree to which pasters are used
in a given election is a measure either of the badness of
the lists of Candidates issued by the parties, or of the
independence of the voters, or of both phenomena to-
gether. Unfortunately, the number of candidates is
often so great, and the knowledge which the average
citizen has of many of them so small, that many who
would be glad to “scratch” or “paste” have really no

cHap.uxvi ELECTIONS AND THEIR MACHINERY 495

_data for doing so, and, especially in large cities, vote the
party ticket in despair.

There are two questions that may be asked regarding
an election system. One is, whether it is honestly
carried out by the officials? To this question, as it
regards the United States, no general answer can be
given, because there are the widest possible differences
between different States; differences due chiefly to the
variations in their election laws, but partly also to the
condition of the public conscience. In some States, such
as, for instance, New York, the official conduct of
elections is now believed to be absolutely pure, owing,
one is told, to the excellence of a minutely careful law.
In others, frauds, such as ballot stuffing and false count-
ing, are said to be common, not only in city, but also in
State and Federal elections. I have no data to deter-
mine how widely frauds prevail, for their existence can
rarely be proved, and they often escape detection.
They are sometimes suspected where they do not exist.
Still there is reason to think that in some few States they
are frequent enough to-constitute a serious reproach.?

The other question is: Does the election machinery
prevent intimidation, bribery, personation, repeating,
and the other frauds which the agents of candidates or
parties seek to perpetrate? Here too, there are great
differences between one State and city and another, dif-
ferences due both to the laws and to the character of the
population. Of intimidation there is but little. Repeat-
ing and personation are not rare in dense populations

1 They were specially frequent, and are not extinct, in some of the
Southern States, being there used to prevent the negro voters from
returning Republican candidates, It was here that the use of “tissue
ballots” was most common. I was told in San Francisco that elections
had become more pure since the introduction of glass ballot boxes, which
made it difficult for the presiding officials to stock the ballot box with
voting papers before the voting began in the morning.

496 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART It

where the agents and officials do not, and cannot, know
the voters’ faces. Of bribery I have spoken elsewhere.
It is a sporadic disease, but often intense where it occurs.
The ballot laws do little to check it, because “under our
present system whole squads of voters are marched to
the polls with their ballots in their hands so held that
the boss can see them from the time they are received
till they are deposited in the ballot boxes.”! This is a
consequence of the free hand which the party agents
enjoy in supplying their tickets to the voters.

The plan of leaving the preparation and distribution
of ballot papers to the parties has, however, had another,
and avery important, result. It has thrown power into
the hands of the party organizations, and by supplying
an excuse for their activity, and for the expenditure
which that activity involves, it has helped to develop
the Machine into its portentous predominance. I will
endeavour to illustrate this from the case of New York
City, basing myself on two able and instructive papers,
published in 1887, and whose statements of facts have
not, so far as I know, been impugned,

In New York City elections are placed under the con-
trol of the Police Board, consisting of four commissioners,
two of whom are required by law to be Democrats, two
Republicans. The Police Board is directed to appoint
annually in each of the 812 election districts of the
city—

1] quote from an article by Mr. J. B. Bishop, in Scribner’s Magazine
for February 1888. He is speaking of the practice of New York, whose
law, excellent as regards the custody and counting of the ballots, has not
provided for real secrecy of voting; but his observations are, I believe,
applicable to most States. Some, as for instance Wisconsin, have recently
amended their law in this point.

2 By Mr. Ivins, city chamberlain of New York, and Mr. J. B. Bishop.

Both papers were originally read before the Commonwealth Club of New
York City.

cHaP.ixvi ELECTIONS AND THEIR MACHINERY 497

As inspectors of elections, four persons, two of whom on State
issues shall be of different faith and opinion from their associates,
and those appointed to represent the party and political minority on
State issues to be named solely by such of the commissioners of
police in the said police board as are the representatives of such
political minority . .. and also as poll clerks two persons of
different political faith and opinions on State issues.” !

There are, accordingly, 4872 election officers, half
of them Democrats, half Republicans, each set being
appointed by the commissioners of its own party. Here
is a solid lump of patronage placed at the disposal of
party leaders ; for the aggregate salaries of these officials
(five days, at $7.50 per day) amounted to nearly $150,000
(£30,000). The selection of shops or other buildings
as polling places, and the nomination to a few other
offices, increases the patronage arising out of elections.
The total cost to the city treasury of its elections was,
in 1886, $222,500 (£44,500). Every second year, when
there is a Federal election, additional election offices are
needed ; they also are treated (the appointment being
vested in Federal officials) as party patronage, and cost
the city an additional $64,100 (£12,800), making alto-
gether $290,000.

“This fund of $290,000 (says Mr. Ivins) is practically used if
not to purchase at least to assure and guarantee the vote of at least
ten persons for each election district. The election districts will
average about 300 voters, so that 3 per cent of the voters are
employed in and about elections in accordance with the provisions
of law as officers of the law, and the election district leader sees
that they are the first men to vote and to vote right.

1 T quote from Mr. Ivins’s paper. This statutory recognition of party
as a qualification for office is not unusual in America, having been found
necessary to ensure some sort of equal distribution between the parties of
the posts of election officers, for the fairness of whose action it was essential
that there should be some sort of guarantee. ‘State issues” are named
because the two great parties are usnally each of them undivided in State
party warfare, but sometimes split into factions in city politics.

VOL. 11 2K

498 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART Ill

“The officials (city and Federal) in whose gift this patronage
lies place it at the disposal of the leaders of the Machine. Now
there are three Machines in New York; two Democratic, because
the Democratic party, commanding a large popular majority, is
divided into two factions (Tammany Hall and the County Demo-
cracy),! and one Republican.

“Each Machine has twenty-four district organizations, corre-
sponding with the twenty-four Assembly districts of the city. Etch
Assembly district has a committee, but is actually controlled by
the Assembly district leader, and the caucus of the Assembly
district leaders constitutes the mainspring of the party. It is the
source of all authority, and determines all questions of policy. .. .
Each Assembly district leader has a representative to look after
the election district, commonly called an election district captain.
These men are of the utmost importance to the Machine, and an
Assembly district leader strives to quarter his election district
captains on the city. This he succeeds in doing sooner or later.
If the Republicans are out of power in every other department, and
cannot take care of ‘the boys’ [party workers] in any other way,
they at least always have three places to dispose of which are
worth $7.50 (£1: 10s.) for five days in each election district. But
they are not reduced to this sore necessity. The Democratic leader
either finds a place for the friends of the Republican leader, with
whom he is co-operating, or when the Republican leader is in power,
it is the latter who finds places for his Democratic friends and
coadjutors, for the professional or caste feeling is very strong, and
politicians of all parties recognize their ultimate community of
interests at all times.

“Sogner or later, on the pay rolls of the city, which contain
9955 names, exclusive of school-rolls, or 13,749 all told, which
latter figure includes 25 aldermen and 83 chief officers, and ex-
cludes all Assembly men, senators, and national officers, at least four
men are taken care of by each party all the year round in each of
the 812 districts) The Machine, for the purpose of securing their
services in perpetuity, thus has the city pay them as city em-
ployees. This is particularly the case with regard to the Assembly
district leaders. To be sure, the money paid them out of the city,

1 There is also a third Democratic faction (Irving Hall), much weaker.
It can hardly be said to have a regular permanent Machine.

cuap.ixvt ELECTIONS AND THEIR MACHINERY 499

State, or national treasury cannot properly be said to be money
spent in elections, but it is money spent in maintaining the solidity
and perpetuity of the Machine; it keeps it alive the year round,
or ready for all emergencies, and especially for the great critical
emergency of the election. Without it each election would find
the Machine broken and scattered, and consequently it has to be
considered.

““New York City paid its Assembly district leaders last year
$330,000, or an average of $4750 for each of the 72 leaders.
This figure includes the estimated income of the registrar's office,
yielding only $12,000 per year to its chief. The amount which is
now being actually received by these leaders from the public
treasury is $24,000. Of this amount Tammany Hall gets about
$119,000, divided among 18 out of 24 of its district leaders. The
County Democracy gets about $90,000, divided among 17 out of 25
of its district leaders) The Republican leaders, being in the
minority party, both in the city and nation, do not fare so well;
but they have hopes, or have heretofore shared the pay of loyalty.
Their $22,000 is divided among 8 of their 24 leaders. It
must be said, however, in order to be just, that many of the men
among whom these sums are divided are honest and efficient public
servants, and the city gets full value for the salaries paid them,

“The aggregate of these sums, say $242,000, may be regarded
as the city’s permanent investment in the Machines for leadership
alone. Certainly not less than $750,000 more is invested in the
same way in political captains, heelers, followers, and hangers-on,
of whom it must be said also that the great majority render fair
service to the city for the salaries paid them. The Machines thus
supported all the year round find themselves in good condition to take
up the work of organizing a campaign or conducting an election.

“Prior to election day each party formally, through the action
of its leaders in caucus, determines upon how much money shall be
allotted by the party as such, for expenditure in each election
district, to employ ‘workers at the polls’ as it is called. These
workers at the polls are paid from $5 a day upwards, according to
the fund to be drawn upon, The ballots are printed by each
Machine for itself, although frequently they will employ the same
printer, which has in the past sometimes produced strange results.

500 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

“By their command of the tickets the Assembly district leaders
come into possession of the whole of the vital part of the election
machinery. They could meet on the night before election and
destroy the tickets, and no election could take place. It is the
possession of this power which makes them valuable from the point
of view of purchase and sale. Many of the Assembly district
leaders in the three organizations have been able to exploit this
possession so successfully and profitably that they have been able
to live throughout the entire year on their income derived from the
handling of the tickets. They can destroy, rebunch, fail to
distribute, and what not as they please. They rarely if ever take
money nominally for dealing with the tickets. It is taken or
alleged to be taken for the purpose of securing the distribution or
peddling of the tickets at the polls, or, as it is called, for the
employment of workers. The result of this system of machinery is
that, in order to compete with the professional ‘politicians, it is
necessary for any independent body of citizens to have a very
complex Machine, and frequently a very expensive one. In the
first place, the regular Machine is always equipped and prepared to
print as well as to distribute a ticket. These are expensive matters,
and the very fact of the expense in this regard alone is a practical
deterrent to independent movements for reform. The Machines
are always enabled to print the tickets and distribute them by
means of assessments levied on candidates and office-holders.”

The expense of printing and distributing tickets, and
of paying the ‘ workers” who labour for the party at
elections, is defrayed out of a fund raised chiefly by
assessments levied on candidates, 2.e. by requiring the
candidate to contribute a sum proportioned to the
pecuniary value of the office he seeks to obtain. As
explained in a preceding chapter, this is practically the
purchase of a nomination. Mr. Ivins gives the following
estimate of the amount raised. It varies a little from
year to year, for example—‘ in good years, such as that
after the sale by the Board of Aldermen of the Broad-
way franchise (the right of laying down a tramway in
Broadway), the Aldermanic office was much sought after.”

cwap.ixvi ELECTIONS AND THEIR MACHINERY 501

“An average year would show the following assessments on the
basis of two candidates only running in each district, and on the
basis of the minimum assessments :—

Two aldermanic candidates at $15 per district for

812 districts. . $24,360

Two Assembly candidates at $10 per district for 812
districts. . 16,240

Two candidates for Sonata or : Conpiees at $25 per
election district . ‘ . 40,600
Four candidates for judsedhips at $10, 000 Sih . 40,000
Two candidates for mayor at $20,000 each. . 40,000

Two candidates for a county office, such as sheriff,
county clerk, or registrar, at $10,000 . ; . 20,000
Two candidates for comptroller at $10,000. - 20,000
Two candidates for district attorney at $5000. . 10,000
Or, say a total of . : $211,200

“Tt is a fair estimate, year in and year out, that there is dis-
tributed at each polling place in the 812 districts of the city $75 to
$100 by the County Democracy, $75 to $100 by Tammany Hall, $40
to $50 by the Republicans, except in presidential years, when the
distribution has been much larger, $15 by Irving Hall, and $15 by
the representatives of the different independent candidates, making
a minimum of $238 per election district, which for 812 election
districts would give us a grand total of $216,000 or thereabouts. It
is usually calculated that the assessment of candidates will cover
this item.”

Mr. Ivins estimates the total annual expenditure of
the three Machines upon elections at $307,500 (£61,500).
The difference between this sum and the $211,000
raised by assessments on candidates, is made up by
assessments on office-holders, levies on public contractors,
and contributions from the rich men of the party. He
estimates the total annual cost of elections in an ordinary
(not a presidential) year at $700,000 (£140,000).

“Of this $700,000, $290,000 is contributed by the city for
legal expenses; $210,000 is derived from assessments upon

502 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

candidates, and $200,000 is obtained by assessments upon office-
holders and through contributions from the rich men of the various
parties. This money is divided among about 45,000 men, who do
the work about the polls. Of this 45,000 about 8000, or ten for
each district, are employed by the city. The remaining 37,000, or
forty-six for each district, are paid by the political organizations or
Machines. It will be seen that it takes nearly five times as many
men to do the political as it does to do the legal work.” 4

Mr. Ivins concludes as follows :—“The entire machinery of
politics thus pivots round the manner of election, the legal recogni-
tion of parties, the ability of parties to levy assessments on office-
seekers and office-holders, the practical exclusion, because of the
expensiveness of elections, of independent nominations and work,
the resulting control of the ballots by Assembly district leaders, and
of the distribution of ballots to voters on election day by their
subordinates and followers; in a word, this system amounts to a
monopoly in the hands of the leaders of the Machines, not only of
the power of nomination, but of the elective franchise itself.”

Thus the creation of a number of places placed under
party patronage enables the professional bosses to reward
their followers, and secure a certain number of safe votes.
The expense of printing and distributing ballots in-
creases the need for a party Machine, and seems to justify
its existence, and it enables the Machine to call for a
large fund. The fund is raised by selling nominations
and levying contributions on office-holders; and thus
the Machines, having a permanent revenue, strengthen
their hold on the city. To run independent candidates
becomes an extremely difficult and costly enterprise.
The city is put to a vast cost, because the assessments
paid by candidates and office-holders fall in the long
run on the city, which is forced to pay larger salaries
than are needed to more officials than are needed for
indifferent service, and thus to perpetuate out of its

1 [ take this summary of Mr. Ivins’s figures (having been obliged to

abridge some of his calculations) from Mr, Bishop’s lucid paper, in which,
following up Mr. Ivins, he indicates the remedies needed.

cHaP. LXVI ELECTIONS AND THEIR MACHINERY 503

corporate purse its own enslavement. The expense,
however, is the least part of the evil. Corruption is
virtually legalized; and as one-fifth of the voters are
under the control of the bosses, these usually have
it in their power to determine elections by turning
over their “voting stock” as they please, perhaps, as
in* some recent well-known instances, to the aspirant
who promises them a substantial sum.’

These things being so, it is not surprising that in
several American States—for the case of New York City
is only an extreme instance of phenomena observable in
other great cities—there have been efforts made to
improve the election laws by taking the printing and
distribution of ballots out of the hands of the parties,
for the purpose of entrusting them to public officers, to
repress bribery, and to limit the expenses incurred by
or on behalf of candidates. The good effects experienced
in England from recent legislation on these subjects have
encouraged American reformers to expect great benefits
from such laws. A European observer, while coinciding
in this view, will conceive that better election laws ought
to be accompanied by a reform in the system of partisan
appointments for short terms, and if possible by a
diminution in the number of administrative places
annually awarded at the polls.

NOTE.
I SUBJOIN specimens of “slip tickets” used at recent elections,
each, it will be understood, being issued by a party and distri-
buted to its supporters to be deposited by them in the ballot box.

1 An experienced New York publicist remarks to me that when
something approaching a real issue is raised there is less bribery. In the
mayoralty election in New York in 1886 very little money passed
“because the usually venal classes went straight for the Labor candidate
and would not be bought.”

504 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

The first set were used in an election of State, county, and
township officers in Iowa :—

REPUBLICAN STATE DEMOCRATIC STATE UNION LABOR STATI
TICKET, TICKET. TICKET.
For Governor, For Governor, For Governor,
WILLIAM LARRABEE, T. J. ANDERSON, M. J. Cain,
Of Fayette County. of Marion County. For Lieut.-Governor,
For Lieutenant-Governor, For Lieutenant-Governor, J. R, SOVEREIGN.
Joun A. T. Hou J. M. ELDER, s,
Of Poik County. : of Hancock County. vOR ee. bia
For Judge of the Supreme For Superintendent of Public S. L, Tipron.
Court. Instruction,
Girrorp 8. RoBrNson, H. W. SawYeEr, or once lg aes baa
Of Buena Vista County. of Fremont County, eee ee
For Superintendent of Public For Judge of the Supreme COUNTY TICKET.
Instructiun, A Court,
Henry SaBiy, ‘Has. S. Foaa, F sentati
Of Clinton County. of Guthrie County. cali ESracireats
REPUBLICAN LEGISLA- DEMOCRATIC COUNTY For gion cabd
TIVE TICKET. TICKET. Bus Busyenty,

eas For Auditor,
For Representative, 39th For Representative, C. H.V eae
District, JoHn W. ‘JONES. For Sheriff,
W. H. REpMan. For Treasurer, JoHN Woon.
= ears W. T. SHARP. For Superintendent,
REPUBLICAN COUNTY a vVW.oMar.
TICKET For Auditor, :
7 O. M. WHEELER. For Supervisor,
For Sheriff, JoHN A, Kina.
For County Treasurer, 3
0. L. ROsEMAN. James HANLIN, Rees

For Surveyor,

For County Auditor, Ws. T. Grrr. For Surveyor,
F. W. Porter. : W. T. Grier
7 ForSuperintendent of Schools, she 7
For Sheriff, V. W. Macy :
A. M. HOGAN, _ . TOWNSHIP TICKET.
‘or Coroner,
For County Superintendent aa!
of Schools, oa CONakis For Trustee,!
8. W. HeatH. | For Supervisor,
Joun A. KING.

For County Supervisor,

For Justice of the Peace,?

J. M, Bryan, TOWNSHIP TICKET.

For County Surveyor, For Trustee,?
W. T. GRIER, For Constables,!
For Coroner, bane ara

Horace WHITCOMB. For Justice of the Peace,!

TOWNSHIP TICKET.

. For Constables,!

For Trustee,
W. O. WILLARD.

For Constable (to fill vacancy},
P, A. TERRELL.

[) The spaces left vacant are to be filled up by the voter according to his pleasure.]

cuap.Lxvi ELECTIONS AND THEIR MACHINERY

595

The following three tickets were used at an election of

city officers in Boston.

The original tickets are ornamental

articles, executed in various kinds of type; I give here only
the names of the candidates :—

Warp TWELVE.

REGULAR DEMOCRATIC
TICKET,
[Here there is a portrait of
Mr. O'Brien.)

For Mayor,
Huan O’Brien.

Copyrighted by M. J. Kivey,

Printer, 7 Spring Lane, Boston.

For Street Commissioner,
Hues E. Brapy.

For School Committee,

Russevt D. Exvviort,
Epwarp C, CaRRIvaN,
JOSEPH T. DURYEA,
Joun G. BLAKE,
George R, Swasky,
JosEPH D. FALion,
EmiLy A. FIFIELD,
THomas O’GRapDy, Jr.

For Alderman,
WILLIAM P. Carrot.

For Common Council,
Witiiam H, WHITMORE,
JAMES J. BURKE,

Joun J. MULHALL.

We hereby certify that this
ballot contains only the
names of the regular De-
mocratic nominees, and is
issued by the Democratic
City Committee of Boston.
THomas J. Barry, Presi-
dent. L, J. Logan, Chair-
than Printing Committee.

Warp TWELVE.

REGULAR REPUBLICAN

TICKET.

Natuan Sawyer & Son, Printers,

No. 70 State Street, Boston.

This certifies that this Ballot

is the regular and genuine
Ballot of the Republican
Party, to be used at the
Election on December 13,
1887, in the City of Boston.
JESSE M. Guin, President,
Republican City Commit-
tee of Boston.

For Mayor,
Tuomas N. Hart.

For Street Commissioner,
Avavstus N. Sampson.

For School Committee,
JOHN W. PorTER,
Joun G. BLAKE,
RussELi D, ELLIOTT,
GEoRGE R, Swasky,
CHARLES L. FLINT,
Emity A. FirleLp,
ABRAM E. Courter,
JosEPH STEDMAN.

WarpD TWELVE.

CITIZENS’ TICKET.
Dec, 13, 1887.

This ballot contains the names

of the regular Citizens’
Nomination (Chickering
Hall Convention A. A.
Burrocs, Chairman.)

Copyright, 1887, by
ALFRED Mubuk & Son,
24 Franklin Street, Boston.
For Mayor,

THomas N, Harv.

For Street Commissioner,

Avaustus N. Sampson.

For Schovl Committee,
Joun G, BLAKE,
GrEoRGE R. SwasEy,
Epwarp C. CaRRIGan,
EmiLy A. FIFIELD,
JosEPH T. DURYEA,
Cuar_es L. FLINT,
ABRAM E. CUTTER,
JOSEPH STEDMAN,

For Alderman,
EDWARD J. JENKINS.

For Alderman,
Epwarp J. JENKINS.

For Common Council,
Corne.ivus F. DesMonD,
Tomas F. Tracy,
James B. Hayes.

For Common Council,
JOHN F, MULHALL,
WILLiaM Bunton,
SaMvuEL B, Doacertr.

On the day when these tickets were used, there were distri-
buted in the streets at the polling-places envelopes containing
small slips of paper gummed on the back, and bearing on the
front the words following :—

For Common Council, WinL1AM M. WHITMORE.

506 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART IIT

These were intended to be used by citizens voting the Repub-
lican or Citizens’ ticket, being pasted by them over the name
of one of the common council candidates on either of these
tickets, so enabling the Republican or supporter of the
Citizens’ list to give his vote for Mr. Whitmore, while voting
against the rest of the Democratic ticket.

The following three tickets were used at the election of
city and school officers in the city of Cambridge, Mass.,
December 1887. They were all issued by organizations, but
not regular party organizations. At the same election a
popular vote was taken on the question whether licences for
the sale of intoxicants should be granted in the city.

Shall Licences be granted for Shall Licences be granted for
the sale of Intoxicating Liquors the sale of Intoxicating Liquors
in this City 4 in this City ?

NO. YES.

CHAP, LXVI

“PAY AS YOU GO”
CONVENTION!
Regular Nominations.

L. M. Hannum, Chairman.
GzorcEe G. WricHt, Secy.

For Mayor,
Wituram E. Russe.

For Aldermen,
ALEXANDER MILLAN,
WARREN Ivers,
Frep. H. Hoiton,
Frank H. TEELE,
Henry A. Dowerty,
Witiiam T, NEILON,
Danigu E. FRAsIEr,
Joun H, Corcoran,
Cuarces F, Stratron,
SoLomon 8, SLEEPER.

For Principal Assessor,
JosHua G, GoocH.

For Assistant ‘Assessors,
CuHarLes H. HUNNEWELL,
Ward One.
Witrram J. Marvin,

Ward Two.
Georae L. MITcHELL,
Ward Three.
JoHN LENNON,
Ward Four.
Tuomas F. Canir,
Ward Five.

For School Committee,
JoHN L, HILDRETH,
(For full Term)
Ward One.

ALicE M. LONGFELLOW,
(For unexpired Term)
Ward One.
ALPHONSO E. WHITE,
Ward Two.
Ricwarp J. McKELLgEGEt,
Ward Three.
WILLIAM H. Orcutt,
(For full Term)
Ward Four,
Moses D. CHURCH,
(For unexpired term)
Ward Four.
GrorcE A, ALLISON,
Ward Five.

WARD ONE.

For Members of the Common
Council,
Wittram H. EvELErH,
Joun H. H. McNaMEg,
Georce E. Canter,
Witt T. PIPER.

ELECTIONS AND THEIR MACHINERY

WORKINGMEN’S TICKET.
1887.

For Mayor,
Epear R, CHAMPLIN.

For Aldermen,
Epwarp W. Hincks,
P, ALLEN LINDSEY,
JoOsEPH J. KELLEY,
Joun H. Corcoran,
Tsaac McLEAN,
SamMuEL W. McDanIgL,
Coin CHISHOLM,
WILuiaM T. NEILON,
Rosert B, BANCROFT,
Henry A. DOHERTY.

For Assessor,
Josaua G. Goock.

For Assistant Assessors,
Ward One,
JAMES GRANT,
Ward Two,
Witiiam J. MARVIN.
Ward Three,
GEORGE L. MITCHELL.
Ward Four,
JoHN LENNON.
Ward Five,
Sy.Lvanus M. Parsons.

For School Committee,
Ward One,
Emery Bemis.
Ward One,
ALIcg M. LoNGFELLOW,
2 years.

Ward Two,
JOHN 8, PAINE.
Ward Three,
Joun H. Ponce.
Ward Four,
JouNn Curtis NIcHOLs.
Ward Four,

Mosegs D. CuurcH, 1 year.

Ward Five,
Gror@E A, ALLISON.

For Common Council,
WittiamM H. Eveveta,
Epear QO. KINSMAN,
Joun H. H. MeNaMEE,
GerorGE E, CarTER.

507

TAX PAYERS’ TICKET.
1887.

[Here there is a portrait of
Mr. Champlin.]
For Mayor, '
Epe@aR R. CHAMPLIN.

For Aldermen,
Epwarp W. HINcks,
P. ALLEN LINDSEY,
JOSEPH J. KELLEY,
Danig. E. FRASIER,
Isaac McLzan,
SAMUEL W. McDaniEL,
Coin CHISHOLM,
WILuiam T. NEILON,
Rosert B. BaNeRo¥Ft,
BENJAMIN F, ATWOOD.

For Assessor,
JosHua G. GoovH.

For Assistant Assessors,
Ward One,
JAMES GRANT.
Ward Two,
Wit1taM 8. Marvin,
Ward Three,
Georce L. MitcHELL.
Ward Four,
JOHN LENNON.
Ward Five,
Syivanus M. Parsons,

For School Committee,
Ward One,
Emery Bemis,
Ward One,
ALICE M. LONGFELLOW,
2 years.
Ward Two,

JOHN 8. PAINE.
Ward Three,
JoHuN H. Ponce.
Ward Four,

JoHN Curtis NICHOLS.
Ward Four,
Moses D. Caurcn, 1 year.
Ward Five,
GEORGE A. ALLISON.

For Common Council,
WILLIAM H. EVELETH,
Epcar 0, KINSMAN,
Joun H. H. McNamee,
GrorGE E. Carter.

508 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

The following comments on this Cambridge election made
by a Cambridge newspaper next day state the result, and ex-
plain the use of “ pasters” or “stickers” :—

RUSSELL AND “NO!”
MAYOR RUSSELL’S MAJORITY 1917.
Five Hundred and Sixty-Six Majority for No-Licence.

“Mayor Russell received an emphatic endorsement at the polls
on Tuesday and was returned to the mayor’s chair by the handsome
majority of 1917. No-licence also came off triumphant with the
same majority as last year, viz. 566, which is a remarkable coin-
cidence. The vote polled was unprecedentedly large, there being
nearly 8200 votes cast out of a total registration of about 9500.
The interest in the licence question was largely responsible for this,
the temperance people having done their utmost to bring out every
friend of the cause, while the licence people struggled with
tremendous energy for the success of their side.

’ “The Russell ticket was, in the main, successful right through.
The aldermanic exceptions were the election of Hincks in Ward
One, in place of Ivers, and of Lindsey in Ward Two, instead of
Holton. Both of these successful candidates are members of this
year’s board and were upon the Champlin ticket. Their election is
not a surprise nor is it a victory for the Champlin ticket, as they
could probably have been elected had they run independently. It
will be remembered that there was a strong effort made to nominate
both these men in the Russell convention. The election of General
Hincks is regarded as an effective offset to the attack made upon
him in the convention. He received a very large vote, and stood
eighth in the list of those elected. Alderman Lindsey defeated
Alderman Holton by 78 votes only, and the majority is so small
that there will be a recount. Holton’s defeat is due to the free use
of stickers in Ward Three. Ivers, whom General Hincks defeated,
stood twelfth on the aldermanic list in the size of his vote. He
was scratched badly in East Cambridge, where Hincks pasters were
freely used. The largest vote cast was that for Neilon for alderman,
viz. 7440. He was on both tickets. Frasier, who was also on
both tickets, received 6872 votes.”’—Cambridge Tribune, 10th
December 1887.

CHAPTER LXVII
CORRUPTION

No impression regarding American politics is more
generally diffused in Europe than that contained in the
question which the traveller who has returned from the
United States becomes so weary of being asked, “ Isn’t
everybody corrupt there?” It is an impression for
which the Americans themselves, with their airy way of
talking about their own country, their fondness for
broad effects, their enjoyment of a good story and
humorous pleasure in exaggerations generally, are
largely responsible. European visitors who, generally
belonging to the wealthier classes, are generally reaction-
ary in politics, and glad to find occasion for disparaging
popular government, eagerly catch up and repeat the
stories they are told in New York or San Francisco.
European readers take literally the highly-coloured pic-
tures of some American novels and assume that the
descriptions there given of certain men and groups
“inside politics”—descriptions legitimate enough in
a novel—hold true of all men and groups following that
unsavoury trade. Europeans, moreover, and English-
men certainly not less than other Europeans, have a
useful knack of forgetting their own shortcomings when
contemplating those of their neighbours ; so you may hear

510 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART I11

men wax eloquent over the depravity of transatlantic
politicians who will sail very near the wind in giving
deceptive pledges to their own constituents, who will
support flagrant jobs done on behalf of their own party,
who will accept favours from, and dine with, and receive
at their own houses, financial speculators and members
of the legislature whose aims are just as base, and whose
standard is just as low as those of the worst congressman
that ever came to push his fortune in Washington.

I am sensible of the extreme difficulty of estimating
the amount of corruption that prevails in the United
States, Ifanative American does not know—as few do
-—how deep it goes nor how widely it is spread, much
less can a stranger. I have, however, submitted the
impressions I formed to the judgment of sume fair-minded
and experienced American friends, and am assured by
them that these impressions are substantially correct; that
is to say, that they give a view of the facts such as they
have themselves formed from an observation incompar-
ably wider than that of a European traveller could be.

The word “corruption” needs to be analysed. It
is used to cover several different kinds of political
unsoundness.

One sense, the most obvious, is the taking or giving
of money bribes. Another sense is the taking or giving
of bribes in kind, e.g. the allotment of a certain quantity
of stock or shares in a company, or of an interest in a
profitable contract, or of a land grant. The offence is
essentially the same as where a money bribe passes, but
to most people it does not seem the same, partly because
the taking of money is a more unmistakable selling of
one’s self, partly because it is usually uncertain how the
bribe given in kind will turn out, and a man excuses
himself by thinking that its value will depend on how

CHAP, LXVII CORRUPTION Sil

he develops the interest he bas obtained. <A third
sense of the word includes the doing of a job, e.g.
promising a contractor that he shall have the clothing
of the police or the cleaning of the city thoroughfares
in return for his political support; giving ofticial adver-
tisements to a particular newspaper which pufis you;
promising a railroad president, whose subscription to
party funds is hoped for, to secure the defeat of a bill
seeking to regulate the freight charges of his road or
threatening its land grants. These cases shade off into
those of the last preceding group, but they seem less
black, because the act done is one which would probably
be done anyhow by some one else from no better motive,
and because the turpitude consists not in getting a
private gain but in misusing a public position to secure a
man’s own political advancement. Hence the virtue that
will resist a bribe will often succumb to these temptations.

There is also the sense in which the bestowal of
places of power and profit from personal motives is said
to be a corrupt exercise of patronage. Opinion has in all
countries been lenient to such action when the place is
given as‘a reward of party services, but the line between
a party and a personal service cannot be easily drawn.

Then, lastly, one sometimes hears the term stretched
to cover insincerity in professions of political faith.
To give pledges and advocate measures which one in-
wardly dislikes and deems opposed to the public interest
is a form of misconduct which seems far less gross than
to sell one’s vote or influence, but it may be, in a given
instance, no less injurious to the state.

Although these two latter sets of cases do not fall
within the proper meaning and common use of the word
corruption, it seems worth while to mention them,
because derelictions of duty which a man thinks trivial

512 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART IIT

in the form with which custom has made him familiar in
his own country, where perhaps they are matter for
merriment, shock him when they appear in a different
form in another country. They get mixed up in his
mind with venality, and are cited to prove that the
country is corrupt and its politicians profligate. A
European who does not blame a minister for making a
man governor of a colony because he has done some
back-stairs parliamentary work, will be shocked at seeing
in New York some one put into the custom-house in
order that he may organize primaries in the district of
the congressman who has got him the place. English
members of Parliament condemn the senator who moves
a resolution intended to “‘ placate” the Irish vote, while
they forget their own professions of ardent interest in
schemes which they think economically unsound but
likely to rouse the flagging interest of the agricultural
labourer. Distinguishing these senses in which the word
corruption is used, let us attempt to inquire how far it
is chargeable on the men who compose each of the
branches of the American Federal and State Government.
No President has ever been seriously charged with
pecuniary corruption. The Presidents have been men
very different in their moral standard, and sometimes
neither scrupulous nor patriotic, but money or money’s
worth they have never touched for themselves, great
as the temptations must have been to persons with
small means and heavy expenses. They have doubiless
often made bad appointments from party motives, have
sought to strengthen themselves by the use of their
patronage, have talked insincerely and tolerated jobs ;
but all these things have also been done within the last
thirty years by sundry English, French, and Italian prime
ministers, some of whom have since been canonized.

CHAP. LXVIT CORRUPTION 513

The standard of honour maintained by the Presi-
dents has not always been maintained by the leading
members of recent administrations, several of whom
have been suspected of complicity in railroad jobs,
and even in frauds upon the revenue. They may not
have, probably they did not, put any part of the
plunder into their own pockets, but they have winked
at the misdeeds of their subordinates, and allowed the
party funds to be replenished, not by direct malversa-
tion, yet by rendering services to influential individuals
or corporations which a strict sense of public duty would
have forbidden. On the other hand, it is fair to say
that there seems to be no case since the war—although
there was a bad case in President Buchanan’s Cabinet
just before the war—in which a member of the Cabinet
has received money, or its equivalent, as the price of
either an executive act or an appointment, while inferior
officials, who have been detected in so doing (and this
occasionally happens), have been dismissed and disgraced.’

Next, as to Congress. It is particularly hard to
discover the truth about Congress, for few of the
abundant suspicions excited and accusations brought
against senators or members of the House have
been, or could have been, sifted to the bottom. Among
four hundred‘men there will be the clean and the unclean.
The opportunities for private gain are large, the chances
of detection small; few members keep their seats for
three or four successive congresses, and one half are
changed every two years, so the temptation to make
hay while the sun shines is all the stronger.

There are several forms which temptation takes in

1 The so-called Whisky Ring of 1875 and the Star Route gang of
more recent times are perhaps the most conspicuous instances of mis-

conduct in the civil service.
VOL. II 2.

514 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART II

the Federal legislature. One is afforded by the position
a member holds on a committee. All bills and many
resolutions are referred to some one of the committees,
and it is in the committee-room that their fate is prac-
tically decided. In a small body each member has great
power, and the exercise of power (as observed already)’
is safeguarded by little responsibility. He may matéri-
ally advance a bill promoted by an influential manufac-
turer, or financier, or railroad president. He may
obstruct it. .He may help, or may oppose, a bill directed
against a railroad or other wealthy corporation, which has
something to gain or lose from Federal legislation.? No
small part of the business of Congress is what would be
called in England private business; and although the
individual railroads which come directly into relation
with the Federal government are not numerous,—the
great transcontinental lines which have received land
grants or other subventions are the most important,—
questions affecting these roads do frequently come up
and involve large amounts of money. The tariff on im-
ports opens another enormous sphere in which legislative
intervention affects private pecuniary interests; for it
makes all the difference to many sets of manufacturers
whether duties on certain classes of goods are raised, or
maintained, or lowered. Hence the doors of Congress
are besieged by a whole army of commercial or railroad
men and their agents, to whom, since they have come to
form a sort of profession, the name of Lobbyists is

1 See Chapter XV. in Vol. I. on the Committees of Congress.

2 T remember to have heard of the governor of a western Territory
who, when he came east, used to borrow money from the head of a great
railway which traversed his Territory, saying he would oblige the railway
when it found occasion to ask him. His power of obliging included the
right to veto bills passed by the Territorial legislature. This governor
was an ex-boss of an Eastern State whom his party had provided for by
bestowing the governorship on him.

CHAP, LXVII CORRUPTION 515

given.'| Many congressmen are personally interested,
and lobby for themselves among their colleagues from
the vantage-ground of their official positions.

Thus a vast deal of solicitation and bargaining goes
on. Lobbyists offer considerations for help in passing
a bill which is desired or in stopping a bill which is
feared. Two members, each of whom has a bill to get
through, or one of whom desires to prevent his railroad
from being interfered with while the other wishes the
tariff on an article which he manufactures kept up, make
a compact by which each aids the other. This is Log-
rolling: You help me to roll my log, which is too heavy
for my unaided strength, and I help you to roll yours.
Sometimes a member brings in a bill directed against
some railroad or other great corporation, merely in order
to levy blackmail upon it. This is technically called a
Strike. An eminent railroad president told me that
for some years a certain senator regularly practised
this trick. When he had brought in his bill he came
straight to New York, called at the railroad offices, and
asked the president what he would give him to with-
draw the bill, That the Capitol and the hotels at
Washington are a nest of such intrigues and machina-
tions, while Congress is sitting, is admitted on all hands ;
but how many of the members are tainted no one
can tell. Sometimes when money passes it goes not
to the member of Congress himself, but to some Boss
who can and does put pressure on him. Sometimes,
again, a lobbyist will demand a sum for the purpose of
bribing a member who is really honest, and, having
ascertained that the member is going to vote in the
way desired, will keep the sum in his own pocket.
Bribery often takes the form of a transfer of stocks

1 See ante, Note (B) to Chapter XVI in Appendix to Vol. I.

516 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

or shares, nor have even free passes on railroads been
scorned by some of the more needy legislators. The
abuse on this head had grown so serious that the
bestowal of passes on inter-State lines was forbidden
by statute in 1887.1 In the end of 1883 portions of
a correspondence in the years 1876-78 between Mr.
Huntington, one of the proprietors and directors of the
Central Pacific Railroad, who then represented that
powerful corporation at Washington, and one of his
agents in California, were published ; and from these it
uppeared that the company, whose land grants were
frequently threatened by hostile bills, and which was
exposed to the competition of rival enterprises, which
(because they were to run through Territories) Congress
was asked to sanction, defended itself by constant deal-
ings with senators and representatives—dealings in the
course of which it offered money and bonds to those
whose support it needed. Mr. Huntington comments
freely on the character of various members of both
Houses, and describes not only his own operations, but
those of Mr. Scott, his able and active opponent, who
had the great advantage of being able to command
passes on some railways running out of Washington.’

1 All lines traversing the territory of more than one State are subject
to the power of Congress to “regulate cominerce.” As to free passes,
see the instructive remarks of the Inter-State Commerce Commission in
their First Report.

2 In one letter Mr. Huntington uses a graphic and characteristic
metaphor: “Scott has switched off (ce. off the Central Pacific track and
on to his own railroad track) Senators 8. and W., but you know they can
be switched back with the proper arrangements when they are wanted.”
In another he observes (1878), “I think in all the world’s history
never befure was such a wild set of demagoyues honoured by the name of
Congress. We have been hurt sore, aud some of the worst bills have
been defeated ; but we cannot stand many such Congresses,”

The recently-issued Report of the US. Pacitic Railway Commission

says of these transactions, “There is no room for doubt that a large
portion of the sum of $4,818,000 was used for the purpose of influencing

CHAP. LXVII CORRUPTION 517

It does not seem, from what one hears on the spot,
that money is often given, or, I should rather say, it seems
that the men to whom it is given are few in number. But
considerations of some kind pretty often pass,’ so that
corruption in both the first and second of the above
senses must be admitted to exist and to affect a portion,
though only a small portion of Congress.? A position
of some delicacy is occupied by eminent lawyers who sit.
in Congress and receive retainers from powerful corpora-
tions whose interests may be affected by congressional
legislation, retainers for which they are often not expected
to render any forensic service.* There are various ways
in which members of Congress can use their position
to advance their personal interests. They have access
to the executive, and can obtain favours from it; not
so much because the executive cares what legislation
they pass, for it has little to do with legislation, but
that the members of the Cabinet are on their pro-
motion, and anxious to stand well with persons whose
influence covers any considerable local area, who may
perhaps be even able to control the delegation of a
State in a nominating convention. Hence a senator

legislation and of preventing the passage of measures deemed to be hostile
to the interests of the company, and for the purpose of influencing
elections. It is impossible to read the extracts from the letters written
by Mr. Huntington himself without reaching the conclusion that large
sums were expended by him in efforts to defeat the passage of various
bills pending in Congress.”—Report, p. 84.

1 The president of a great Western railroad told me that members of
Congress used to come to the company’s office to buy its land, and on
seeing the price-list would say, “‘ But isn’t there a discount? Surely you
can give the land cheaper to a friend. You know I shall be your friend
in Congress,” and so forth.

2 Among the investigations which disclosed the existence of bribery
among members of Congress, the most prominent are those of the Credit
Mobilier and the Pacific Mail cases,

3 This has been forbidden by a statute of 1886 as regards railroads
having Federal lard grants.

518 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

or congressman may now and then sway the executive
towards a course it would not otherwise have taken,
and the resulting gain to himself, or to some person
who has invoked his influence, may be an illicit gain,
probably not in the form of money, but as a job out
of which something may be made. Again, it has been
hitherto an important part of a member’s duty to obtain
places for his constituents in the Federal civil service.
There are about 120,000 of such places. Here is a vast
field, if not for pecuniary gain, for appointments are
not sold, yet for the gratification of personal and party
interests. Nor does the mischief stop with the making
of inferior appointments, for the habit of ignoring public
duty which is formed blunts men’s sense of honour, and
makes them more apt to yield to some grosser form of
temptation. Similar causes produced similar effects
during last century in England, and it is said that the
French legislature now suffers from the like’ malady,
members of the Chamber being incessantly occupied in
wheedling or threatening the Executive into conferring
places or decorations upon their constituents.

The rank and file of the Federal civil service attain
a level of integrity as high as that of England or Ger-
many. The State civil service is comparatively small,
and in most States one hears little said against its purity.
Taking one part of the country with another, a citizen
who has business with a government department, such as
the customs or excise, or with a State treasurer’s oflice, or
with a poor law or school authority, has as much expec-
tation of finding honest men to deal with as he has of
finding trustworthy agents to conduct a piece of private
commercial business. Instances of dishonesty are more
noticed when they occur in a public department, but I
do not think they are more frequent.

CHAP. LXVII CORRUPTION 519

It is hard to form a general judgment regarding the
State legislatures, because they differ so much among
themselves. Those of Massachusetts, Vermont, and
several of the North-western States, such as Michigan,
are pure, z.e. the members who would take a bribe are
excessively few, and those who would push through a
job for some other sort of consideration a small fraction
of the whole.t On the other hand, New York and
Pennsylvania have so bad a name that people profess
to be surprised when a good act passes, and a strong
governor is kept constantly at work vetoing bills cor-
ruptly obtained or mischievous in themselves. Several
causes have contributed to degrade the legislature of
New York State. It is comparatively small in number,
the Assembly having but 128 members, the Senate 32.
It includes, besides New York and Brooklyn, several
smaller ring-governed cities whence bad members come.
It has to deal with immensely powerful corporations,
such as the great railroads which traverse it on their
way to the West. These corporations are the bane of
State politics, for their management is secret, being
usually in the hands of one or two capitalists, and their
wealth is so great that they can offer bribes at which
ordinary virtue grows pale. There are many honest men
in the Assembly, and a few are rich men who do not need
a douceur, but the proportion of tainted men is large
enough to pollute the whole lump. Of what the bribe-
taker gets he keeps a part for himself, using the rest to
buy the doubtful votes of purchaseable people ; to others
he promises his assistance when they need it, and when
by such log-rolling he has secured a considerable back-

1 The Territorial legislatures vary greatly from time to time: they
are sometimes quite pure; another election under some demagogic im-
pulse may bring in a crowd of mischievous adventurers.

520 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

ing, he goes to the honest men, among whom, of course,
he has a considerable acquaintance, puts the matter to
them in a plausible way—they are probably plain
farmers from the rural districts—and so gains his
majority. Each great corporation keeps an agent at
Albany, the capital of the State, who has authority to
buy off the promoters of hostile bills, and to employ the
requisite professional lobbyists. Such a lobbyist, who
may or may not be himself a member, bargains for a
sum down, $5000 or $10,000 (£1000 or £2000), in
case he succeeds in getting the bill in question passed
or defeated, as the case may be; and when the session
ends he comes for his money, and no questions are
asked. This sort of thing now goes on, or has lately
gone on, in several other States, though nowhere on so
grand a scale. Virginia, Maryland, California, Illinois,
Missouri, are all more or less impure; , Louisiana is
said to be now worse than New York. But the
lowest point was reached in some of the Southern
States shortly after the war, when, the negroes having
received the suffrage, the white inhabitants were still
excluded as rebels, and the executive government
was conducted by Northern carpet-baggers under the
protection of Federal troops. In some States the
treasury wag pilfered; huge State debts were run up;
negroes voted farms to themselves ; all kinds of robbery
and jobbery went on unchecked. South Carolina, for
instance, was a perfect Tartarus of corruption, as much
below the Hades of Illinois or Missouri as the heaven
of ideal purity is above the ordinary earth of Boston
and Westminster.’ In its legislature there was an old
darkey, jet black and with venerable white hair, a
Methodist preacher, and influential among his brother

1 Téccov évepO” Alésew dcov ot paves éor’ did, yains.
:

CHAP. LXVII CORRUPTION 521

statesmen, who kept a stall for legislation, whére he dealt
in statutes at prices varying from $100 to $400. Since
those days there has been a peaceful revolution for the
better at the South, but some of its legislative bodies
have still much leeway to make up.

Of city governments I have spoken in previous
chapters. They begin to be bad when the population
begins to exceed 100,000, and includes a large propor-
tion of recent immigrants. They are generally pure in
smaller places, that is to say, they are as pure as those
of an average English, French, or German city.

The form which corruption usually takes in the
populous cities is the sale of “franchises” (especially
monopolies in the use of public thoroughfares),’ the
jobbing of contracts, and the bestowal of places upon
personal adherents, both of them faults not unknown in
large European municipalities, and said to be speci-
ally rife in Paris, though no rifer than under Louis
Napoleon, when the reconstruction of the city under
Prefect Haussman provided unequalled opportunities
for the enrichment of individuals at the public expense.
English vestries, local boards, and even, though much
more rarely, town councils, do some quiet jobbery.
No European city has, however, witnessed scandals ap-
proaching those of New York or Philadelphia, where the
public till has been robbed on a vast scale, and accounts
have been systematically cooked to conceal the thefts.

Last of all we come to the ordinary voter and the
question of bribery at elections. Here, again, there is
the widest possible difference between different regions
of the country. The greater part of the Union is pure,
as pure as Scotland, where from 1868 till 1885 there

1 The most notorious recent case is the sale by the New York alder-
men of the right to lay a tramway in Broadway. Nearly the whole
number were indicted and some were punished by imprisonment.

522 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART 111

was only ‘one election petition for alleged bribery.
Other parts are no better than the small boroughs of
Southern England were before the Corrupt Practices
Act of 1883.’ No place, however, not even the poorest
ward in New York City, sinks below the level of such
constituencies as Yarmouth, Sandwich, or Canterbury
were in England. Bribery is not practised in America ‘in
the same way as it was recently in some parts of England,
or as anciently at Rome, by distributing small sums
among a large mass of poor electors, or even, as in many
English boroughs, among a section of voters (not always
the poorest) known to be venal, and accustomed to
reserve their votes till shortly before the close of the
poll. The American practice has been to give sums of
from $20 to $50 (£4 to £10) to an active local “worker,”
who undertakes to bring up a certain number of voters,
perhaps twenty or thirty, whom he “ owns” or can get at.
He is not required to account for the money, and prob-
ably spends very little of it in direct bribes, though
something in drinks to the lower sort of elector. This
kind of expenditure belongs rather to the category of
paid canvassing than of bribery, yet sometimes the true
European species occurs. In a New Hampshire town
not long ago, $10 (£2) were paid to each of two hundred
doubtful voters. In some districts of New York the
friends of a candidate will undertake, in case he is
returned, to pay the rent of the poorest voters who
occupy tenement houses, and the candidate subsequently
makes up the amount.? The expenses of congressional

1 After the election of 1880 no less than 95 petitions were presented
impugning elections on the ground of some form of corruption, and
many were sustained. After the election of 1886 there was not a single
petition. This improvement must, however, be in great measure ascribed
to the Redistribution Act of 1885, which destroyed the small boroughs.

2 At a recent election in Brouklyn a number of coloured voters sat

CHAP. LXVII CORRUPTION 523

and presidential elections are often heavy, and though
the larger part goes in organization and demonstra-
tions, meetings, torchlight processions, and so forth, a
part is likely to go in some illicit way. A member of
Congress for a poor district in a great city told me that
his expenses ran from $8000 up to $10,000 (£1600 to
£2000), which is just about what a parliamentary con-
test used to cost in an English borough constituency of
equal area. In America the number of voters in a con-
stituency is more than five times as great as it now is
in England, but the official expenses of polling-booths
and clerks are not borne by the candidate. In a corrupt
district along the Hudson River above New York I have
heard of as much as $50,000 (£10,000) being spent
at a single congressional election, when in some other
districts of the State the expenses did not exceed
$2000 (£400). In a presidential election great sums
are spent in doubtful, or, as they are called, “ pivotal”
States. Indiana was ‘“ drenched with money” in 1880,
much of it contributed by great corporations, yet one is
told that little of this went in bribery. How much ever
does go it is the harder to determine, because elec-
tions are rarely impeached on this ground, both parties
tacitly agreeing that bygones shall be bygones; and
experience having shown not only the extreme difficulty
of proof but the tediousness of investigation, which may
not be over till half the term of Congress has run out.
Well-informed Americans do not consider bribery at
elections to be a growing evil in their country. Serious
it is, but not comparable for the mischief it does
either to Bossism or to election frauds. Probably the
disease is no more diffused than in England before 1883.

(literally) on the fence in front of the polling booths, waiting to be bought,
but were disappointed, the parties having agreed nut to buy them.

524 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART HI

In most rural districts it is practically unknown: the
only thing approaching it is the farmer’s notion, that
when he drives in five or six miles to a polling place
he ought to get his dinner for nothing.

On a review of the whole matter, the following
conclusions may be found not very wide of the truth.

Bribery exists in Congress, but is confined to a
few members, say five per cent of the whole number.
It is more common in the legislatures of a few, but only
a few States, practically absent from the higher walks
of the Federal civil service and among the chief State
officials, rare among the lower officials, unknown among
the Federal judges, rare among State judges.’

The taking of other considerations than money,
such as a share in a lucrative contract, or a railway
pass, or a “good thing” to be secured for a friend,
prevails among legislators to a somewhat larger extent.
Being less coarsely palpable than the receipt of money,
it is thought more venial, One may roughly conjecture
that from fifteen to twenty per cent of the members of
Congress or of an average State legislature would allow
themselves to be influenced by inducements of this kind.

Malversation of public funds occurs occasionally in
cities, rarely among Federal or State officers.

Jobbery of various kinds, 7.e. the misuse of a public
position for the benefit of individuals, is pretty frequent.
It is often disguised as a desire to render some service to
the party, and the same excuse is sometimes found for
a misappropriation of public money.

Patronage is usually dispensed with a view to party

1 One hears senators often charged with buying themselves into the
Senate ; but, so far as I could ascertain, it rarely happens that a candidate
for the Senate bribes members of the State legislature, though probably
he often makes heavy contributions to the party election fund, out of
which the election expenses of the members of the party dominant in the
State legislature are largely defrayed.

CHAP. LXVII CORRUPTION 525

considerations or to win personal support. But this
remark is equally true of England and France, the chief
difference being that owing to the short terms and
frequent ce the quantity of patronage is relatively
greater in the United States.

If this is not a bright picture, neither is it so
datk as that which most Europeans have drawn, and
which the loose language of many Americans sanctions.
What makes it seem dark is the contrast between the
deficiencies which the government shows in this respect,
and the excellence, on the one hand of the frame of the
Constitution, on the other of the tone and sentiment
of the people. The European reader may, however,
complain that the picture is vague in its outlines. I
cannot make it more definite. The facts are not easy
to ascertain, and it is hard to say what standard one is
to apply to them. In the case of America men are
inclined to apply an ideal standard, because she is
a republic, professing to have made a new departure
in politics, and setting before her a higher ideal than
most European monarchies. Yet it must be remembered
that in a new and large country, where the temptations
are enormous and the persons tempted have many of
them no social position to forfeit, the conditions are
not the most favourable to virtue. If, recognizing
the fact that the path of the politician is in all countries
thickly set with snares, we leave ideals out’ of sight and
try America by an actual standard, we shall find that
while her legislative bodies fall below the level of purity
maintained in England and Germany, probably also in
France and Italy, her Federal and State administration,
in spite of the evils flowing from an uncertain tenure,
is not, in point of integrity, at this moment sensibly
inferior to the administrations of European countries.

CHAPTER LXVIIil
THE WAR AGAINST BOSSDOM

Ir must not be supposed the inhabitants of Ring-ruled
cities tamely submit to their tyrants. The Americans are
indeed, what with their good nature and what with the
preoccupation of the most active men in their private
business, a long-suffering people. But patience has its
limits, and when a Ring has pushed paternal government
too far, an insurrection may break out. Rings have
generally the sense to scent the coming storm, and to
avert it by making two or three good nominations, and
promising a reduction of taxes. Sometimes, however,
they hold on their course fearless and shameless, and
then the storm breaks upon them.

There are several forms which a reform movement
or other popular rising takes. The recent history of
great cities supplies examples of each. The first form is
an attack upon the primaries. They are the key of a
Ring’s position, and when they have been captured
their batteries can be turned against the Ring itself.
When an assault upon the Bosses is resolved upon, the
first thing is to form acommittee. It issues a manifesto
calling on all good citizens to attend the primaries of
their respective wards, and there vote for delegates
opposed to the Ring. The newspapers take the matter

CHAP. LXVIII THE WAR AGAINST BOSSDOM 527

up, and repeat the exhortation. As each primary is
held, on the night fixed by the ward committee of the
regular (that is the Ring) organization, some of the
reformers appear at it, and propose a list of delegates,
between whom and the Ring’s list a vote of the members
of the primary is taken. This may succeed in some of
thé primaries, but rarely in a majority of them ; because
(as explained in a previous chapter) the rolls seldom or
never include the whole party voters of the ward,
having been prepared by the professionals in their own
interest. Sometimes only one-fourth or one-fifth of
the voters are on the primary roll, and these are of
course the men on whom the Ring can rely. Hence, even
if the good citizens of the district, obeying the call of
patriotism and the Reform Committee, present themselves
at the primary, they may find so few of their number on
the roll that they will be outvoted by the ringsters.
But the most serious difficulty is the apathy of the
respectable, steady-going part of the population to turn
out in sufficient numbers. They have their engagements
of business or pleasure to attend to, or it is a snowy
night and their wives persuade them to stay indoors.
The well-conducted men of small means are an eminently
domestic class, who think they do quite enough for the
city and the nation if-they vote at the polls. It is still
more difficult to induce the rich to interest themselves
in confessedly disagreeable work. They find themselves
at a primary in strange and uncongenial surroundings.
Accustomed to be treated with deference in their count-
ing-house or manufactory, they are jostled by a rough
crowd, and find that their servants or workmen are
probably better known and more influential than they are
themselves. They recognize by sight few of the persons
present, for, in a city, acquaintance does not go by prox-

528 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

imity of residence, and are therefore at a disadvantage
for combined action, whereas the professional politicians
are a regiment where every private in each company
knows his fellow-private and obeys the officers. Hence,
the best, perhaps the only chance of capturing a primary
is by the action of a group of active young men who
will take the trouble of organizing the movement: by
beating up the members of the party who reside in the
district, and bearding the local bosses in the meeting.
It is a rough and toilsome piece of work, but young
men find a compensation in the fun which is to be
had out of the fight ; and when a victory is won, theirs
is the credit. To carry a few primaries is only the first
step. The contest has to be renewed in the convention,
where the odds are still in favour of the professionals, who
“know the ropes” and may possibly outwit even a majority
of Reform delegates. The managing committee is in their
hands, and they can generally secure a chairman in their
interests. Experience has accordingly shown that this
method of attacking the Machine very rarely succeeds ;
and though the duty of attending the primaries continues
to be preached, the advice shares the fate of most sermons.
Once in a way, the respectable voter will rouse himself,
but he cannot be trusted to continue to do so year after
year. He js like those citizen-soldiers of ancient Greece
who would turn out for a summer inroad into the enemy’s
country, but refused to keep the field through the autumn
and winter.

A second expedient, which may be tried instead of
the first, or resorted to after the first has been tried
and failed, is to make an independent list of nominations
and run a separate set of candidates. If this strategy
be resolved on, the primaries are left unheeded; but
when the election approaches, a committee is formed

CHAP. LXVIII THE WAR AGAINST BOSSDOM 529

which issues a list of candidates for some or all of the
vacant offices in opposition to the ‘‘ regular” list issued
by the party convention, and conducts the agitation on
their behalf. This saves all trouble in primaries or con-
ventions, but involves much trouble in elections, because
a complete campaign corps has to be organized, and a
campaign fund raised.* Moreover, the average voter, not
having followed politics closely enough to comprehend
his true duty and interest, and yielding to his established
party habits, inclines, especially in State and Federal
elections, to vote the “regular ticket.” He starts with
a certain prejudice against those who are “ troubling
Israel” by dividing the party, because he sees that in
all probability the result will be not to carry the Inde-
pendent ticket, but to let in the candidates of the
opposite party. Hence the bolting Independents can
rarely hope to carry so large a part of their own party
with them as to win the election. The result of their
action will rather be to bring in the candidates of the
other side, who may be no better than the men on the
ticket of their own Ring. Accordingly reformers have
become reluctant to take this course, for though it has
the merit of relieving their feelings, it exposes them
to odium, involves great labour, and effects nothing
more than may be obtained by one or other of the
two methods which I have next to describe.

The third plan is to abstain from voting for the

1 “To run an anti-machine candidate for mayor it is necessary to
organize a new machine at an expense of from $60,000 to $100,000
(£12,000 to £20,000), with a chance of his being ‘sold out’ then hy the
men who are hired to distribute his ballots.”.—Mr. J. B. Bishop in the
paper on “ Money in City Elections,” already cited. Some one has said
that the difference between running as a regular candidate and running
on your own account as an independent candidate, is like the difference
between travelling by railway, and making a new railway of your own to
travel by.

VOL. II 2M

530 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

names on your party ticket to whom you object. This
is Scratching. You are spared the trouble of running
candidates of your own, but your abstention, if the
parties are nearly balanced, causes the defeat of the bad
candidates whom your own party puts forward, and
brings in those of the other party. This is a good plan
when you want to frighten a Ring, and yet cannot
get the more timid reformers to go the length of voting
either an independent ticket or the ticket of the other
party. It is employed when a Ring ticket is not bad
all through, but contains some fair names mingled with
some names of corrupt or dangerous men. You scratch
the latter and thereby cause their defeat; the others,
receiving the full strength of the party, are carried.

If, however, indignation against a dominant Ring has
risen so high as to overcome the party predilections of
ordinary citizens, if it is desired to administer condign
and certain punishment to those who have abused the
patience of the people, the reformers will take a more
decided course. They urge their friends to vote the
ticket of the opposite party, either entire or at least
all the better names on it, thus ensuring its victory.
This is an efficient method, but a desperate one, for you
put into power a Ring of the party which you have been
opposing all your life, and whose members are possibly
quite as corrupt as those of the Ring which controls
your own party. The gain you look for is not therefore
the immediate gain of securing better city government,
but the ultimate gain of raising the general practice
of politics by the punishment of evil-doers. Hence,
whenever there is time to do so, the best policy is
for the reformers to make overtures to the opposite
party, and induce them by the promise of support
to nominate better candidates than they would have

CHAP. LXVIII THE WAR AGAINST BOSSDOM 531

nominated if left to themselves. A group of Bolters
afraid of being called traitors to their party, will
shrink from this course; and if they are weak in
numbers, their approaches may be repulsed by the
opposition. But the scheme is always worth trying,
and has several times been crowned with success. By
it the reforming party among the Democrats of Baltimore
recently managed to defeat their Ring in an election of
judges. They settled in conference with the Republicans
a non-partisan ticket, which gave the Republicans (who
were a minority) a better share of the bench than they
could have got by fighting alone, and which substituted
respectalle Democrats for the objectionable names on
the regular Democratic ticket. A similar combination
of the reform Republicans in Philadelphia with the
Democrats, who in that city are in a permanent minority,
led to the defeat of the Republican Gas Ring (whereof
more in a later chapter). This method has the advan-
tage of saving expense, because the bolters can use
the existing machinery of the opposite party, which
organizes the meetings, circulates the literature, prints
and distributes the ballots. It is on the whole the most
promising strategy, but needs tact as well as vigour on
the part of the Independent leaders. Nor will the
opposite party always accept the proferred help. Some-
times it fears the gifts of the Greeks, sometimes it hopes
to win unhelped, and therefore will not sacrifice any of
its candidates to the scruples of the reformers. Some-
times its chiefs dislike the idea of reform so heartily as to
prefer defeat at the hands of a Ring of the other party to a
victory which might weaken the hold of professionals upon
the Machine and lead toa general purification of politics.

If the opposite party refuses the overtures of the
reformers who are “kicking” against their own Machine,

532 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART IT

or will not purify the ticket sufficiently to satisfy them,
there remains the chance of forming a third party out
of the best men of both the regular organizations, and
starting a third set of candidates. This is an extension
and improvement of the first of the four enumerated
methods, and has the greater promise of success because
it draws votes from both parties instead of from one
only. It has been frequently employed of late years in
cities, generally of the second order, hy running what is
called a “ Citizens’ Ticket.”

Of course bolters who desert their own party at a
city election do not intend permanently to separate
themselves from it. Probably they will vote its ticket
at the next State or presidential election. Their object
is to shake the power of their local boss, and if they
cannot overthrow the Ring, at least to frighten it into
better behaviour. This they often effect. After the
defeat of some notorious candidates, the jobs are apt
to be less flagrant. But such repentances are like
those of the sick wolf in the fable, and experience
proves that when the public vigilance has been relaxed,
the ringsters of both parties return to their wallowing
in the mire.

The difficulties of getting good citizens to maintain
a steady war against the professionals have been found
so great, and in particular the attempt to break their
control of the primaries has so often failed, that remedies
have been sought in legislation. Several States have
extended the penalties attached to bribery and frauds
at public elections to similar offences committed at
primaries and nominating conventions, deeming these
acts to be, as in fact they are, scarcely less hurtful to
the community when practised at purely voluntary
and private gatherings than when employed at elec-

CHAP. LXVIII THE WAR AGAINST BOSSDOM 533

tions.1 Statutes have also been passed in some States
for regulating the proceedings at primaries. For in-
stance, Ohio provides that a certain notice shall be pub-
lished of the holding of a primary ; that judges, clerks,
and supervisors of the election of delegates shall be
sworn ; that any qualified elector may challenge any one
claiming to vote; that the asking, or giving, or taking a
bribe, or an attempt to intimidate, shall be punishable
offences, and disqualify the offending party from voting.
Similar provisions protect the delegate to a convention
from the candidate, the candidate from the delegate, and
the party from both. Minnesota has just enacted a set
of even more stringent regulations, making the annul-
ment or destruction of any ballots cast at a party meet-
ing held for the purpose of choosing either candidates or
delegates, ur the wrongfully preventing persons from
voting who are entitled to vote, or personation, or “any
other fraud or wrong tending to defeat or affect the
‘ result of the election,” a misdemeanour punishable by a
fine not exceeding $3000 (£600), or three years’ imprison-
ment, or both penalties combined.? Astonishing as it
seems to a European that legislation should not only
recognize parties, but should actually attempt to regulate
the internal proceedings of a political party at a perfectly
voluntary gathering of its own members, a gathering
whose resolutions no one is bound to obey or regard in
any way, some of the wisest American publicists conceive

1 ‘Says Mr. Bernheim : “The party elections in New York [i.e choice of
candidates] are all now representative and conducted with an equal dis-
regard of law and honesty. ... On the purity of primary elections
depend good nominations; and quite as truly the efficiency of public
officials ; for the party label in almost every case commends the candidate
to the electors, his trade-mark is voted for and not his character.”’—
Political Science Quarterly for March 1888.

2 Statutes of Minnesota of 1887, chap. iv. §§ 99-105. It is significant
that these sections apply only to cities of 5000 inhabitants or upwards,

534 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

that this plan offers the best chance of reforming the
Machine and securing the freedom of the voter.’ Not
much success has been hitherto attained; but the statutes
have, in some cases (e.g. California), been expressed to
apply only where the political party seeks to apply them,
and the experiment has not been tried long enough to
enable a judgment on it to be formed. That it should
be tried at all is a phenomenon to be seriously pondered
by those who are accustomed to point to America as the
country where the principle of leaving things alone has
worked most widely and usefully ; and it is the strongest
evidence of the immense vigour of these party organiza-
tions, and of the authority their nominations exert, that
reformers, foiled in the effort to purify them by voluntary

action, should be driven to invoke the arm of the law.
The struggle between the professional politicians
and the reformers has been going on in the great
cities, with varying fortune, for the last twenty
years. As illustrations of the incidents that mark it
will be found in subsequent chapters, I will here
suy only that in the onslaughts on the Rings, which
most elections bring round, the reformers, though they
seldom capture the citadel, often destroy some of
the outworks, and frighten the garrison into a more
cautious and moderate use of their power. After an
election in which an “ Independent ticket” has received
considerable support, the bosses are disposed to make
better nominations, and, as an eminent New York pro-
fessional (the late Mr. Fernando Wood) said, “ to
pander a little to the moral sense of the community.”
Every campaign teaches the reformers where the
1 “A Pennsylvania lawyer tells me, ‘I have just closed a protracted

trial of an election fraud case under our primary laws with a conviction
of the entire board of election officers.’”—Bernheim, ut supra.

CHAP. LXVIII THE WAR AGAINST BOSSDOM 535

enemy's weak points lie, and gives them more of
that technical skill which has hitherto been the strength
of the professionals, , It is a warfare of volunteers
against disciplined troops, but the volunteers, since
they are fighting for the tax-payers at large, would
secure so great a preponderance of numbers, if they
cotld but move the whole body of respectable citizens,
that their triumph will evidently depend in the long
run upon their own constancy and earnestness, If their
zeal does not flag; if they do not suffer themselves
to be disheartened by frequent repulses ; if, not relying
too absolutely on any one remedy, they attack the
enemy at every point, using every social and educa-
tional as well as legal appliance, the example of their
disinterested public spirit, as well as the cogency of
their arguments, cannot fail to tell on the voters; and
no Boss, however adroit, no Ring, however strongly
entrenched, will be able to withstand them. The war,
however, will not be over when the enemy has been
routed. Although much may be done by legislative
remedies, such as new election laws, new provisions
against corruption, a reconstruction of the frame of
city government, and a purification of the civil service,
there are certain internal and, so to speak, natural
causes of mischief, the removal of which will need
patience and unremitting diligence. In great cities—
for it is throughout chiefly of cities that we have to
think—a large section of the voters will, for many years
to come, be comparatively ignorant of the methods of
free government which they are set to work. They will
be ignorant even of their own interests, failing to
perceive that wasteful expenditure injures those who
do not pay direct taxes, as well as those who do.
Retaining some of the feelings which their European

536 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART IT

experience has tended to produce, they will distrust
appeals coming from the more cultivated classes, and be
inclined to listen to loose-tongued demagogues. Once
they have joined a party they will vote at the bidding
of its' local leaders, however personally unworthy.’
While this section remains numerous, Rings and Bosses
will always have materials ready to their hands. There
is, however, reason to expect that with the progress of
time this section will become relatively smaller. And
even now, large as it is, it could be overthrown and
bossdom extirpated, were the better citizens to maintain
unbroken through a series of elections that unity and
vigour of action of which they have at rare moments,
and under the impulse of urgent duty, shown themselves
capable. In America, as everywhere else in the world,
the commonwealth suffers more often from apathy
or shortsightedness in the upper classes, who ought
to lead, than from ignorance or recklessness in the
humbler classes, who are generally ready to follow when
they are wisely and patriotically led.

1 Says Mr. Roosevelt ; “ Voters of the labouring class in the cities are
very emotional: they value in a public man what we are accustomed to
consider virtues only to be taken into account when estimating private
character. Thus if a man is open-handed and warm-hearted, they con-
sider it as being a fair offset to his being a little bit shaky when it comes
to applying thd eighth commandment to affairs of state. I have more
than once heard the statement ‘He is very liberal to the poor,’ advanced
as a perfectly satisfactory answer to the charge that a certain public man
was corrupt.” He adds, “In the lower wards (of New York City), where
there is a large vicious population, the condition of politics is often fairly
appulling, and the [local] boss is generally a man of grossly immoral public
and private character. In these wards many of the social organizations
with which the leaders are obliged to keep on good terms are composed
of criminals or of the relatives and associates of criminals... . The
president of a powerful semi-political association was by profession a
burglar, the man who received the goods he stole was an alderman,
Another alderman was elected while his hair was still short from a term
in the State prison. A school trustee had been convicted of embezzlement
and was the associate of criminals.” Century magazine for Nov. 1866.

CHAPTER LXIX
NOMINATING CONVENTIONS

In every American election there are two acts of
choice, two periods of contest. The first is the selection
of the candidate from within the party by the party ;
the other is the struggle between the parties for the
place. Frequently the former of these is more import-
ant, more keenly fought over, than the latter, for there
are many districts in which the predominance of one
party is so marked that its candidate is sure of success,
and therefore the choice of a candidate is virtually the
choice of the officer or representative.

Preceding chapters have described the machinery
which exists for choosing and nominating a candidate.
The process is similar in every State of the Union, and
through all elections to office, from the lowest to the
highest, from that of common councilman for a city
ward up to that of President of the United States.
But,,of course, the higher the office, and the larger the
area over which the election extends, the greater are the
efforts made to secure the nomination, and the hotter
the passions it excites.

Like most political institutions, the system of nom-
inating the President by a popular convention is the
result of a long process of evolution.

538 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

In the first two elections, those of 1789! and 1792,
there was no need for nominations of candidates, because
the whole nation wished and expected George Washing-
ton to be elected. So too, when in 1796 Washington
declared his retirement, the dominant feeling of one
party was for John Adams, that of the other for Thomas
Jefferson, and nobody thought of setting out formally
what was so generally understood.

In 1800, however, the year of the fourth election,
there was somewhat less unanimity. The prevailing
sentiment of the Federalists went for re-electing Adams,
and the small conclave of Federalist members of Con-
gress which met to promote his interest was deemed
scarcely necessary. The Republicans, however (for that
was the name then borne by the party which now calls
itself Democratic), while united in desiring to make
Jefferson President, hesitated as to their candidate for
the vice-presidency, and a meeting of Republican
members of Congress was therefore called to recommend
Aaron Burr for this office. It was a small mecting and
a secret meeting, but it is memorable not only as the
first congressional caucus but as the first attempt to
arrange in any way a party nomination.

In 1804 a more regular gathering for the same
purpose was held. All the Republican members of
Congress were summoned to meet; and they unani-
mously nominated Jefferson for President, and George
Clinton of New York for Vice-President. So in 1808
nearly all the Republican majority in both Houses of
Congress met and formally nominated Madison and

1 The President is now always chosen on the Tuesday after the first
Monday in the November of an even year, whose number is a multiple
of four (eg. 1880, 1884, 1888), and comes into office in the spring follow-

ing; but the first election was held in the beginning of 1789, because the
Constitution had been then only just adupted.

CHAP, LXIX NOMINATING CONVENTIONS 539

Clinton. The same course was followed in 1812, and
again in 1816. But the objections which were from the
first made to this action of the party in Congress, as being
an arrogant usurpation of the rights of the people—for no
one dreamed of leaving freedom to the presidential electors
—gained rather than lost strength on each successive
occasion, so much so that in 1820 the few who met
made no nomination,' and in 1824, out of the Democratic
members of both Houses of Congress summoned to the
“nominating caucus,” as it was called, only sixty-six
attended, many of the remainder having announced
their disapproval of the practice.” The nominee of this
caucus came in only third at the polls, and this failure
gave the coup de grace to a plan which the levelling
tendencies of the time, and the disposition to refer every-
thing to the arbitrament of the masses, would in any
case have soon extinguished. No congressional caucus
was ever again held for the choice of candidates.

A new method, however, was not at once discovered.
In 1828 Jackson was recommended as candidate by the
legislature of Tennessee and by a number of popular
gatherings in different places, while his opponents
accepted, without any formal nomination, the then
President, J. Q. Adams, as their candidate. In 1831
however, and again in 1832, assemblies were held by
two great parties (the Anti-Masons and the National
Republicans, afterwards called Whigs) consisting of
delegates from most of the States; and each of these
conventions nominated its candidates for the presidency
and vice-presidency. A third “national convention”
of young men, which met later in 1832, adopted the

1 It was not absolutely necessary to have a nomination, because there
was a general feeling in favour of re-electing Monroe.

2 The whole number was then 261, nearly all Democrats, for the
Federalist party had been for some time virtually extinct.

540 FHE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

Whig nominations, and added to them a series of ten
resolutions, constituting the first political platform
ever put forth by a nominating body. The friends of
Jackson followed suit by holding their convention
which nominated him and Van Buren. For the election
of 1836, a similar convention was held by the Jacksonian
Democrats, none by their opponents. But for that of
1840, national conventions of delegates from nearly all
the States were held by both Democrats and Whigs, as
well as by the (then young and very small) party of the
Abolitionists. This precedent has been followed in
every subsequent contest, so that the national nominat-
ing conventions of the great parties are now as much a
part of the regular machinery of politics as the election
rules contained in the Cunstitution itself. The estab-
lishment of the system coincides with and represents the
complete social democratization of politics in Jackson’s
time. It suits both the professionals, for whom it
finds occupation and whose power it secures, and the
ordinary citizen who, not having time himself to attend
to politics, likes to think that his right of selecting
candidates is duly recognized in the selection of candi-
dates by delegates whom he is entitled to vote for. But
it was soon seen to be liable to fall under the control of
selfish intriguers and to destroy the chances of able and
independent men, and was denounced as early as 1844
by Calhoun, who then refused to allow his name to be
submitted to a pominating convention. He observed
that he would never have joined in breaking down
the old congressional caucus had he foreseen that its
successor would prove so much more pernicious.

Thus from 1789 till 1800 there were no formal
nominations; from 1800 till 1824, nominations were
made by congressional caucuses ; from 1824 till 1840,

CHAP. LXIX NOMINATING CONVENTIONS 541

nominations irregularly made by State legislatures and
popular meetings were gradually ripening towards the
method of a special gathering of delegates from the
whole country. This last plan has held its ground from
1840 till the present day, and is so exactly conformable
to the political habits of the people that it is not likely
soon to disappear.’

Its perfection, however, was not reached at once.
The early conventions were to a large extent mass
meetings.” The later and present ones are regularly-
constituted representative bodies, composed exclusively
of delegates, each of whom has been duly elected at a
party meeting in his own State, and brings with him
his credentials. It would be tedious to trace the process
whereby the present system was created, so I shall be
content with describing it in outline as it now stands.

The Constitution provides that each State shall
choose as many presidential electors as it has persons
representing it in Congress, z.e. two electors to correspond
to the two senators from each State, and as many more
as the State sends members to the House of Repre-
sentatives. Thus Delaware and Oregon have each three
electoral votes, because they have each only one repre-
sentative besides their two senators. New York has
thirty-six electoral votes: two corresponding to its two
senators, thirty-four corresponding to its thirty-four
representatives in the House.

Now in the nominating convention each State is

1 An interesting sketch of the history of congressional caucuses and
presidential conventions is given by Mr. M. Ostrovorski in two articles in
the Annales de PEcole Libre des Sciences Politiques, January and April
1888.

2 In 1856 the first Republican convention, which nominated Fremont,
was rather a mass meeting than a representative body. So was the
seceding Republican convention which met at Cincinnati in 1872 and
nominated Greeley.

542 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

allowed twice as many delegates as it has electoral
votes, e.g. Delaware and Oregon have each six delegates,
New York has seventy-two. The delegates are chosen
by local conventions in their several States, viz. two for
each congressional district by the party convention of
that district, and four for the whole State (called dele-
gates-at-large) by the State convention. As each con-
vention is composed of delegates from primaries, it is
the composition of the primaries which determines that
of the local conventions, and the composition of the local
conventions which determines that of the national. To
every delegate there is added a person called his ‘“alter-
nate,” chosen by the local convention at the same time,
and empowered to replace him in case he cannot be
present in the national convention. If the delegate is
present to vote the alternate is silent; if from any cause
the delegate is absent, the alternate steps into his shoes.

Respecting the freedom of the delegate to vote for
whom he will, there have been differences both of
doctrine and of practice. A local convention or State
convention may instruct its delegates which aspirant’
shall be their first choice, or even in case he cannot be
carried, for whom their subsequent votes shall be cast.
Such instructions are frequently given, and still more
frequently /implied, because a delegate is often chosen
expressly as being the supporter of. one or other of the
aspirants whose names are most prominent. But the
delegate is not absolutely bound to follow his instruc-
tions. He may vote even on the first ballot for some
other aspirant than the one desired by his own local
or State convention. Much more, of course, may he,

1 I use throughout the term “aspirant” to denote a competitor for

the nomination, reserving the term “ candidate” for the person nominated
as the party’s choice for the presidency,

CHAP. LXIX NOMINATING CONVENTIONS 543

though not so instructed, change his vote when it is
plain that that aspirant will not succeed. His vote is
always a valid one, even when given in the teeth of his
instructions; but how fur he will be held censurable for
breaking them depends on a variety of circumstances.
His motives may be corrupt; perhaps something has
been given him. They may be pardonable; a party
chief may have put pressure on him, or he may desire
to be on the safe side, and go with the majority. They
may be laudable ; he really seeks to do the best for the
party, or has been convinced by facts lately brought to
his knowledge that the man for whom he is instructed
is unworthy. Where motives are doubtful, it may be
charitable, but it is not safe, to assume that they are of
the higher order. Each ‘State delegation” has its chair-
man, and is expected to keep together during the conven-
tion. It usually travels together to the place of meeting ;
takes rooms in the same hotel; has a recognized head-
quarters there ; sits in a particular place allotted to it
in the convention hall; holds meetings of its members
during the progress of the convention to decide on the
course which it shall from time to time take. These
meetings, if the State be a large and doubtful one,
excite great interest, and the sharp-eared reporter prowls
round them, eager to learn how the votes will go. Each
State delegation votes by its chairman, who announces
how his delegates vote; but if his report is challenged
the roll of delegates i is called, and they vote individually.

Whether the votes of a State delegation shall be given
solid for the aspirant whom the majority of the dele-
gation favours, or by the delegates individually accord-
ing to their preferences, is a point which has excited
bitter controversy. The present practice of the Republi-
can party (so settled in 1876 and again in 1880) allows

544 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

the delegates to vote individually, even when they have
been instructed by a State convention to cast a solid
vote. The Democratic party, on the other hand, sustains
any such instruction given to the delegation, and records
the vote of all the State delegates for the aspirant whom
the majority among them approve.’ This is the so-called
Unit Rule. If, however, the State convention has -not
imposed the unit rule, the delegates vote individually.
For the sake of keeping up party life in the Territories
and in the Federal District of Columbia, delegates from
them are admitted to the national convention, although
the Territories and District have no votes in a presi-
dential election. Delegations of States which are known
to be in the hands of the opposite party, and whose
preference of one aspirant to another will not really tell
upon the result of the presidential election, are admitted
to vote equally with the delegations of the States sure
to go for the party which holds the convention. This
arrangement is justified on the ground that it sus-
tains the interest and energy of the party in States
where it is in a minority. But it permits the choice to
be determined by districts whose own action will not
tell in any way on the election itself, and the delegates
from these districts are apt to belong to a lower class of
politicians than those from the States where the party holds
a majority, and to be swayed by more sordid motives,’
So much for the composition of the national conven-

tion: we may now go on to describe its proceedings.

1 An attempt was made at the Democratic convention in Chicago in
July 1884 to overset this rule, but the majority re-affirmed it.

2 Although the large majority of the deleyates in the Conventions uf
the two great parties belong to the class of professional politicians, there
is always a respectable m:tority of men who do not belong to that class,
but have obtained the post owing to their interest in seving a strong and
honest candidate chosen. The great importance of the business draws
men of talent and experience from most parts of the country.

CHAP. LXIX NOMINATING CONVENTI ONS 545

It is held in the summer immediately preceding a
presidential election, usually in June or July, the election
falling in November. A large city is always chosen, in
order to obtain adequate hotel accommodation, and easy
railroad access. Formerly, conventions were commonly
held in Baltimore or Philadelphia, but since the centre
of population has shifted to the Mississippi valley, Cin-
cinnati, “St. Louis, and especially Chicago; have become
the favourite spots.

Business begins by the “ calling of the convention
to order” by the chairman of the National Party com-.-
mittee. Then a temporary chairman is nominated, and,
if opposed, voted on; the vote sometimes giving an in-
dication of the respective strength of the factions present.
Then the secretaries and the clerks are appointed, and
the rules which are to govern the business are adopted.
After this, the committees, particularly those on cre-
dentials and resolutions, are nominated, and the conven-
tion adjourns till their report can be presented.

The next sitting usually opens, after the customary
prayer, with the appointment of the permanent chair-
man, who inaugurates the proceedings with a speech.
Then the report of the committee on resolutions (if
completed) is presented. It contains what is called the
platform, a long series of resolutions embodying the
principles and programme of the party, which has usually
been so drawn as to conciliate every section, and avoid or
treat with prudent ambiguity those questions on which
opinion within the party is divided. Any delegate who
objects to a resolution can move to strike it out or
amend it; but it is generally sustained in the shape it
has received from the practised hands of the committee.

Next follows the nomination of aspirants for the post
of party candidate. The roll of States is called, and

VOL, II 2N

5.46 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

when a State is reached to which an aspirant intended
to be nominated belongs, a prominent delegate from
that State mounts the platform, and proposes him in a
speech extolling his merits, and sometimes indirectly dis-
paraging the other aspirants. Another delegate seconds
the nomination, sometimes a third follows; and then the
roll-call goes on till all the States have been despatched,
and all the aspirants nominated.’ The average number of
nominations is seven or eight; it rarely exceeds twelve.?

Thus the final stage is reached, for which all else has
been but preparation—that of balloting between the
aspirants. The clerks call the roll of States from Ala-
bama to Wisconsin, and as each is called the chair-
man of its delegation announces the votes, e.g. six for
A, five for B, three for C, unless, of course, under the
unit rule, the whole vote is cast for that one aspirant
whom the majority of the delegation supports. When
all have voted, the totals are made up and announced.
If one competitor has an absolute majority of the whvle
number voting, according to the Republican rule, a
majority of two-thirds of the number voting, according
to the Democratic rule, he has been duly chosen, and
nothing remains but formally to make his nomination
unanimous. If, however, as has usually happened of late
years, no éne obtains the requisite majority, the roll is
called again, in order that individual delegates and dele-
gations (if the unit rule prevails) may have the oppor-
tunity of changing their votes; and the process is re-
peated until some one of the aspirants put forward has
received the required number of votes. Sometimes many

1 Nominations may however be made at any subsequent time.

2 However, in the Republican Convention of 1888, fourteen aspirants
were nominated at the outset, six of whom were voted for on the last

hallot. Votes were given at one or other of the ballotings for nineteen
aspirants in all.

CHAP, LXIX NOMINATING CONVENTIONS 547

roll-ealls take place. In 1852 the Democrats nominated
Franklin Pierce on the forty-ninth ballot, and the
Whigs General Scott, on the fifty-third. In 1880,
thirty-six ballots were taken before General Garfield
was nominated, But, in 1835, Martin Van Buren;
in 1844, Henry Clay; in 1868 and 1872, Ulysses S.
Grint, were unanimously nominated, the two former by
acclamation, the latter on the first ballot. In 1884 Mr.
Blaine was nominated by the Republicans on the fourth
ballot, Mr. Cleveland by the Democrats on the second."
‘Thus it sometimes happens that the voting is over in an
hour or two, while at other times it may last for days.
When a candidate for the presidency has been thus
found, the convention proceeds to similarly determine its
candidate for the vice-presidency. The inferiority of the
office, and the exhaustion which has by this time over-
come the delegates, make the second struggle a less
exciting and protracted one. Frequently one of the
defeated aspirants is consoled by this minor nomination,
especially if he has retired at the nick of time in favour
of the rival who has been chosen. The work of the con-
vention is then complete, and votes of thanks to the
chairman and other officials conclude the proceedings.
The two nominees are now the party candidates, entitled
to the support of the party organizations and of loyal
party men over the length and breadth of the Union.
Entitled to that support, but not necessarily sure
to regeive it. Even in America, party discipline cannot
compel an individual voter to cast his ballot for the
party nominee, All that the convention can do is to
recommend the candidate to the party ; all that opinion
can do is to brand as a Kicker or Bolter whoever breaks

1 In 1888 Mr. Cleveland was nominated by the Democrats by
acclamation, Mr. Harrison by the Republicans on the eighth ballot.

548 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

away ; all that the local party organization can do is to
strike the bolter off its lists. But how stands it, the
reader will ask, with the delegates who have been
present in the convention, have had their chance of
carrying their man, and have been beaten ? are they not
held absolutely bound to support the candidate chosen ?

This is a question which has excited much contro-
versy. The impulse and effort of the successful majority
has always been to impose such an obligation on the
defeated minority, and the chief motive which has pre-
vented it from being always formally enforced by a rule
or resolution of the convention has been the fear that
it might precipitate hostilities, might induce men of
independent character, or strongly opposed to some
particular aspirant, to refuse to attend as delegates, or
to secede early in the proceedings when they saw that
a person whom they disapproved was likely to win.

At the Republican national convention at Chicago
in June 1880 an attempt was successfully made to
impose the obligation by the following resolution,
commonly called the “‘ Iron clad Pledge ”:—

“That every member of this convention is bound in
honour to support its nominee, whoever that nominee
may be, and that no man should hold his seat here who
is not ready so to agree.”

This was carried by 716 votes to 3. But at the
Republican national convention at Chicago in June
1884, when a similar resolution was presented, the
opposition developed was strong enough to compel its
withdrawal; and in point of fact, several conspicuous
delegates at that convention strenuously opposed its
nominee at the subsequent presidential election, them-
selves voting, and inducing others to vote, for the
candidate of the Democratic party.

CHAPTER LXX
THE NOMINATING CONVENTION AT WORK

WE have examined the composition of a national con-
vention and the normal order of business in it.
The more difficult task remains of describing the
actual character and features of such an assembly,
the motives which sway it, the temper it displays, the
passions it elicits, the wiles by which its members are
lured or driven to their goal.

A national convention has two objects, the formal
declaration of the principles, views, and practical pro-
posals of the party, and the choice of its candidates for
the executive headship of the nation.

Of these objects the former has in critical times,
such as the two elections preceding the Civil War, been
of great importance. In the Democratic Convention at
Charleston in 1860, a debate on resolutions led to a
secession, and to the break-up of the Democratic party.’
But of late years the adoption of platforms, drafted in
a somewhat vague and pompous style by the committee,
has been almost a matter of form. Some observations
on these enunciations of doctrine will be found in
another chapter.’

1 The national conventions of those days were much smaller than
now, nor were the assisting spectators so numerous.
2 The nearest English parallel to an American “platform” is to be

550 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

The second object is of absorbing interest and im-
portance, because the presidency is the great prize of
politics, the goal of every statesman’s ambition. The
President can by his veto stop legislation adverse to
the wishes of the party he represents. The President
is the universal dispenser of patronage.?

One may therefore say that the task of a convention
is to choose the party candidate. And it is a task
difficult enough to tax all the resources of the host of
delegates and their leaders. Who is the man fittest to
be adopted as candidate? Not even a novice in politics
will suppose that it is the best man, ze. the wisest,
strongest, and most upright. Plainly, it is the man
most likely to win, the man who, to use the technical term,
is most “available.” What a party wants is not a good
President but a good candidate. The party managers
have therefore to look out for the person likely to gain most
support, and at the same time excite least opposition.
Their search is rendered more troublesome by the fact
that many of them, being themselves either aspirants or
the close allies of aspirants, are not disinterested, and are
distrusted by their fellow-searchers.

Many things have to be considered. The ability of a
statesman, the length of time he has been before the
people, his/oratorical gifts, his “‘ magnetism” (personal
attractiveness), his family connections, his face and
figure, the purity of his private life, his “‘record” (the
chronicle of his conduct) as regards integrity—all these
are matters needing to be weighed. To have served

found in the addresses to their respective constituencies issued at a general
election by the Prime Minister, if a member of the House of Commons,
and the leader of the Opposition in that House. Such addresses, how-
ever, do not formally bind the whole party, as an American platform
does.

1 Subject at present, as respects some offices, to the provisions of the
Civil Service Reform Act of 1883.

cHap. LXx NOMINATING CONVENTION AT WORK 551

with distinction in the Federal ranks during the War
of Secession, endears a man to the still numerous
veterans of the Northern armies, and does not damage
him in the South.. Account must be taken of the
personal jealousies and hatreds which a man has
excited. To have incurred the enmity of a leading
statesman, of a powerful boss or ring, or of an
influential newspaper, is serious. Several such feuds
may be fatal.

Finally, much depends on the State whence a possible
candidate comes. Local feeling leads a State to support
one of its own citizens; it increases the vote of his own
party in that State, and reduces the vote of the opposite
party. Where the State is decidedly of one political
colour, e.g. so steadily Republican as Vermont, so steadily
Democratic as Maryland, this consideration is weak,
for the choice of a Democratic candidate from the
former, or of a Republican candidate from the latter,
would not make the difference of the State’s vote. It
is therefore from a doubtful State that a candidate may
with most advantage be selected; and the larger the
doubtful State the better. California, with her five
electoral votes, is just worth “placating”; Indiana, with
her fifteen votes, more so; New York, with her thirty-
six votes, most so of all. Hence an aspirant who
belongs to a great and doubtful State is. prima facie
the most eligible candidate. The force of this considera-
tion ,is shown by the fact that during the last thirty
years nearly all leading aspirants have come from great
States, though some of the most eminent statesmen
have been citizens of small ones such as Vermont and
Delaware.

' Aspirants hoping to obtain the party nomination
from a national convention may be divided into three

552 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART II]

classes, the two last of which, as will appear presently,
are not mutually exclusive, viz.—

Favourites. Dark Horses., Favourite Sons.

A Favourite is always a politician well known over
the: Union, and drawing support from all or most of
its sections. He is a man who has distinguished him-
self in Congress, or in the war, or in the politics of some
State so large that its politics are matter of knowledge
and interest to the whole nation. He is usually a
person of conspicuous gifts, whether as a speaker, or
a party manager, or an administrator. The drawback
to him is that in making friends he has also made
enemies.

A Dark Horse is a person not very widely known
in the country at large, but known rather for good
than for evil. He has probably sat in Congress,
been useful on committees, and gained some credit
among those who dealt with him in Washington. Or
he has approved himself a safe and assiduous party man
in the political campaigns of his own and neighbouring
States, yet without reaching national prominence. Some-
times he is a really able man, but without the special
talents that win popularity. Still, speaking generally,
the note of the Dark Horse is respectability, verging on
colourlessness ; ‘and he is therefore a good sort of person
to fall back upon when able but dangerous Favourites
have proved impossible. That native mediocrity rather
than adverse fortune has prevented him from winning
fame is proved by the fact that the Dark Horses who
have reached the White House, if they have seldom
turned out bad presidents, have even more seldom
turned out distinguished ones.

A Favourite Son is a politician respected or admired
in his own State, but little regarded beyond it. He may

cHap. xx NOMINATING CONVENTION AT WORK $53

not be, like the Dark Horse, little known to the nation
at large, but he has not fixed its eye or filled its
ear. He is usually a, man who has sat in the State
legislature ; filled with credit the post of State gover-
nor; perhaps gone as senator or representative to
Washington, and there approved himself an active
promoter of local interests. Probably he possesses the
qualities which gain local popularity—geniality, activity,
sympathy with the dominant sentiment and habits of his
State ; or while endowed with gifts excellent in their way,
he has lacked the audacity and tenacity which push a
man to the front through a jostling crowd. More rarely
he is a demagogue who has raised himself by flattering
the masses of his State on some local questions, or a
skilful handler of party organizations who has made local
bosses and spoilsmen believe that their interests are safe
in his hands. Anyhow, his personality is such as to be
more effective with neighbours than with the nation, as
a lamp whose glow fills the side chapel of a cathedral
sinks to a spark of ight when carried into the nave.

A Favourite Son may be also a Dark Horse ; that is
to say, he may be well known in his own State, but so
little known out of it as to be an unlikely candidate.
But he need not be. “The types are different, for as there
are Favourite Sons whom the nation knows but does not
care for, so there are Dark Horses whose reputation, such
as it is, has not been made in State affairs, and who rely
very’little on State favour. P

There are seldom more than two, never more than
three Favourites in the running at the same convention.
Favourite Sons are more numerous—it 1s not uncommon
to have four or five, or even six, though perhaps not
all these are actually started in the race. The number
of Dark Horses is practically unlimited, because many

554 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

talked of beforehand are not actually started, while others
not considered before the convention begins are dis-
covered as it goes on. This happened in the leading
and most instructive case of James A. Garfield, who was
not voted for at all on the first ballot in the Republican
Convention of 1880, and had,on no ballot up to the thirty-
fourth, received more than two votes. On the thirty-
sixth’ he was nominated by 399. So, in 1868, Horatio
Seymour, who had been so little thought of as a candi-
date that he was chairman of the Democratic Convention,
was first voted for on the twenty-second ballot. He
refused to be nominated, but was induced to leave the
chair and nominated on that very ballot.

To carry the analysis farther, it may be observed
that four sets of motives are at work upon those who
direct or vote in a convention, acting with different
degrees of force on different persons. There is the wish
to carry a particular aspirant. There is the wish to defeat
a particular aspirant, a wish sometimes stronger than
any predilection. There is the desire to get sumething
for one’s self out of the struggle—e.g. by trading one’s
vote or influence for the prospect of a Federal office.
There is the wish to find the man who, be he good or
bad, friend or foe, will give the party its best chance of
victory. These motives cross one another, get mixed,
vary in relative strength from hour to hour as the con-
vention goes on and new possibilities are disclosed. To
forecast their joint. effect on the minds of particular
persons and sections of a party needs wide knowledge
and eminent acuteness, to play upon them is a matter
of the finest skill.

The proceedings of a nominating convention can be

1 In 1860 the Democratic Convention at Charleston nominated Mr.
Douglas on the fifty-seventh ballot.

cHaP.Lxx NOMINATING CONVENTION AT WORK 555

best understood by regarding the three periods into
which they fall: the transactions which precede the
opening of its sittings ; the preliminary business of pass-
ing rules and resolutions and delivering the nominating
speeches ; and, finally, the balloting.

A President has scarcely been elected before the
newspapers begin to discuss his probable successor.
Little, however, is done towards the ascertainment of
candidates till about a year before the next election,
when the factions of the chief aspirants prepare to fall
into line, newspapers take up their parable in favour of
one or other, and bosses begin the work of “ subsoiling,”
2.é. manipulating primaries and local conventions so as to
secure the choice of such delegates to the next national
convention as they desire. In most of the conventions
which appoint delegates, the claims of the several aspir-
ants are cunvassed, and the delegates chosen are usually
chosen in the interest of one particular aspirant. The
newspapers, with their quick sense of what is beginning
to stir men’s thoughts, redouble their advocacy, and
the “‘boom” of one or two of the probable favourites is
thus fairly started. Before the delegates leave their _
homes for the national convention, most of them have
fixed on their candidate, many having indeed received
positive instructions as to how their vote shall be cast.
All appears to be spontaneous, but in reality both the
choice of particular men as delegates, and the instruc-
tions, given, are usually the result of untiring under-
ground work among local politicians, directed, or even
personally conducted, by two or three skilful agents
and emissaries of a leading aspirant, or of the knot which
seeks to run him.

Four or five days before the day fixed for the opening
of the convention the delegations begin to flock into the

556 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

city where it is to be held. Some come attended by a
host of friends and camp-followers, and are received at
the depét (railway terminus) by the politicians of the city,
with a band of music and an admiring crowd. Thus
Tammany Hall, the famous Democratic club of New
York City, came six hundred strong to Chicago in July
1884, filling two special trains.’ A great crowd met it
at the station, and it marched, following its Boss, from
the cars to its headquarters at the Palmer House in pro-
cession, each member wearing his badge, just as the
retainers of Earl Warwick the King-maker used to
follow him through the streets of London with the Bear
and Ragged Staff upon their sleeves. Less than twenty
of the six hundred were delegates; the rest ordinary
members of the organization, who had accompanied to
give it moral and vocal support.?

Before the great day dawns many thousands of poli-
ticlans, newspaper men, and sight-seers have filled to
overflowing every hotel in the city, and crowded the main
thoroughfares so that the horse-cars can scarcely pene-
trate the throng. It is like a medieval pilgrimage, or
the mustering of a great army. When the chief dele-
gations have arrived the work begins in earnest. Not
only each large delegation, but the faction of each leading
aspirant to the candidacy, has its headquarters, where
the managers hold perpetual session, reckoning up their
numbers, starting rumours meant to exaggerate their
resources, and dishearten their opponents, organjzing
raids upon the less experienced delegates as they arrive.
Some fill the entrance halls and bars of the hotels, talk

1 The Boss of Tammany was an object of special curiosity to the crowd,
being the most illustrious professional in the whole United States.

2 The two other Democratic organizations of New York City, the County
Democracy and Irving Hall, came each in force—the one a regiment of
five hundred, the other of two hundred.

cHar.Lxx NOMINATING CONVENTION AT WORK 557

to the busy reporters, extemporize meetings with tumul-
tuous cheering for their favourite. The common
“worker” is pov enough to raise the boom by these
devices. Meanwhile, the more skilful leaders begin (as
it is expressed) to “ plough around” among the delega- —
tions of the newer Western and Southern States, usually
(at least among the Republicans) more malleable, be-
cause they come from regions where the strength of
the factions supporting the various aspirants is less
accurately known, and are themselves more easily
“captured” by bold assertions or seductive promises,
Sometimes an expert intriguer will ‘break into” one
of these wavering delegations, and make havoc like
a fox in a hen-roost. ‘ Missionaries” are sent out to
bring over individuals; embassies are accredited from
one delegation to another to endeavour to arrange com-
binations by coaxing the weaker party to drop its own
aspirant, and add its votes to those of the stronger party.
All is conducted with perfect order and good-humour,
for the least approach to violence would recoil upon its
authors; and the only breach of courtesy is where a
delegation refuses to receive the ambassadors of an
organization whose evil fame has made it odious.’

It is against etiquette for the aspirants themselves to
appear upon the scene,? whether from some lingering re-
spect for the notion that a man must not ask the people
to choose him, but accept the proffered honour, or on the
pringiple that the attorney who conducts his own case
has a fool for a client. But from Washington, if he is

1 This happened once or twice in July 1884; Tammany Hall being
regarded with some suspicion by the better surt of Democrats.

2 Oddly enough, the only English parallel to this delicate reserve is to
be found in the custum which forbids a candidate for the representation
in Parliament of the University of Oxford to appruach the University be-
fore or during the election.

558 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART II

an official or a senator, or perhaps from his own home in
some distant State, each aspirant keeps up hourly com-
munication with his managers in the convention city,
having probably a private wire laid on for the purpose.
Not only may officials, including the President himself,
become aspirants, but Federal office-holders may be, and
very largely are, delegates, especially among the Southern
Republicans when that party is in power. They have
the strongest personal interest in the issue; and the
heads of departments can, by promises of places, exert
a potent influence. One hears in America, just as one
used to hear in France under Louis Napoleon or Marshal
MacMahon, of the “ candidate of the Administration.”?

As the hour when the convention is to open ap-
proaches, each faction strains its energy to the utmost.
The larger delegations hold meetings to determine their
course in the event of the man they chiefly favour
proving “unavailable.” Conferences take place between
different delegations. Lists are published in the news-
papers of the strength of each aspirant. Sea and land
are compassed to gain one influential] delegate, who
“owns” other delegates. If he resists other persuasions,
he is “switched on” to the private wire of some magnate
at Washington, who “ talks to him,” and suggests induce-
ments more effective than those he has hitherto with-
stood. The air is thick with tales of plots and treasons,
so that no politician trusts his neighbour, for rumour
spares none.

At length the period of expectation and prepara-
tion is over, and the summer sun rises upon the
fateful day to which every politician in the party

1 In 1884, President Arthur and his ministers at Washington sat up

during the long night session of the Republican Convention receiving an
incessant stream of telegraphic reports of the proceedings at Chicago.

CHAP.LxX NOMINATING CONVENTION AT WORK 559

has looked forward for three years. Long before
the time (usually 11 a.m.) fixed for the beginning of
business, every part of the hall, erected specially for
the gathering—a hall often large enough to hold from
ten to fifteen thousand persons—is crowded.’ The dele-
gates—who in 1884 were 820 in number—are a mere
drop in the ocean of faces. Eminent politicians from
every State of the Union, senators and representatives
from Washington not’a few, journalists and reporters,
ladies, sight-seers from distant cities, as well as a swarm
of partisans from the city itself, press in ; some semblance
of order being kept by the sergeant-at-arms and his mar-
shals. Some wear devices, sometimes the badge of their
State, or of their organization ; sometimes the colours or
emblem of their favourite aspirant.? Each State dele-
gation has its allotted place marked by the flag of the
State floating from a pole ; but leaders may be seen pass-
ing from one group to another, while the spectators
listen to the band playing popular airs, and cheer any
well-known figure that enters.

When the assembly is “called to order,” a prayer is
offered—each day’s sitting begins with a prayer by some
clergyman of local eminence,’ the susceptibilities of
various denominations being duly respected in the selec-
tion—and business proceeds according to the order
described in last chapter. First come the preliminaries,
appointment of committees and chairman, then the plat-

le Admission is of course by ticket, and the prices given for tickets
to those who, having obtained them, sell them, run high, up to $30, or
even $50.

2 In the Democratic Convention of 1884 the admirers of a certain
senatorial aspirant proclaimed themselves by red bandana handkerchiefs,
that article of dress being a favourite with the senator in question.

3 Tt was remarked at the Democratic Convention of 1884 that the

delegates from the South all rose and stuod during the prayer, while those
from the Northern States did not.

560 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

form, and probably on the second day, but perhaps
later, the nominations and balloting, the latter some-
times extending over several days. There is usually
both a forenoon and an afternoon session.

A European is astonished to see eight hundred men
prepare to transact the two most difficult pieces of
business an assembly .can undertake, the solemn cun-
sideration of their principles, and the selection of the
person they wish to place at the head of the nation, in
the sight and hearing of twelve thousand other men and
women. Observation of what follows does not lessen
the astonishment. ‘The convention presents in sharp
contrast and frequent alternation, the two most striking
features of Americans in public—their orderliness and
their excitability. Everything is done according to
strict rule, with a scrupulous observance of small for-
malities which European meetings would ignore or
despise. Points of order almost too fine for a parliament
are taken, argued, decided on by the chair, to whom
every one bows. Yet the passions that sway the multi-
tude are constantly bursting forth in storms of cheering
or hissing at an allusion to a fuvourite aspirant or an
obnoxious name, and five or six speakers often take the
floor together, shouting and gesticulating at each other
till the chairman obtains a hearing for one of them. Of
course it depends on the chairman whether or no the
convention sinks intoa mob, A chairman with a weak
voice, or a want of prompt decision, or a suspicign of
partisanship, may bring the assembly to the verge of
disaster, and it has more than once happened that when
the confusion that prevailed would have led to an
irregular vote which might have been subsequently
disputed, the action of the manager acting for the
winning horse has, by waiving some point of order or

cHap.txx NOMINATING CONVENTION AT WORK 561

consenting to an adjournment, saved the party from
disruption. Even in the noisiest scenes the singular
good sense and underlying love of fair-play—fair-play
according to the rules of the game, which do not ex-
clude some dodges repugnant to an honourable man—
will often reassert itself, and pull back the vehicle from
the edge of the precipice.

The chief interest of the earlier proceedings lies in
the indications which speeches and votings give of the
relative strength of the factions. Sometimes a division
on the choice of a chairman, or on the adoption of arule,
reveals the tendencies of the majority, or of influential
leaders, in a way which sends the chances of an aspirant
swiftly up or down the barometer of opinion. So when
the nominating speeches come, it is not so much their
eloyuence that helps a nominee as the warmth with
which the audience receives them, the volume of
cheering and the length of time, sometimes fifteen
minutes, during which the transport lasts. As might
be guessed from the size of the audience which he
addresses, an orator is expected to “soar into the blue
empyrean” at once. The rhetoric is usually pompous
and impassioned. To read a speech, even a short speech,
from copious notes, is neither irregular nor rare.

While forenoon and evening, perhaps even late even-
ing, are occupied with the sittings of the convention,
canvassing and intrigue go on more briskly than ever
during the rest of the day and night. Conferences are
held between delegations anxious to arrange for a union
of forces on one candidate.1 Divided delegations hold

1 In 1884 many efforts were made to arrange combinations ayainst
Mr. Blaine, but all failed. The Arthur men are reported to have sent an
embassy to the Edmunds men begging them to lend some votes for the first
ballot, in order that the total Arthur vote might at first overtop that of
Mr. Blaine. The Edmunds men refused, being mostly persons entirely

VOL. II 20

562 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

meetings of their own members, meetings often long and
stormy, behind closed doors, outside which a curious crowd
listens to the angry voices within, and snatches at the
reports which the dispersing members give of the result.
Sometimes the whole issue of the convention hinges on the
action of the delegates of a great State, which, like New
York, under the unit rule, can throw seventy-two votes
into the trembling scale.’ It may even happen, although
this is against a well-settled custom, that a brazen can-
didate himself goes the round of several delegations
and tries to harangue them into supporting him.?

As it rarely happens that any aspirant is able to
command at starting a majority of the whole conven-
tion, the object of each is to arrange a combination
whereby he may gather from the supporters of other
aspirants votes sufficient to make up the requisite
majority, be it two-thirds, according to the Democratic
rule, or a little more than a half, according to the
Republican. Let us take the total number of votes
at 820—the figure in 1884. There are usually two
aspirants commanding each from 23Q to 330; one or
two others with from 50 to 100, and the rest with much
smaller figures, 10 to 30 each. A combination can
succeed jn one of two ways: (a) One of the stronger
aspirants may pick up votes, sometimes quickly, some-
out of sympathy with the Arthur men, though possibly they would have
preferred Mr. Arthur to Mr. Blaine.

1 In the Democratic Convention of 1884 it was well known that the
choice of Mr. Cleveland, the leading favourite, would depend on tl® action
of the delegation of New York State, not only, however, because it cast
the largest vote, but because it was his own State, and because it was
already foreseen that the presidential election would turn on the electoral
vote of New York. Thus the strugyle in the convention came to be really
a duel between Mr. Cleveland and the Boss of Tammany, with whom Mr.
Cleveland had at an earlier period in his career “locked horns.”

2 This is reported to have been done by a well-known politician in
Chicago in July 1884.

cHap,Lxx NOMINATING CONVENTION AT WORK 563

times by slow degrees, from the weaker candidates, suffi-
cient to overpower the rival Favourite ; (b) Each of the
strongest aspirants may hold his forces so well together
that after repeated ballotings it becomes clear ‘that
neither can win against the resistance of the other.
Neither faction will, however, give way, because there
is susually bitterness between them, because each
would feel humiliated, and because each aspirant has
so many friends that his patronage will no more than
suffice for the clients to whom he is pledged already.
Hence one or other of the baffled Favourites suddenly
transfers the votes he commands to some one of the
weaker men, who then so rapidly ‘develops strength”
that the rest of the minor factions go over to him, and
he obtains the requisite majority... Experience has so
well prepared the tacticians for one or other of these
issues that the game is always played with a view to
them. The first effort of the managers of a Favourite is
to capture the minor groups of delegates who support one
or other of the Favourite Sons and Dark Horses. Not
till this proves hopeless do they decide to sell themselves
as dear as they can by taking up and carrying to victory
a Dark Horse or perhaps even a Favourite Son, thereby
retaining the pleasure of defeating the rival Favourite,
while at the same time establishing a claim for them-
selves and their faction on the aspirant whom they carry.’

1 Suppose A and B, Favourites, to have each 300 votes. After some
ballotings, A’s friends, perceiving they cannot draw enough of the votes
commanded by C, D, and F (who have each 60), and of G and H (who
have each 20) to win, give their 300 votes to F. This gives him so con-
siderable a lead that OC, D, and G go over to him on the next ballot ; he
has then 440, and either wins at once (Republican rule) or will win next
ballot (Democratic rule).

2 It will be understood that while the Favourites and Favourite Sons

are before the convention from the first, some of the Dark Horses may
not appear as aspirants till well on in the balloting, They may be

564 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

It may be asked why a Dark Horse often prevails
against the Favourites, seeing that either of the latter
has a much larger number of delegates in his favour.
Ought not the wish of a very large group to have so
much weight with the minor groups as to induce them
to come over and carry the man whom a powerful
section of the party obviously desires? The reason why
this does not happen is that a Favourite is often as much
hated by one strong section as he is liked by another, and
if the hostile section is not strong enough to keep him
out by its unaided vote, it is sure to be able to do
so by transferring itself to some other aspirant. More-
over, a Favourite has often less chance with the minor
groups than a Dark Horse may have. He has not the
charm of novelty. His “‘ins.and outs” are known; the
delegations weighed his merits before they left their own
State, and if they, or the State convention that instructed
them, decided against him then, they are slow to adopt
him now. They have formed a habit of “ antagonizing”
him, whereas they have no hostility to some new and
hitherto inconspicuous aspirant.

Let us now suppose resolutions and nominating
speeches despatched, and the curtain raised for the third
act of the convention, The chairman raps loudly with
his gavel,’ announcing the cal] of States for the vote. A
hush falls on the multitude, a long deep breath is drawn,
tally books are opened and pencils grasped, while the
elerk reads slowly the names of State after State, As
each is called, the chairman of its delegation rises and
persons who have never been thought of before as possible candidates.
There is therefore always a yreat element of exciting uncertainty.

1 The gavel is a sort of auctioneer’s hammer used by a chairman to
call the attention of the meeting to what he is saying or lo restore order,

That used at a national convention is often made of thirty-eight pieces
of wood from the various States.

cHAP.Lxx MWOMINATING CONVENTION AT V/ORK 565

announces the votes it gives, bursts of cheering from
each faction in the audience welcoming the votes given
to the object of its wishes. Inasmuch as the disposition
of most of the delegates has become known beforehand,
not only to the managers, but to the public through the
press, the loudest welcome is given to a delegate or
delegation whose vote turns out better than had been
predicted.

In the first scene of this third and decisive act the
Favourites have, of course, the leading parts. Their
object is to produce an impression of overwhelming
strength, so the whole of this strength is displayed,
unless, as occasionally happens, an astute manager holds
back a few votes. This is also the bright hour of the
Favourite Sons. Each receives the vote of his State,
but each usually finds that he has little to expect from
external help, and his friends begin to consider into what
other camp they had better march over. The Dark
Horses are in the background, nor is it yet possible
to say which (if any) of them will come to the front.

The first ballot seldom decides much, yet it gives
a new aspect to the battlefield, for the dispositions of
some groups of voters who had remained doubtful is
now revealed, and the managers of each aspirant are
better able to tell, from the way in which certain dele-
gations are divided, in what quarters they are most likely
to gain or lose votes on the subsequent ballots. They
whisper hastily together, and try, in the few moments
they have before the second ballot is upon them, to pre-
pare some new line of defence or attack.

The second ballot, taken in the same way, sometimes
reveals even more than the first. The smaller and more
timid delegations, smitten ‘with the sense of their weak-
hess, despairing of their own aspirant, and anxious to be

566 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

on the winning side, begin to give way; or if this does
not happen on the second ballot, it may do so on the
third. Rifts open in their ranks, individuals or groups
of delegates go over to one of the stronger candidates,
some having all along meant to do so, and thrown their
first vote merely to obey instructions received or fulfil
the letter of a promise given. The gain of even twepty
or thirty votes for one of the leading candidates over his
strength on the preceding ballot so much inspirits his
friends, and is so likely to bring fresh recruits to his
standard, that a wily manager will often, on the first
ballot, throw away some of his votes on a harmless anta-
gonist that he may by rallying them increase the total
of his candidate on the second, and so convey the
impression of growing strength.

The breathing space between each ballot and that
which follows is used by the managers for hurried con-
sultations. Aides-de-camp are sent to confirm a waver-
ing delegation, or to urge one which has been supporting
a now hopeless aspirant to seize this moment for dropping
him and coming over to the winning standard. Or the
aspirant himself, who, hundreds of miles away, sits listen-
ing to the click of the busy wires, is told how matters
stand, and asked to advise forthwith what course his
friends shall'take. Forthwith it must be, for the next
ballot is come, and may give the battlefield a new aspect,
promising victory or presaging irretrievable defeat.

Any one who-has taken part in an election, be it the
election of a pope by cardinals, of a town-clerk by the
city council, of a fellow by the dons of a college, of a
schoolmaster by the board of trustees, of a pastor by a
congregation, knows how much depends on generalship.
In every body of electors there are men who have no
minds of their own; others who cannot make up their

cHAP.LXx NMOMINATING CONVENTION AT WORK 567

minds till the decisive moment, and are determined by the
last word or incident; others whose wavering inclination
yields to the pressure or follows the example of a stronger
colleague. There are therefore chances of running in
by surprise an aspirant whom few may have desired, but
still fewer have positively disliked, chances specially
valuable when controversy bas spent itself between two
equally-matched competitors, so that the majority are
ready to jump at a new suggestion. The wary tactician
awaits his opportunity; he improves the brightening
prospects of his aspirant to carry him with a run before
the opposition is ready with a counter move; or if he
sees a strong antagonist, he invents pretexts for delay till
he has arranged a combination by which that antago-
nist may be foiled. Sometimes he will put forward an
aspirant destined to be abandoned, and reserve till several
votings have been taken the man with whom he means
to win. All these arts are familiar to the convention
manager, whose power is seen not merely in the dealing
with so large a number of individuals and groups whose
dispositions he must grasp and remember, but in the
cool promptitude with which he decides on his course
amid the noise and passion and distractions of twelve
thousand shouting spectators. Scarcely greater are the
faculties of combination and coolness of head needed
by a general in the midst of a battle, who has to bear
in mind the position of every one of his own corps and
to divine the positions of those of the enemy’s corps
which remain concealed, who must vary his plan from
hour to hour according to the success or failure of each
of his movements and the new facts that are succes-
sively disclosed, and who does all this under the roar
and through the smoke of cannon.

One balloting follows another till what is called “ the

568 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

break” comes. It comes when the weaker factions, per-
ceiving that the men of their first preference cannot suc-
ceed, transfer their votes to that pne among the aspirants
whom they like best, or whose strength they see growing.
When the faction of one aspirant has set the example,
others are quick to follow, and thus it may happen that
after thirty or forty ballots have been taken with few
changes of strength as between the two leading competi-
tors, a single ballot, once the break has begun, and the
column of one or both of these competitors has been
“ staggered,” decides the battle.

If one Favourite is much stronger from the first
than any other, the break may come soon and come
gently, «e. each ballot shows a gain for him on
the preceding ballot, and he marches so steadily to
victory that resistance is felt to be useless. But if
two well-matched rivals have maintained the struggle
through twenty or thirty ballots, so that the long
strain has wrought up all minds to unwonted excite-
ment, the break, when it comes, comes with fierce
intensity, like that which used to mark the charge of the
Old Guard. The defeat becomes a rout. Buttalion
after battalion goes over to the victors, while the van-
quished, ashamed of their candidate, try to conceal them-
selves by thfowing away their colours and joining in the
cheers that acclaim the conqueror. In the picturesyuely
technical language of politicians, it is a Stampede.

To stampede.a convention is the steadily .con-
templated aim of every manager who knows he cannot
win on the first ballot.1 He enjoys it as the most

1 To check stampeding the Republican Convention of 1876 adopted
a rule providing that the rull-call of States should in no case be dispensed
with. This makes surprise and tumult less dangerous. (See Stanwood’s
useful History of Presidential Elections.) With the same view the Re-
publican Convention of 1888 ruled that no vote given on any balloting
should be changed before the end of that balloting.

cHar. uxx NOMINATING CONVENTION AT V7ORK 569

dramatic form of victory, he values it because it evokes
an enthusiasm whose echo reverberates all over the
Union, and dilates the party heart with something like
that sense of supernatural guidance which Rome used to
have when the cardinals chose a pope by the sudden
inspiration of the Holy Spirit. Sometimes it comes of
itself, when various delegations, smitten at the same
moment by the sense that one of the aspirants? is destined
to conquer, go over to him all at once. Sometimes it
is due to the action of the aspirant himself. In 1880
Mr. Blaine, who was one of the two leading Favourites,
perceiving that he could not be carried against the
resistance of the Grant men, suddenly telegraphed to
his friends to transfer their votes to General Garfield, till
then a scarcely considered candidate. In 1884 General
Logan, also by telegraph, turned over his votes to Mr.
Blaine between the third and fourth ballot, thereby
assuring the already probable triumph of that Favourite.

When a stampede is imminent, only one means
exists of averting it, that of adjourning the convention
so as to stop the panic and gain time for a combination
against the winning aspirant. A resolute manager always
tries this device, but he seldom succeeds, for the winning
side resists the motion for adjournment, and the vote
which it casts on that issue is practically a vote for its
aspirant, against so much of the field as has any fight left
in it. This is the most critical and exciting moment of
the whole battle. A dozen speakers rise at once, some to
support, some to resist the adjournment, some to protest
against debate upon it, some to take points of order,
few of which can be heard over the din of the howling
multitude. Meanwhile, the managers who have kept

1 Probably a Dark Horse, for the Favourite Sons, having had their
turn in the earlier ballotings, have been discounted ; and are apt to excite
more jealousy among the delegates of ‘other States.

570 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

their heads rush swiftly about through friendly dele-
gations, trying at this supreme moment to rig up a
combination which may resist the advancing tempest.
Tremendous efforts are made to get the second Favourite’s
men to abandon their chief and “swing into line” for
some Dark Horse or Favourite Son, with whose votes
they may make head till other factions rally to them‘
“Tn vain, in vain, the all-consuming hour
Relentless falls.”

The battle is already lost, the ranks are broken and
cannot be rallied, nothing remains for brave men but
to cast their last votes against the winner and fall
gloriously around their still waving banner. The
motion to adjourn is defeated, and the next ballot ends
the strife with a hurricane of cheering for the chosen
leader. Then a sudden calm falls on the troubled sea.
What is done is done, and whether done for, good or
for ill, the best face must be put upon it. Accordingly
the proposer of one of the defeated aspirants moves
that the nomination be made unanimous, and the more
conspicuous friends of other aspirants hasten to show
their good-humour and their loyalty to the party as
a whole by seconding this proposition. Then, perhaps,
a gigantic portrait of the candidate, provided by an-
ticipation, is hoisted up, a signal for fresh enthusiasm,
or a stuffed eagle is carried in procession round the hall.’

Nothing further remains but to nominate a can-
didate for the “vice-presidency, a matter of %mall
moment now that the great issue has been settled.
This nomination is frequently used to console one of the
defeated aspirants for the presidential nomination, or
is handed over to his friends to be given to some
politician of their choice. If there be a contest, it is

1 So at Chicago in 1884.

cuap. Lxx MOMINATING CONVENTION AT WORK 571

seldom prolonged beyond two or three ballots. The
convention is at an end, and in another day the whole
host of exhausted delegates and camp-followers, hoarse
with shouting, is streaming home along the railways.

The fever heat of the convention is almost matched
by that of the great cities, and indeed of every spot
over the Union to which there runs an electric wire.
Every incident, speech, vote, is instantly telegraphed
‘to all the cities. Crowds gather round the newspaper
offices, where frequent editions are supplemented by
boards displaying the latest bulletins. In Washington,
Congress can hardly be kept together, because every
politician is personally interested in every move of the
game. When at last the result is announced, the parti-
sans of the chosen candidate go wild with delight;
salvos of artillery are fired off, processions with bands
parade the streets, ratification meetings are announced
for the same evening, “campaign clubs” bearing the
candidate’s name are organized on the spot. The ex-
citement is of course greatest in the victor’s own State,
or in the city where he happens to be resident. A
crowd rushes to his house, squeezes his hand to a quiver-
ing pulp, congratulates him on being virtually President,
while the keen-eyed reporter telegraphs far and wide
how he smiled and spoke when the news was brought.
Defeated aspirants telegraph to their luckier rival their
congratulations on his success, promising him sup-
port in the campaign. Interviewers fly to prominent
politicians, and cross-examine them as to what they
think of the nomination. But in two days all is still
again, and a lull of exhaustion follows till the real
business of the contest begins some while later with the
issue of the letter of acceptance, in which the candidate
declares his views and outlines his policy.

CHAPTER LXXI
THE PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN

iA PRESIDENTIAL election in America is something to
which Europe can show nothing similar. Though the
issues which fall to be decided by the election of a
Chamber in France or Italy, or of a House of Commons
in England, are often far graver than those involved in
the choice of A or B to be executive chief magistrate
for four years; the commotion and excitement, the
amount of “organization,” of speaking, writing, tele-
graphing, and shouting, is incomparalbly greater in the
United States. It is only the salient features of these
contests that I shall attempt to sketch, for the detail
is infinite.

The canvass usually lasts about four months. It
begins soon after both of the great parties have chosen
their candidate, t.e. before the middle of July; and it
ends early in November, on the day when the presi-
dential electors -are chosen simultaneously in and by
all the States, The summer heats and the absence of
the richer sort of people at the seaside or mountain
resorts keep down the excitement during July and
August; it rises in September, and boils furiously
through October.

The first step is for each nominate candidate to

CHAP. LXXI THE PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN 573

accept his nomination in a letter, sometimes as long as
a pamphlet, setting forth his views of the condition of
the nation and the policy which the times require.
Such a letter is meant to strike the keynote for the
whole orchestra of orators. It is, of course, published
everywhere, extolled by friendly and dissected by hostile
journals. Together with the “platform” adopted at
the national party convention, it is the official declara-
tion of party principles, to be referred to as putting the
party case, no less than the candidate himself, before
the nation.

While the candidate is composing his address, the
work of organization goes briskly forward, for in Ameri-
can elections everything is held to depend on organiza-
tion. A central or national party committee nominated
by the national convention, and consisting of one
member from each State, gets its members together and
forms a plan for the conduct of the canvass. It raises
money by appealing to the wealthy and zealous men of
the party for subscriptions, and, of course, presses those
above all who have received something in the way of an
office or other gratification from the party.2 It com-
municates with the leading statesmen and orators of the
party, and arranges in what district of the country each
shall take the stump. It issues shoals of pamphlets,
and forms relations with party newspapers. It allots
grants from the “campaign fund” to particular persons
and State committees, to be spent by them for “campaign
purposes,” an elastic term which may cover a good deal
of illicit expenditure. Enormous sums are sometimes
gathered and disbursed by this committee, and the

1 As a recent statute forbids the levying of assessments for party
purposes on members of the Federal civil service, it is deemed prudent to
have no Federal official on this committee, lest in demanding subscriptions
from his subordinstes he should transgress the law.

574 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART IIE

accounts submitted do not, as may be supposed, answer
all the questions they suggest. The committee directs
its speakers and its funds chiefly to the doubtful States,
those in which eloquence or expenditure may turn the
balance either way. There are seldom more than six or
seven such States at any one election, possibly fewer.

The efforts of the national committee are secorded
not only by State committees, but by an infinite number
of minor organizations over the country, in the rural
districts no less than in the cities. Some of these
are permanent. Others are created for the election
alone; and as they contemplate a short life, they make
it a merry one. These “ campaign clubs,” which usually
bear the candidates’ names, are formed on every imagin-
able basis, that of locality, of race, of trade or profession,
of university affiliation. There are Irish clubs, Italian
clubs, German clubs, Scandinavian clubs, Polish clubs,’
coloured (z.e. negro) clubs, Orange clubs. There are
young men’s clubs, lawyers’ clubs, dry-goods clubs,
insurance men’s clubs, shoe and leather clubs. There
are clubs of the graduates of various colleges. Their
work consists in canvassing the voters, making up lists
of friends, opponents, and doubtfuls, getting up proces-
sions and parades, holding meetings, and generally
“booming ‘all the time.”

This is mostly unpaid labour. But there are also
thousands of paid agents at work, canvassing, distribut-
ing pamphlets or leaflets, lecturing on behalf of the
candidate. It is in America no reproach to a political
speaker that he receives a fee or a salary. Even
men of eminence are permitted to receive not only
their travelling expenses, but a round sum. Whether

1 At a “parade” of a Polish campaign club in New York in 1884
more than 1000 Polish citizens are reported as present.

CHAP. LXXI THE PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN 575

the candidate himself takes the field depends on his
popular gifts. If he is a brilliant speaker his services
are too valuable to be lost; and he is sent on a tour
through the doubtful States, where he speaks for weeks
together twice or thrice on most days, filling up the
intervals with “receptions” at which he has to shake
hands with hundreds of male callers, and be presented
to ladies scarcely less numerous.’ The leading men of
the party are, of course, pressed into the service. Even
if they dislike and have opposed the nomination of the
particular candidate, party loyalty and a lively sense
of favours to come force them to work for the person
whom the party has chosen.2— An eminent Irishman or
an eminent German is especially valuable for a stumping
tour, because he influences the vote of his countrymen.
Similarly each senator is expected to labour assiduously
at’ his own State, where presumably his influence is
greatest, and any refusal to do so is deemed a pointed
disapproval of the candidate.

The committees print and distribute great quantities
of campaign literature, pamphlets, speeches, letters,
leaflets, and one can believe that this printed matter is
more serviceable than it would be in England, because a
larger part of the voters live in quiet country places, and
like something to read in the evening. Even novelettes
are composed in the interests of a candidate. I found
mention of one, written by a literary colonel, in which
“the lovers, while in the most romantic situation, are
made to talk about the protective tariff. One-third of
the book consists of love and tragedy, and the remainder
is an argument for protection. (This is a large propor-

1 Sometimes he stumps along a line of railroad, making ten minute
speeches from the end platform of the last car.

2 Exceptions are rare, but there was one distinguished senator who
refused to take the field for his party’s candidate in 1844.

576 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

tion of powder to jam.) Thousands of these have been
distributed as campaign documents.” Sometimes a less
ingenuous use is made of the press. On the very eve
of the election of 1880, too late for a contradiction to
obtain equal publicity, a forged letter, purporting to
come from Mr. Garfield, and expressing views on
Chinese immigration and labour, distasteful to the Pasific
States, was lithographed and scattered broadcast over
California, where it told heavily against him, And in
1884, an extract, purporting to come from a pamphlet
issued by the “ London Free Trade Club” was circulated,
in which that (non-existent) body was represented as
declaring that ‘the salvation of England depends on the
destruction of American manufactures, and this must be
effected by means of free trade and the Democratic party.”*

Most constant and effective of all is the action of the
newspapers. The chief journals have for two or three
months a daily leading article recommending their own
and assailing the hostile candidate, with a swarm of
minor editorial paragraphs bearing on the election.
Besides these there are reports of speeches delivered,
letters to the editor with the editor’s comments at the
end, stories about the candidates, statements as to the
strength of each party in particular States, counties, and
cities. Ari examination of a few of the chief newspapers
during the months of September and October 1884,
showed that their “ campaign matter ” of all kinds formed
between one-half and one-third of the total letterpress
of the paper (excluding advertisements), and this, be it
remembered, every day during those two months. The
most readable part of this matter consists in the reports

1 Jt was also stated that English clubs sent money to be expended in
paying Irish “ex-suspects” to persuade their countrymen to vote ayainst
the protectionist candidate !

CHAP. LXXI THE PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN 577

of the opinion of individual persons, more or less
prominent, on the candidate. You find, for instance, a
paragraph stating that the Rev. Dr. A., president of
such and such a college, or Mr. B., the philanthropist
who is head of the Y Z Bank, or ex-Governor C., or Judge
D., has said he thinks the candidate a model of chivalric
virtue, or fit only for a felon’s cell, as the case may be,
and that he will vote for or against him accordingly.’
Occasionally the prominent man is called on by an inter-
viewer and gives a full statement of his views, or he writes
to a young friend who has asked his advice a private
letter, which is immediately published. The abundance
of these expressions or citations of the opinions of private
citizens supplies a curious evidence of the disposition of
some sections in a democracy to look up to its intellectual
and moral leaders. For the men thus appealed to are
nearly all persons eminent by their character, ability,
learning, or success in business ; the merely rich man is
cited but rarely, and as if his opinion did not matter,
though of course his subscription may. Judges and
lawyers, university dignitaries and literary men, are,
next to the clergy,’ the persons most often quoted.

The function of the clergy in elections is very
characteristic of the country and the occasion. They

1 Sometimes a sort of amateur census is taken of the persons occupied
in one place in some particular employment, as, for instance, of the
professors in a particular college, or even of the clerks in a particular
store, these being taken as samples of store-clerks or professors generally ;
and the party organ triumphantly claims that three-fourths of their votes
will be cast for its candidate. Among the “throbs of Connecticut’s pulse ”
described by a newspaper in the fall of 1884, I recollect an estimate of
the * proclivities” of the workmen in the Willimantic mills in that State.

2 An eminent Unitarian clergyman having written a letter condemn-
ing a candidate, the leading organ of that candidate in sneering at it,
remarked that after all Dr. Clarke’s coachman’s vote was as good as Dr.
Clarke's ; to which it was rejoined by a hostile journalist that hundreds
of voters would follow Dr. Clarke, and hundreds more be offended at this
disrespectful refererce to him.

VOL. 11 2P

578 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

used during the period from 1820 to 1856 to give
politics a wide berth, for not only would their advocacy
of any particular cause have offended a section among
their flocks, but the general sentiment condemned the
immixture in politics of a clerical element. The
struggle against slavery, being a moral issue, brought
them into more frequent public activity. Since. the
close of that struggle they have again tended to retire.
However, the excitement of a presidential election
suspends all rules; and it sometimes happens that the
charges brought against a candidate involve moral issues
which are deemed, at least by partisans, to justify
clerical intervention. In the contest of 1884, at any
rate, ecclesiastics came well to the front. For months
the newspapers were full of the opinions of clergymen.
Sermons were reported if they seemed to bear upon the
issue. Paragraphs appeared saying that such and such
a pastor would carry three-fourths of his congregation
with him, whereas the conduct of another in appearing
at a meeting on behalf of the opposing candidate was
much blamed by his flock. Not many ministers
actually took the platform, though there was a general
wish to have them as chairmen. But one, the late Mr.
Henry Ward Beecher, did great execution by his power-
ful oratory, artillery all the more formidable because it
was turned against the candidate of the party to which
he had through his long life belonged.’ Nor was there
any feature in the canvass of that same candidate more
remarkable than the assembly of 1018 clergymen of all
denominations (including a Jewish rabbi), which gathered
at the Fifth Avenue Hotel in New York, to meet him

1 Mr. Beecher’s attitude was deemed so formidable that a number of

his congregation were induced to issue a document stating that they did
not intend to be influenced by him.

CHAP, LXXI THE PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN 579

and assure him of their support on moral grounds,
immediately before the election day.’

’ From a class usually excluded from politics by
custom -to a class excluded by law, the transition is
easy. Women as a rule keep as much aloof from
electoral contests in America as in continental Europe,
anc certainly more than in England, for I have never
heard of their forming an organization to canvass the
voters of a district in America, as the (Conservative)
Primrose League has done all over England for four
years past, and as several women’s associations belonging
to the Liberal party are now doing in London. Nor are
women appointed delegates from any ward primary,’
as ladies have lately been in some divisions of London.
In no State of the Union can they vote at any State
election, and therefore neither can they vote at
Federal elections. However, the excitement of 1884
drew even women into the vortex. In various cities
receptions were tendered by the ladies of each party
to the candidate, receptions reported in the public
press as politically significant. And a good many of
the letters which appeared in the newspapers attacking
or defending the candidate bore female signatures. The
Women’s Suffrage journal gave its support to the
Republican party, but a section of the suffragists,
incensed at the faithlessness or indifference of both of
the parties to their claims, started a presidential
candiglate of their own, Mrs. Belva C. Lockwood, a lady

1 One of the clerical speakers spoke of the opposite candidate as
Teceiving the support of “rum, Romanism, and rebellion.” This phrase,
eagerly caught up, and repeated by hostile newspapers, incensed the
Roman Catholics of New York, and was believed to have turned the elec-
tion against the candidate in whose interest the alliteration was invented.
Nothing so dangerous as a friend ; especially when he is an amateur.

2 Women, however, appear as delegates at the conventions of the Pro-
hibition party.

580 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

practising law at Washington. She took the stump on
her own behalf, but did not ultimately go to the poll.

Speaking and writing and canvassing are common
to elections all over the world. What is peculiar to
America is the amazing development of the “ demonstra-
tion” as a means for raising enthusiasm. For three
months, processions, usually with brass bands, flags,
badges, crowds of cheering spectators, are the order of
the day and night from end to end of the country.
The Young Men’s Pioneer club of a village in the
woods of Michigan turns out in the summer evening ;
the Democrats or Republicans of Chicago or Philadelphia
leave their business to march through the streets of
these great cities many thousands strong.

When a procession is exceptionally large it is called
a Parade. In New York City, on the 29th of October
1884, the business men who supported Mr. James
Gillespie Blaine held such a demonstration. They were
organized by profession or occupation: the lawyers,
800 strong, forming one battalion, the dry-goods men
another,’ the Produce Exchange a third, the bankers a
fourth, the brokers a fifth, the jewellers a sixth, the
Petroleum Exchange a seventh, and so on ad infinitum.’
They started from the Bowling-green near the south
end of Manhattan Island, and marched right up the
city along Broadway to Madison Square, where Mr.

1 It was stated that the first seven files of the 8000 dry-goods men
who walked in this procession represented $150,000,000 (£30,060,000)
worth of business, °

2 A dinner was given to Mr. Blaine under the auspices of two noted
financial operators, at which two hundred of the wealthiest men in and
near New York were present. This was intended to convey the impres-
sion that the solid commercial interests of the country were in his favour,
but it was of course caught up and turned the other way by antagonists
who wished to represent the financiers and railway men as “ monopolists
and speculators,” and therefore dangerous to the people.

CHAP, LXXI THE PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN 581

Blaine reviewed and addressed them. Rain fell incess-
antly, and the streets were deep with mud, but neither
rain above nor mud hkelow damped the spirits of this
great army, which tramped steadily along, chanting
various “ campaign refrains,” such as

“Five, Five, Five Cent Fare ;”!
but most frequently

“Blaine, Blaine, James G. Blaine,
We don’t care a bit for the rain,
0—O—O—O—HI—O.” ?

There were said to have been 25,000 business men
in this parade, which was followed soon after by another
more miscellaneous Blaine parade of 60,000 Republicans,
as well as (of course) by counter parades of Democrats.°
A European, who stands amazed at the magnitude of
these demonstrations, is apt to ask whether the result
attained is commensurate with the money, time, and effort
given to them. His American friends answer that, as
with advertising, it is not to be supposed that shrewd
and experienced men would thus spend their money
unless convinced that the expenditure was reproductive.
The parade and procession business, the crowds, the
torches, the badges, the flags, the shouting, all this
pleases the participants by making them believe they
are effecting something ; it impresses the spectators by
showing them that other people are in earnest, it strikes
the imagination of those who in country hamlets read

1 Mr. Cleveland had as Governor of New York State vetoed as un-
constitutional a bill establishing a uniform fare of 5 cents on the New
York City elevated railroads. This act was supposed to have alienated
the working men and ruined his presidential prospects,

2 In the State elections held in Ohio shortly beforehand the Re-
publicans had been victorious, and the omen was gladly caught up.

3 In the Cleveland Business Men’s parade it was alleged that 1500
lawyers had walked, one-third of them Republican “bolters”; but this
number was doubtless exagyerated.

582 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART LI

of the doings in the great city. In short, it keeps up
the “boom,” and an American election is held to be,
truly or falsely, largely a matter of booming.

If the cynical visitor smiles at these displays, he is
constrained to admire the good-humour and good order
which prevail. Neither party in the Northern, Middle,
and Western States dreams of disturbing the parades or
meetings of the other. You might believe, from the
acclamations which accompany a procession, that the
whole population was with it, for if opponents are pre-
sent they do not hoot or hiss, and there are always
enough sympathizers to cheer. During the hotly-
contested elections of 1880 and 1884 there were hardly
any collisions or disturbances reported from California
to Maine.. Even in Virginia, Maryland, Missouri,
where the old Southern party is apt to let its angry
passions rise against the negroes and their white Republi-
can allies, the breaches of order were in 1884 neither
numerous nor serious.’ There is a large and vicious
mob in New York, Chicago, and Cincinnati, but it
behaved perfectly well in the two former cities, though
badly in the third at the October State elections. Over
four-fifths of the Southern States perfect quiet pre-
vailed. It is true that one party could there count on
an overwhdlming majority, so that there was no excuse
for the one to bully nor any inducement for the other to
show fight.

The maxim that nothing succeeds like success is
nowhere so cordially and consistently accepted as in
America. It is the corner-stone of all election work.
The main effort of a candidate’s orators and newspapers

1 In Baltimore the Democratic mob maltreated some of the letter-

carriers, who, as Federal officials, were presumably Republicans, and there
was a little rioting in Virginia.

CHAP. LXXI THE PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN 583

is to convince the people that their side is the winning
one, for there are sure to be plenty of voters anxious to
be on that side, not so much from any advantage to be
gained for themselves as because reverence for “the
People” makes them believe that the majority are right.
Hence the exertions to prove that the Germans, or the
Irigh, or the working men are going for candidate X. or
candidate Y. Hence the reports of specimen canvasses
showing that seventy per cent of the clerks in a partic-
ular bank or eighty per cent of the professors in a par-
ticular theological college have declared themselves for X.
Hence the announcements of the betting odds for a par-
ticular candidate, and the assertion that the supporters of
the other man who had put large sums on him are now
beginning to hedge.’ But the best evidence to which a
party can appeal is its winning minor elections which
come off shortly before the great presidential one. In
two States the choice of a governor and other State
officers took place, till lately, within the month prior to
the 8th of November, in two or three it still takes
place in September. If the State is a safe one for the
Republicans or the Democrats (as the case may be), the
votes cast are compared with those cast at the last pre-
ceding similar election, and the inference drawn that one
or other party is gaining. If it is a doubtful State the
interest is still more keen, and every nerve is strained to
carry an election whose issue will presage, and by presag-
ing eontribute to, success in the presidential struggle.’

1 There is a great deal of betting on elections, so much that bribery
is often alleged to be practised by those who are heavily involved. The
constitutions or statutes of some States make it an offence to give or take
a bet on an election.

2 “Tf the Republicans lose Ohio,” said Mr. Schurz in 1884, “ there
will be a general landslide, and the election will be virtually over.” It

was currently reported that one party had sent $500,000 (£100,000) into
Ohio for the fall elections.

584 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

Possibly the candidate or some of his ablest speakers stump
this State; probably also it is drenched with money,
The inferences from such a contest may be thought un-
certain, because State elections are always complicated
with local questions, and with the character of the par-
ticular candidates for State offices. But it is a maxim
among politicians that in a presidential year local issues
vanish, the voters being so warmed with party spirit that
they go solid for their party in spite of all local or per-
sonal obstacles. The truth of this view was illustrated
by the fact that Ohio often returns a majority of Demo-
crats to Congress and has a Democratic majority in her
own legislature, but has for several elections given a
majority for the presidential candidate of the Republican
party. The eagerness shown to carry the October elections
in this great and often doubtful State used to be scarcely
second to that displayed in the presidential contest.
She has now put her fall elections later, and makes them
coincide (every second term) with the presidential elec-
tion, in order to avoid the tremendous strain which they
had been forced to bear.’ Before this change it was
often made an argument why the party should select
its candidate from Ohio, that this would give a better
chance of winning the preliminary canter, and thereby
securing thd advantage of a presageful victory.”

So far I have described the contest as one between

1 No State now holds an October State election, Indiana, whose election
fell then, having put it later for the same reason.

2 There is a touch of superstition in the value set in America upon
the first indications of the popular sentiment, like that which made the
Romans attach such weight to the vote of the century first called up to
vote in the comitia centuriata. It was selected by lot, perhaps not merely
because the advantage of calling first a century which he might know to
be favourable to his own view or candidate was too great a one to be left
to the presiding magistrate, but also because its declaration was thus deemed
to be an indication of the will of the gods who governed the lot.

CHAP. LXXI THE PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN 585

two parties and two candidates only. But it is usually
complicated by the appearance of other minor parties
and minor candidates who, although they have no
chance of success, affect the main struggle by drawing
off strength from one side or the “other. In the
elections of 1876, 1880, and 1884, the Prohibitionist
party and the Greenback (now the Labour) party each
held a national convention, nominated candidates for
presidency and vice-presidency, and obtained at the
polls a number of votes far too small to carry any
single State, and therefore, of course, too small to
choose any presidential electors, but sufficient to affect,
perhaps to turn, the balance of strength between Repub-
licans and Democrats in two or three of the doubtful
States. The Prohibitionist candidate draws most of his
votes from the Republican side; the Greenbacker or
Labour man from the Democratic: hence there is a
sort of tacit alliance during the campaign between the
Republican organs and the Greenback party, between
the Democratic organs and the Prohibitionists ; and con-
versely much ill blood between Republicans and Pro-
hibitionists, between Democrats and Greenbackers. In
1884, the Democrats charged the Republicans with
secretly encouraging and supporting by money the can-
didature of General Benjamin F. Butler, nominated by
the Greenbackers and Labour men, while the Repub-
licans bitterly reproached the temperance people with
playing into the hands of the liquor-loving Democrats.
Any one can see what an opening these complications
give for intrigue, and how much they add to the diffi-
culty of predicting the result.

CHAPTER LXXII
THE ISSUES IN PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS

Uron what does a presidential election turn? The
presidential candidate has a double character. He is
put forward as being individually qualified for the great
place of executive head of the nation, because he is a
man of integrity, energy, firmness, intellectual power,
experience in affairs. He is also recommended as a
prominent member of a great national party, inspired by
its traditions, devoted to its principles, and prepared to
carry them out not only in his properly executive
capacity, but, what is more important, as the third
branch of the legislature, armed with a veto on bills
passed by Congress. His election may therefore be
advocated or opposed either on the ground of his per-
sonal qualities or of his political professions and party
affiliations. Here we have a marked difference between
the American and European systems, because in England,
France, Germany, and Italy, elections turn chiefly on the
views of the parties, secondarily on the character of indi-
vidual leaders, seeing that the leaders are not chosen
directly by the people, but are persons who have come to
the top in the legislatures of those countries, or have been
(in Germany) raised to office by the Crown. In America
therefore we have a source of possible confusion between

cuap.txxir ISSUES IN PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS 587

issues of two wholly distinct kinds—those which affect
the personal qualifications of the candidate, and those
which regard the programme of his party.

Whether, in any given presidential election, the
former or the latter class of issues are the more conspic-
uous and decisive, depends partly on the political ques-
tiots which happen to be then before the people, partly
on the more or less marked individuality of the rival
candidates. From about 1850 down to 1876, ques-
tions, first of the extension of slavery, then of its ex-
tinction, then of the reconstruction of the Union, had
divided the nation, and made every contest a contest of
principles and of practical measures. Since the contro-
versies raised by the war have been settled, there have
been few real differences of political principle between
the parties, and questions of personal fitness have there-
fore become relatively more important.

The object of each party naturally is to put forward
as many good political issues as it can, claiming for it-
self the merit of having always been on the popular side.
Any one who should read the campaign literature of the
Republicans would fancy that they were opposed to the
Democrats on many important points. When he took
up the Democratic speeches and pamphlets he would be
again struck by the serious divergences between the
parties, which however would seem to arise, not on the
points raised by the Republicans, but on other points
which the Republicans had not referred to. In other
words, the aim of each party is to force on its antagonist
certain issues which the antagonist rarely accepts, so
that although there is a vast deal of discussion and
declamation on political topics, there are few on which
either party directly traverses the doctrines of the other.
Each pummels, not his true enemy, but a stuffed figure

588 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART II

set up to represent that enemy. During the presidential
elections of 1880 and 1884, for instance, the Republicans
sought to force to the front the issue of Protection versus
Free Trade, which the Democrats refused to accept,
having avowed Protectionists within their own ranks,
and knowing that the bulk of the nation was at most
prepared only for certain reductions in the tariff. Hence
the odd spectacle was presented of Republican orators
advocating a protective tariff on a thousand platforms,
and hardly any Democrat referring to the subject except
to say that he would not refer to it. Both sides de-
clared against monopolists and the power of corpora-
tions. Both professed to be the friends of civil service
reform. Both promised to protect the rights of the
Americans all over the world, to withstand Bismarck in
his attacks on American bacon, and to rescue American
citizens from British dungeons. Both, however, were
equally zealous for peace and good-will among the
nations, and had no idea of quarrelling with any
European power.

What impression did these appeals and discussions
make upon the voters? Comparatively little. The
American, like the Englishman, usually votes with his
party, right or wrong, and the fact that there is little
distinction of view between the parties makes it easier
to stick to your old friends. The tariff issue did, how-
ever, tell in favour of the Republicans in 1880 and 1884,
and while the Southern men voted against the Republi-
can party because it was the party which had carried on
the war and crushed Secession, the bulk of the North
voted for that party for the same reason. It was
associations of the past rather than arguments on the
present and the future that determined men’s action.

When politics are slack, personal issues come to the

cHap. Lxxur JSSUES IN PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS 589

front. They are in one sense small, but not for that
reason less exciting. Whoever has sat in any body
of men, from a college debating society up to a legisla-
tive chamber, knows that no questions raise so much
warmth and are debated with sv much keenness as
questions affecting the character and conduct of indi-
vidual men. They evoke some of what is best and
much of what is worst in human nature. In a presi-
dential election it is impossible to avoid discussing
the personal merits of the candidates, because much
depends on those merits. It has also proved im-
possible to set limits to the discussion. Unmitigated
publicity is a condition of eminence in America; and
the excitement in one of these contests rises so high
that (at elections in which personal issues are prominent)
the canons of decorum which American custom at other
times observes, are cast aside by speakers and journalists.
The air is thick with charges, defences, recriminations,
till the voter knows not what to believe. Imagine all
the accusations brought against all the candidates for
the 670 seats in the English parliament concentrated on
one man, and read by sixty millions of people daily
for three months, and you will’ still fail to realize what
is the tempest of invective and calumny which hurtles
round the head of a presidential candidate.

These censures are referable to three classes. One
includes what is called the candidate’s “war record.”
-To have been disloyal to the Union in the hour of
its danger is a reproach. To have fought for the
North, still more to have led a Northern regiment or
division, covers a multitude of sins. It is the greatest
of blessings for America that she fights so seldom, for in
no country do military achievements carry a candidate
farther, not that the people love war, for they do not,

590 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART IIT

but because success in a sphere so remote from their
ordinary life touches their imagination, marks a man
out from his fellows, associates his name with their
passionate patriotism, gives him a claim on the gratitude,
not of a party, but of the nation as a whole. His
prowess in repulsing the British troops at New Orleans
made Andrew Jackson twice President, in spite of
grave faults of temper and judgment. Some Indian
skirmishes fixed the choice of the Whig party in 1840
upon William H. Harrison, though his competitor for
the nomination was Henry Clay. Zachary Taylor was
known only by his conduct of the Mexican War, when
he was elected by the same party in 1848. The failure
of General Grant as President in his first term, a failure
which those who most heartily recognized his honour
and patriotism could not deny, did not prevent his re-
election in 1872, and the memory of his services would
have given him a third nomination in 1880, but for the
adverse precedent set by Washington.

Far more serious than the absence of a war record
are charges of the second class—those impeaching the
nominee’s personal integrity. These no candidate need
hope to escape. Few men can have passed years in a
State legislature or State or city office, or Congress,
without coming into contact with disreputable persons,
and occasionally finding themselves in situations capable
of being misrepresented. They may have walked warily,
they may not have swerved from the path of rectitude,
but they must have been tempted to do so, and it
requires no great invention to add details which give a
bad look to the facts. As some men of note, from whom
better things had been expected, have lapsed, a lapse by
a man of standing seems credible. It is therefore an
easy task fur the unscrupulous passions which a contest

cHap,Lxxu LSSUES IN PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS 591

rouses to gather up rumours, piece out old though un-
proved stories of corruption, put the worst meaning on
doubtful words, and so construct a damning impeach-
ment, which will be fead in party journals by many
voters who never see the defence. The worst of this
habit of universal invective is that the plain citizen,
heaging much which he cannot believe, finding foul
imputations brought even against those he has reason
to respect, despairs of sifting the evidence in any given
case, and sets down most of the charges to malice and
“campaign methods,” while concluding that the residue
is about equally true of all politicians alike. The dis-
tinction between good and bad men is for many voters
practically effaced, and you have the spectacle of half
the honest men supporting for the headship of the
nation a person whom the other half declare to be a
knave. Extravagant abuse produces a reaction, and
makes the honest supporters of a candidate defend
even his questionable acts. And thus the confidence
of the country in the honour of its public men is
lowered.

Less frequent, but more offensive, are the charges
made against the private life of a candidate, particu-
larly in his relations with women. American opinion
is highly sensitive on this subject. Nothing damages
aman more than a reputation for irregularity in these
relations; nothing therefore opens a more promising
field to slander, and to the coarse vulgarity which is
scarcely less odious, even if less mendacious, than
slander itself.

These are the chief heads of attack. But there is

1 The inquiry into a candidate’s honesty is pursued so keenly that
even his property tax returns are scrutinized to found charges of his
having endeavoured to evade the law. Such a charge played a great
part in a recent presidential contest.

592 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART Ill

really nothing in the life or habits of a candidate out
of which materials for a reproach may not be drawn.
Of one it is said that he is too fond of eating, of
another that though he rents a pew in Dr. Y. "8
church, he is more frequently seen in a Roman
Catholic place of worship, of a third that he deserted
his wife twenty-five years ago, of a fourth that he is
an atheist. His private conversations are reported ;
and when he denies the report, third persons are
dragged in to refute his version. Nor does criticism
stop with the candidate himself. His leading supporters
are arraigned and dissected. A man’s surroundings
do no doubt throw some light upon him. If you
are shown into a library, you derive an impression
from the books on the shelves‘and the pictures on the
wall; much more then may you be influenced by the
character of a man’s personal friends and political associ-
ates, if they are of a conspicuously good or evil type.
But such methods of judging must be applied cautiously.
American electioneering carries them beyond reasonable
limits.

I do not mean that elections always bring these
personal issues prominently to the front. Sometimes,
where the candidates excite no strong enthusiasm or re-
pulsion, they remain in the background. Their intrusion
into what ought to be a contest of principles is unavoidable
when the personal qualities of a candidate may affect the
welfare of the country. But it has the unfortunate result
of tending to draw attention away from political dis-
cussions, and thereby lessening what may be called the
educational value of the campaign. A general election in
England seems better calculated to instruct the masses of
the people in the principles as well as the practical issues of
politics, than the longer and generally hotter presidential

cHap. Lxxir ISSUES IN PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS 593

contest in America. The average intelligence of the
voter (excluding the negroes) is higher in America than
in Britain, and his familiarity not only with the pass-
words and catchwords of politics but with the structure
of his own government is much greater. But in Britain
the contest is primarily one of programmes and not of
persons. The leaders on each side are freely criticized,
and most people are largely influenced by their judg-
ment of the prime minister, and of the person who will
become prime minister if the existing ministry be dis-
missed. Still the men are almost always overshadowed
by the principles which they respectively advocate, and
as they are men already fully known, men on whom
invective and panegyric have been poured for years,
there is little inducement to rake up or invent tales
against them. Hence controversy turns on the needs
of the country, and on the measures which each party
puts forward; attacks on a ministry are levelled at
their public acts instead of their private characters.
Americans who watch general elections in England say
that they find in the speeches of English candidates
more appeal to reason and experience, more argument
and less sentimental rhetoric, than in the discourses of
their own campaign orators. To such a general judg-
ment there are, of course, many exceptions. I have
read American election speeches, such as those of Mr.
Beecher, whose vigorous thinking was in the highest
degree instructive as well as stimulative ; and the speah-
ing of English candidates is probably, regarded as mere
speaking, less effective than that of the American stump.

An examination of the causes which explain this
difference belongs to another part of this.book. Here I
will only remark that the absence from English elections
of flags, uniforms, torches, brass bands, parades, and all

VOL. I 2Q

594 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

the other appliances employed in America, for making
the people “enthuse,” leaves the field more free for
rational discussion. Add to this that whereas the ques-
tions discussed on English platforms during the last fifty
years have been mainly questions needing argument,
such as that of the corn laws in the typical popular
struggle which Cobden and Bright and Villiers led, the
most exciting theme for an American speaker during
a whole generation was one—the existence and exten-
sion of slavery—which specially called for emotional
treatment. The subjects which now chiefly need to be
debated, such as the regulation of the tariff, competing
plans of liquor legislation, the currency and labour
questions, are so difficult to sift thoroughly before a
popular audience that the orator has been apt to evade
them or to deal in sounding commonplaces. The tariff
issue cannot be evaded much longer, and its discussion
may force speakers and hearers to think more closely
than has been usual of late years.

Although, however, the presidential contest does less
for the formation of political thought and diffusion of
political knowledge than might have been hoped from
the immense efforts put forth and the intelligence of the
voters addressed, it rouses and stirs the public life of the
country. One can hardly imagine what the atmosphere
of American politics would be without this quadrennial
storm sweeping through it to clear away stagnant
vapours, and recall to every citizen the sense of his
own responsibility for the present welfare and future
greatness of his country. Nowhere does government
by the people through the people for the people take
a more directly impressive and powerfully stimulative
form than in the choice of a chief magistrate by twelve
millions of citizens voting on one day.

CHAPTER LXXIII

FURTHER OBSERVATIONS ON NOMINATIONS AND
ELECTIONS

SEVERAL questions may have occurred to the European
reader who has followed the foregoing account of presi-
dential nominations and elections.

The most obvious is—How comes it that a system of
nomination by huge party assemblies has grown up so
unlike anything which the free countries of Europe have
seen ?

The nominating convention is the natural and legit-
imate outgrowth of two features of the Constitution,
the restricted functions of Congress and the absolute
sovereignty of the people. It was soon perceived that
under the rule of party, a party must be united on its
candidate in order to have a prospect of success. There
was therefore need for a method of selecting the candi-
date which the whole of a party would recognize as fair
. and entitled to respect. At first the representatives of
the party in Congress assumed the right of nomination.
But it was presently felt that they were not entitled to
it, for they had not been chosen for any such purpose,
and the President was not constitutionally responsible to
them, but rather set up to check them. When the con-
gressional caucus had been discredited, the State legis-

596 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART IIL

latures tried their hands at nominations; but acting
irregularly, and with a primary regard to local senti-
ment, they failed to win obedience. It began to be seefi
that whom the people were to elect the people must also
nominate. Thus presently the tumultuous assemblies of
active politicians were developed into regular represen-
tative bodies, modelled after Congress, and giving to
the party in each State exactly the same weight in
nominating as the State possessed in voting. The
elaborate nominating scheme of primaries and conven-
tions which was being constructed for the purpose of
city, State, and congressional elections, was applied to
the election of the President, and the national conven-
tion was the result. We may call it an effort of nature
to fill the void left in America hy the absence of the
European parliamentary or cabinet system, under which
an executive is called into being out of the legislature
by the majority of the legislature. In the European
system no single act of nomination is necessary, because
the leader of the majority comes gradually to the top in
virtue of his own strength." In America there must be
a single and formal act: and this act myst emanate
from the people, since it is to them that the party leader,
when he becomes chief magistrate, will be responsible.
There is not quite so strong a reason for entrusting to —
the convention the function of declaring the aims and
tenets of the party in its platform, for this might pro-
perly be done by a caucus of the legislature. But as .
the President is, through his veto power, an independent

1 The nearest parallel to the American nominating system is the
election of the leader of a party by the Opposition in the House of Com-
mons, of which there has been only one instance, the choice of Lord Hart-
ington by the Liberal members in that House in 1875; and on that
occasion the other candidates withdrew before a vote was needed. What
the Americans call “ House caucuses,” i.e, meetings of a party in the larger
House of the legislature, are not uncommon in Enyland.

CHAP. LXXIII NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS 597

branch of the legislature, the moment of nominating him
is apt for a declaration of the doctrines, whereof the party
makes him the standargl-bearer.

What effects has the practice of nomination by con-
ventions had upon the public life of the country? Out
of several I select two. It makes political struggles
turh more upon men and less upon measures than
might have been expected in a country where equality is
so fully established, and the citizens are so keenly in-
terested in public questions. The victory of a party
in a presidential election depends upon its being unani-
mous in its support of a particular candidate. It must
therefore use every effort to find, not necessarily the
best man, but the man who will best unite it. In the
pursuit of him, it is distracted from its consideration
of the questions on which it ought to appeal to the
country, and may form its views on them hastily or
loosely. The convention is the only body authorized
to declare the tenets and practical programme of the
party. But the duty of declaring them is commonly
overshadowed by the other duty of choosing the candi-
date,.which naturally excites warmer feelings in the
hearts of actual or potential office-holders. Accordingly
delegates are chosen by local conventions rather as the
partisans of this or that aspirant than as persons of
political ability or moral weight ; and the function of
formulating the views of the party may be left to, and
ill-dscharged by, men of an inferior type.

A further result will have been foreseen by those who
have realized what these conventions are like. They are
monster meetings. Besides the eight hundred delegates
there are some ten to fourteen thousand spectators on the
floor and in the galleries. It goes without saying that
such a meeting is capable neither of discussing political

598 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

questions and settling a political programme, nor of
deliberately weighing the merits of rival aspirants for
the nomination. Its programme must be presented
to it cut and dry, and this is the work of a small
committee. In choosing a candidate, it must follow
a few leaders... And what sort of leaders do con-
ventions tend to produce? Two sorts—the intriguer
and the declaimer. There is the man who manipulates
delegates, and devises skilful combinations. There is
also the orator, whose physical gifts, courage, and readi-
ness enable him to browbeat antagonists, overawe the
chairman, and perhaps, if he be possessed of eloquence,
carry the multitude away in a fit of enthusiasm. For
men of wisdom and knowledge, not seconded by a com-
manding voice and presence, there is no demand, and
little chance of usefulness, in these tempestuous halls.
Why, however, it may also be asked, should conven-
tions be so pre-eminently tempestuous, considering that
they are not casual concourses, but consist of persons
duly elected, and are governed by a regular code of pro-
cedure? The reason may be found in the fact that in
them are united the two conditions which generate excite-
ment, viz. very large numbers and important issues to be
determined. In no other modern assemblies? do these
conditions edncur. Modern deliberative assemblies are
comparatively small—the House of Representatives has
only 325 members ; the French Chamber 584; while in

1 Hamilton had acutely remarked in 1788 that the larger an assembly
the greater is the power of a few in it. See Vol. I. p. 265.

2 In the ancient world the assemblies of great democratic cities like
Athens or Syracuse presented both these conditions; they had large
numbers present, and almost unlimited powers. But they were at any
rate permanent bodies, accustomed to meet frequently, composed of men
who knew one another, who respected certain leaders, and applauded the
same oratora. The American convention consists of men who come to-
gether once only in their lives, and then for a week or less.

CHAP, LXXIII NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS 599

the British House of Commons there is sitting space for
only 400. Large popular gatherings, on the other hand,
such as mass meetings, are excitable in virtue of their size,
but have nothing to do ‘but pass resolutions, and there is
seldom controversy over these, because such meetings are
attended only by those who agree with the summoners.
Buta national convention consists of more than eight
hundred delegates, as many alternates, and some twelve
thousand spectators. It is the hugest mass meeting the
world knows of. Not only, therefore, does the sympathy
of numbers exert an unequalled force, but this host, larger
than the army with which the Greeks conquered at
Marathon, has an issue of the highest and most exciting
nature to decide, an issue which quickens the pulse even
of those who read in cold blood afterwards how the votes
fell as the roll of States was called, and which thrills
those who see and listen, and, most of all, those who
are themselves concerned as delegates, with an intensity
of emotion surpassing, in proportion to the magnitude
of the issue, that which attends the finish of a well-
contested boat race. If you wish to realize the passionate
eagerness of an American convention, take the House
of Commons or the French Chamber during a division
which is to decide the fate of a ministry and a policy,
and raising the numbers present twenty-fold, imagine the
excitement twenty-fold hotter. Wanting those wonderful
scenes which a great debate and division in Parliament
provide the English with, America has evolved othexs
not less dramatic. The contrast between the two
countries is perhaps most marked in this, that in Parlia-
ment the strife is between two parties, in an American
Convention between the adherents of different leaders
belonging to the same party. We might have expected
that in the more democratic country more would turn

600 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

upon principles, less upon men. It is exactly the other
way. The struggle in a convention is over men, not
over principles.

These considerations may Serve to explain to a
European the strange phenomena of a convention. But
his inquiry probably extends itself to the electoral
campaign which follows. “Why,” he asks, “is the e¢on-
test so much longer, more strenuous, and more absorbing
than the congressional elections, or than any election
struggle in Europe, although Europe is agitated by
graver problems than now occupy America? And why
does a people externally so cool, stlf-contained, and
unimpulsive as the American work itself up into a
fever of enthusiasm over an issue of little permanent
importance between two men, neither of whom will do
much good or can do much harm ?”

The length of the contest is a survival. The Americans
themselves regret it, for it sadly interrupts both business
and pleasure. It is due to the fact that when communica-
tion was difficult over a rough and thinly settled country,
several months were needed to enable the candidates
and their orators to go round. Now railways and tele-
graphs have drawn the continent so much together that
five or six weeks would be suflicient. That the presi-
dential ele¢tion is fought more vehemently than con-
gressional elections seems due to its coming only half
as often; to the fact that the President is the dispenser
of Federal patronage, and to the habit formed in,days
when the President was the real head of the party, and
his action in foreign affairs was important, of looking on
his election as the great trial of party strength. Besides,
it is the choice of one officer by the whole country, a
supreme political act in which every voter has a share,
and the same share; an act which fills the whole of

CHAP, LXXIII NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS 601

the party in all of the States with the sense that it is
feeling and thinking and willing as one heart and mind.
This simaltaneity of effort, this concentration of interest
upon one person and one polling day, gives to the
struggle a sort of tension not to be looked for where a
number of elections of different persons are guing on in
as many different spots, nor always at the same time.
In congressional elections each constituency has to think
first of itself and its own candidate. In the presidential
elections all eyes are fixed on the same figure ; the same
personal as well as political issue is presented to the
nation. Each polling district in a State, each State in
the Union, emulates every other in the efforts it puts
forth to carry the party ticket.

To explain why the hard-headed self-possessed
Americans go so wild with excitement at election times is
a more difficult task. See what the facts are: There has
not been a single presidential candidate, since Abraham
Lincoln’s re-election in 1864 (always excepting General
Grant), of whom his friends could say that he had done
anything to command the gratitude of the nation. Some
of these candidates had been skilful party leaders, others
had served with eredit in the Civil War. None could
be called distinguished in the sense in which, I will not
say, Hamilton, Jefferson, Marshall, Webster, but J. Q.
Adams, Clay, Benton, Calhoun, Seward, Stanton, and
Chase, were distinguished men. However, let us take
Mr. Blaine and Mr. Cleveland. One had been Speaker
of the House, and was unquestionably a skilful debater
in Congress, an effective speaker on a platform, a man
socially attractive, never forgetting a face or a service.
The other had made a shrewd and upright Mayor of
Buffalo and Governor of New York State. Compare
the services rendered to the country by them, or by any

602 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

other candidate of recent times, with those of Mazzini,
Garibaldi, Cavour, and Victor Emmanuel to Italy, of
Bismarck and Moltke to Germany, even of Thiers and
Gambetta to France in her hour of peril. Yet the
enthusiasm. shown for Mr, Blaine (who seems to have
drawn out the precious fluid at a higher temperature
than his rival), the demonstrations made in his honeur
wherever he appeared, equalled anything done, in their
several countries, for these heroes of Italy, Germany, or
France. As for England, where two great political
leaders, towering far above their fellows, have of late
years excited the warmest admiration and the bitterest
dislike from friends and foes, imagine eight hundred
English barristers turning out from the Temple and
Lincoln’s Inn to walk in slow procession from London
Bridge to South Kensington, shouting themselves hoarse
for Gladstone or Disraeli !

In trying to account for this fact, it is well to begin
by taking the bull by the horns. Is the world right in
deeming the Americans a cool and sober people? The
American is shrewd and keen, his passion seldom obscures
his reason ; he keeps his head in moments when a French-
man, or an Italian, or even a German, would lose it. Yet
he is also of an excitable temper, with emotions capable
of being quickly and strongly stirred. That there is
no contradiction between these qualities appears from
the case of the Scotch, who are both more logical and
more cautious in_affairs than the English, but are. also
more enthusiastic, more apt to be swept away by a
passionate movement.’ Moreover, the Americans like
excitement. They like it for its own sake, and go

1 Sir Walter Scott remarks of Edinburgh, early in the eighteenth century,
that its mob was one of the fiercest in Europe. The history of the Cove-
nant from 1638 downwards is full of episodes which indicate how much
more excitable is Scotch than English blood.

CHAP, LXXIII NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS 603

wherever they can find it. They surrender themselves
to the enjoyment of this pleasure the more willingly
because it is comparatively rare, and relieves the level
tenor of their ordinary life. Add to this the further
delight which they find in any form of competition.
The passion which in England expresses itself in the
poyfular eagerness over a boat race or a horse race, ex-
tends more widely in America to every kind of rivalry
and struggle. The presidential election, in which two
men are pitted against one another over a four months’
course for the great prize of politics, stirs them like any
other trial of strength and speed; sets them betting on
the issue, disposes them to make efforts for a cause in
which their deeper feelings may be little engaged.

These tendencies are intensified by the vast area
over which the contest extends, and the enormous
multitude that bears a part in it. The American
imagination is peculiarly sensitive to the impression of
great size. “A big thing” is their habitual phrase of
admiration. In Europe, antiquity is what chiefly com-
mands the respect of some minds, novelty what rouses
the interest of others. Beyond the Atlantic, the sense
of immensity, the sense that the same thought and pur-
pose are animating millions of other men in sympathy
with himself, lifts a man out of himself, and sends
him into transports of eagerness and zeal about things
intrinsically small, but great through the volume of
human feeling they have attracted. It is not the pro-
foundity of an idea or emotion, but its lateral extension
which most quickly touches the American imagination.
For one man who can feel the former a hundred are
struck by the latter; and he who describes America
must remember that he has always to think first of the
masses.

t

|

604 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART IE j

These considerations may help to explain the cents
portion that strikes a European between the merits of
the presidential candidate and the blazing enthusiasra
which he evokes. It is not really given to him as an
individual, it is given to the party personified in him,
because he bears its banner, and its fervour is due, not
even so much to party passion as to the impressidhist
character of the ‘people, who desire to be excited, desire
to demonstrate, desire, as English undergraduates say, “to
run with the boats,” and cheer the efforts of the rowers.
As regards the details of the demonstrations, the parades
and receptions, the badges and brass bands and trium-
phal arches, any one can understand why the masses of
the people—those who in Europe would be called the
lower middle and working classes—should relish these
things, which break the monotony of their lives, and
give them a sense of personal participation in a great
movement. Even in London, least externally pictur-
esque among European cities, when the working men
turn out for a Hyde Park meeting they come marshalled
in companies under the banners of their trade unions or
other societies, carrying devices, and preceded by music.
They make a somewhat scrubby show, for England does
not know how to light up the dulness of her. skies and
streets by colour in costume or variety in design. But
the taste for display is there as it is in homan nature
everywhere. In England, the upper class is shy of join-
ing in any such.“ functions,” even when they have a
religious tinge. Its fastidiousness and sense of class
dignity are offended. But in America, the sentiment of
equality is so pervading that the rich and cultivated do
not think of scorning the popular procession ; or if some
do feel such scorn, they are careful to conceal it. The
habit of demonstrating with bands and banners and

cHap. “xxi =§ WOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS 605

emblems was formed in days when the upper class was
very small, and would not have dreamt of standing aloof
from anything which interested the crowd; and now,
when the rich and cultivated have grown to be as numer-
ous, and, in most respects, as fastidious as the parallel
class in Europe, the habit is too deeply rooted to be
shaken. Nobody thinks of sneering. To do as the
people do is a tribute to the people’s majesty. And the
thousand lawyers who shout “ James G. Blaine, O-h-i-o,”
as they march through the October mud of Broadway,
have no more sense that they are making themselves
ridiculous than the European noble who backs with
repeated obeisances out of the presence of his sovereign.

CHAPTER LXXIV
TYPES OF AMERICAN STATESMEN

As trees are known by their fruits, and as different
systems of government evidently tend to produce dif-
ferent types of statesmanship, it is pertinent to our
examination of the American party system to inquire
what are the kinds of statesmen which it engenders and
ripens to maturity. A democracy, not less than any
other form of government, needs great men to lead and
inspire the people. The excellence therefore of the
methods democracy employs may fairly enough be
tested by the excellence of the statesmen whom these
methods call forth. Europeans are wont to go farther,
and reason from the character of the statesmen to the
character of the people, a convenient process, because it
seems easier to know the careers and judge the merits
of persons than of nations, yet one not universally
applicable. In the free countries of Europe, the men
who take the lead in public affairs may be deemed fair
specimens of its best talent and character, and fair
types, possibly of the virtues of the nation, though the
temptations of politics are great, and certainly of its
practical gifts. But in two sorts of countries one can-
not so reason from the statesmen to the masses. In
despotic monarchies the minister is often merely the

cHaP,LxxIV. TYPES OF AMERICAN STATESMEN 607

king’s favourite, who has risen by unworthy arts, or, at
any rate, not by merit; and in a democracy where
birth and education give a man little advantage in
the race, a political career may have become so
unattractive as compared with other pursuits that the
finest or most ambitious spirits do not strive for its
prizes, but generally leave them to men of the second
order.

This second case is, as we have seen, to some extent
the case of America. We must not therefore take her
statesmen as types of the highest-or strongest American
manhood. The national qualities come out fully in
them, but not always in their best form. I speak of
the generations that have grown up since the great men
of the Revolution epoch died off. Some of those men
were the peers of the best European statesmen of the
time: one of them rises in moral dignity above all his
European contemporaries. The generation to which J. Q.
Adams, Jackson, Webster, Clay, Calhoun, and Benton
belonged is less impressive, perhaps because they failed
to solve a question which may have been too hard for
any one to solve. Yet the men I have mentioned were
striking personalities who would have made a figure
in any country. Few of the statesmen of the third or
Civil War period enjoyed more than a local reputation
when it began, but in its course several of them de-
veloped remarkable powers, and one became a national
hero. The fourth generation is now upon the stage.
The Americans confess that not many who belong to it
have as yet won fame. The times, they remark, are
comparatively quiet. What is wanted is not so much
an impassioned popular leader nor a great philosophic
legislator as men who will administer the affairs of the
nation with skill and rectitude, and who, fortified by

608 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

careful study and observation, will grapple with the
economic problems which the growth of the country
makes urgent. I admit this, but, think that much must
also be ascribed to the character of the party system
which, as we have seen, is unfavourable to the develop-
ment of the finest gifts. Let us note what are the
types which that system displays to us.

In such countries as England, France, Germany,
and Italy there is room and need for five sorts of
statesmen. Men are wanted for the management of
foreign and colonial policy, men combining the talents
of a diplomatist with a wide outlook over the world’s
horizon. The needs of social and economic reform,
grave in old countries with the mistakes of the past to
undo, require a second kind of statesman with an apti-
tude for constructive legislation. Thirdly there is the
‘administrator who can manage a department with
diligence and skill and economy. Fourthly comes the
parliamentary tactician, whose function it is to under-
stand men, who frames cabinets and is dexterous in
humouring or spurring a representative assembly.’
Lastly we have the leader of the masses, who, whether
or no he be a skilful parliamentarian, thinks rather of
the country than of the chamber, knows how to watch
and rouse tHe feelings of the multitude, and rally a great
party to the standard which he bears aloft. The first
of these has no need for eloquence ; the second and third
can get on withoyt it ; to the fourth it is almost, yet not
absolutely, essential ; it is the life breath of the fifth.’

1 Englishmen will think of the men who framed the new Poor Law as
specimens of the second class, of Sir G. C. Lewis as a specimen of the
third, of Lord Palmerstun as a specimen of the fourth. The aptitudes of
the third and fourth were united in Sir Robert Peel.

2 It need hardly be said that the characteristic attributes of these
several types are often found united in the same person ; indeed no one
can rise high who does not combine at least two of the fuur latter.

cHAP,LxxIV ZTYPES OF AMERICAN STATESMEN 609

Let us turn to America. In America there are few
occasions for the first sort of statesman, while the condi-
tidns of a Federal government, with its limited legislative
sphere, are unfavourable to the second, as frequently
changing cabinets are to the third. It is chiefly for
persons of the fourth and fifth classes we must look.
Persons of those classes we shall find, but in a different
shape and guise from what they would assume in
Europe. American politics seem at this moment to tend
to the production of two types, the one of whom may
be called par excellence the man of the desk or of the
legislature, the other the man of the convention and
the stump. They resemble the fourth and fifth of our
European types, but with instructive differences.

The first of these types is usually a shrewd, cool,
hard-headed man of business. He is such a man as one
would find successful in the law or in commerce if he
had applied his faculties to those vocations. He has
mostly been, is often still, a practising counsel and
attorney. He may lack imagination and width of
view; but he has a tight grip of facts, a keen insight
into men, and probably also tact in dealing with them.
That he has come to the front shows him to possess a
resolute and tenacious will, for without it he must have
been trodden down in the fierce competition of a political
career. His independence is limited by the necessity
of keeping step with his party, for isolated action counts
for little in America, but the tendency to go with one’s
party is so inbred there that a man feels less humiliated
by waiving his private views than would be the case in
Europe. Such compliance does not argue want of
strength. As to what is called “culture,” he has often
at least a susceptibility to it, with a wish to acquire
it which, if he has risen from humble beginnings, may

VOL. II 2R

610 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

contrast oddly with the superficial roughness of his
manner. He is a ready and effective rather than a
polished speaker, and is least agreeable when, forsaking
the solid ground of his legal dr administrative know-
ledge, he attempts the higher flights of eloquence.

Such a man does not necessarily make his first
reputation in an assembly. He may begin as governor
of a State or mayor of a large city, and if he earns a
reputation there, can make pretty sure of going on to
Congress if he desires it. In any case, it is in adminis-
tration and the legislative work which deals with ad-
ministration that he wins his spurs. The sphere of
local government is especially fitted to develop such
talents, and to give that peculiar quality I have been
trying to describe. It makes able men of affairs;
men fit for the kind of work which needs the com-
bination of a sound business head and the power of
working along with others. One may go farther and
say, that this sort of talent is the talent which during
the last half century has been most characteristic of the
American people. Their greatest achievements have
lain in the internal development of their country by
administrative shrewdness, ingenuity, promptitude, and
an unequalled dexterity in applying the principle of
association, whether by means of private corporations
or of local public or quasi-public organisms. These
national characteristics reappear in Federal politics,
not always accompanied by the largeness of vision and
mastery of the political and economic sciences which that
wider sphere demands.

The type I am trying to describe is less brilliant
than those modern Europe has learned to admire in men
like Bismarck or Cavour, Thiers or Gambetta, perhaps
one may add, Tisza or Minghetti. But then the conditions

cHAP,LxxIvV. TYPES OF AMERICAN STATESMEN 611
agp

required for the rise of the last-named men do not exist
in America, nor is her need for them pressing. America
Would have all she wants if such statesmen as I have
described were more tumerous; and if a philosophic
mind, capable of taking in the whole phenomena of
transatlantic society, and propounding comprehensive
solufions for its problems, were more common among
the best of them. Persons of this type have hitherto
been most frequently found in the Senate, to which they
usually rise from the House of Representatives or from a
State legislature. They are very useful there; indeed,
it is they who have given it that, apparently now de-
clining, authority which it has enjoyed.

The other kind of statesman is the product of two
factors which give to American politics their peculiar
character, viz. an enormous multitude of voting citizens
and the existence of a wonderful network of party
organizations for the purpose of selecting and carrying
candidates for office. To move the masses, a man must
have the gifts of oratory ; to rule party committees, he
must be a master of intrigue. The stump and the
committee-room are his sphere. There is a great deal
of campaign speaking to be done at State elections, at
congressional elections, above all, in presidential cam-
paigns. It does not flow in such a perennial torrent as
in England, for England has since 1876 become the
most speech-flooded country in the world, but it is
more copious than in France, Italy, or Germany. The
audiences are less ignorant than those of Europe,
but their critical standard is not higher; and whereas
in England it is Parliament that forms most speakers
and creates the type of political oratory, Congress
renders no such service to America. There is there-
fore, I think, less presumption in America than in Europe

612 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

that the politician who makes his way by oratory is
a man either of real eloquence or of vigorous thinking
power. Able, however, he must be. He is sure to have
fluency, a power of touching eitlfer the emotions or the
imagination, a command of sonorous rhetoric. Probably
he has also humour and a turn for quick retort. In fact,
he must have the arts—we all know what they are—
which please the multitude; arts not blamable in
themselves, but needing to be corrected by occasional
appearances before a critical audience. These arts
joined to a powerful voice and a forcible personality
will carry a man far. If he can join to them a
ready and winning address, a geniality of manner if
not of heart, he becomes what is called magnetic.
Now, magnetism is among the highest qualities which an
American popular leader can possess. Its presence may
bring him to the top. Its absence may prevent him
from getting there. It makes friends for him wherever
he goes. It immensely enhances his powers in the
region of backstairs politics.

For besides the visible work on the stump, there is
the invisible work of the committee-room, or rather of
the inner conclave, whose resolves are afterwards regis-
tered in the committee, to be still later laid before the
convention.’ The same talent for intrigue which in
monarchies or oligarchies is spent within the limits of a
court or a knot of ruling families, here occupies itself
with bosses and rings and leaders of political groups.
To manipulate these men and groups, to know their
weaknesses, their ambitions, their jealousies, to play
upon their hopes and fears, attaching some by promises,
entrapping others through their vanity, browbeating
others into submission, forming combinations in which
each partisan’s interest is so bound up with that of the

cHAP., LxxIV. TYPES OF AMERICAN STATESMEN 613

aspiring statesman that he is sure to stand faithfully by
his chief—all this goes a long way to secure advance-
ment under the party system.

It may be thought that between such aptitudes and
the art of oratory there is no necessary connection.
There are intriguers who are nothing but intriguers,
useless on the stump or on the platform of a conven-
tion. But fluent oratory, as distinguished from eloquence,
is an art which most able men can acqtiire with practice.
In popularly-governed countries it is as common as
it is worthless. And a link between the platform
and the committee-room is found in the quality of
magnetism. The magnetic man attracts individuals just
as he captivates masses. “Where oratory does not need
either knowledge or reflection, because the people are
not intent upon great questions, or because the
parties evade them, where power of voice and skill
in words, and ready sympathy with the feelings and
prejudices of the crowd, are enough to command the
ear of monster meetings, there the successful speaker
will pass for a statesman. He will seem a fit man to
put forward for high office, if he can but persuade the
managers to run him; and therefore the other side of
his activity is spent among and upon the managers.

It sometimes happens that the owner of these gifts
is also a shrewd, keen, practical man, so that the first
type is blended with the second. Nor is there anything
to prevent the popular speaker and skilled intriguer
from also possessing the higher attributes of statesman-
ship. This generation has seen the conjunction both in
America and in France. But the conjunction is rare; not
only because these last-named attributes are themselves
rare, but because the practice of party intrigue is un-
favourable to their development. It narrows a man’s

614 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

mind and distorts his vision. His eye, accustomed to
the obscurity of committee-rooms, cannot range over the
wide landscape of national questions. Habits of argu-
ment formed on the stump seldom fit a man to guide
a legislature. In none of the greatest public men that
have adorned America do we discern the features of
the type just sketched. Hamilton was no intriguer,
though he oncé executed a brilliant piece of strategy.’
Neither was Clay or Webster. Jefferson, who added an
eminent talent for party organization and management
to his powers as a thinker and writer, was no speaker ;
and one might go through the whole list without
finding one man of the first historic rank in whom
the art of handling committees and nominating con-
ventions was developed to that pitch of excellence to
which far inferior men have now brought it. National
conventions offer the best field for the display of the
peculiar kind of talent which this type of statesman
exhibits. To rouse eight hundred delegates and ten
thousand spectators needs powerful lungs, a striking
presence, address, and courage. A man capable enough
in Congress may fail in this arena. But less than half
the work of a convention is done on the public stage.
Delegates have to be seen in private, combinations
arranged, mines laid and those of the opponent dis-
covered and countermined, a distribution of the good
things in the gift of the party settled with swarms of
hungry aspirants. Easy manners, tact, and suppleness,
a reputation for remembering and requiting good turns
and ill turns—in fact, many a the qualities which make
a courtier are the qualities which the intrigues of a con-
vention require, develop, and perfect.

* 1 In agreeing that the national capital should be placed in the South
in return for the support of two Southern men to his plan for the settle-
ment of the public debt.

cHap. Lxxiv. ZYPES OF AMERICAN STATESMEN 615

Besides such causes inherent in the present party
system as check the growth of first-class statesmen in
America, there are two springing from her constitutional
arrangements which must not be forgotten. One is the
disconnection of Congress from the executive. How
this works to prevent true leadership has been already
explained.’ Another is the existence of States, each of
which has a political life and distinct party organization
of its own. Men often rise to eminence ina State without
making their mark in national politics. They may be-
come virtual masters of the State either in a legitimate
way by good service to it or in an illegitimate way as its
bosses. In either case they have to be reckoned with
when a presidential election comes round, and are able,
if the State be a doubtful one, to dictate their terms.
Thus they push their way to the front without having
ever shown the qualities needed for guiding the nation ;
they crowd out better men, and they make party leader-
ship and management even more of a game than under
the spoils system and the convention system it naturally
becomes. The State vote comes to be in national politics
what the ward vote is in city politics, a commodity which
a boss or ring can dispose of ; the power of a man who can
influence it is greater than his personal merits entitle
him to; and the kind of skill which can make friends
of these State bosses and bring them into a “ pool” or
working combination becomes valuable, if not essential,
to a*national party leader. In fact, the condition of
things is not wholly unlike that of England in the
middle of last century, when a great borough-monger
like the Duke of Newcastle was a power in the country,
who must be not only consulted and propitiated at every
crisis, but even admitted to a ministry if it was to secure

1 See Chapters XXI. XXV. and XXVI. in Vol. L

616 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

a parliamentary majority. When a crisis rouses the

nation, the power of these organization-mongers or vote-
owners vanishes, just as that of the English borough-
owning magnate was checked on like occasions, pecaites
it is only wien the people of a State are listless that
their Boss is potent. Unable to oppose a real wish of
the masses, he can use their vote only by professing
obedience while guiding it in the direction of the men
or the schemes he favours.

This remark suggests another. I have remarked
that among statesmen of the first of the two types
described there are always ability and integrity sufficient
for carrying on the regular business of the country.
Men with those still higher gifts which European
nations look for in their prime ministers (though they
do not always find them) have of late years been rare.
The Americans admit the fact, but explain it by argu-
ing that there has been no crisis needing those gifts.
Whether this is true ‘may be doubted. Men of con-
structive statesmanship were surely needed in the
period after the Civil War: and it is possible that a
higher statesmanship might have averted the war itself.
However, I am giving the view the Americans take.
When the hour comes, they say, it will bring the man.
It brought Abraham Lincoln. When he was nominated
by the famous convention of 1860 his name had been
little heard of beyond his own State. But he rose at
once to the level.of the situation, and that not merely
by virtue of strong clear sense, but by his patriotic
steadfastness and noble simplicity of character. If this
was luck, it was just the kind of luck which makes a
nation hopeful of its future, and inclined to overlook the
faults of the methods by which it finds its leaders.

CHAPTER LXXYV.
WHAT THE PEOPLE THINK OF IT

THE European reader who has followed thus far the
description I have attempted to give of the working
of party politics, of the nominating machine, of the
spoils system, of elections and their methods, of venality
in some legislative and municipal bodies, may have been
struck by its dark lines. He sees in this new country
evils which savour of Old World corruption, even of Old
World despotism. He is reminded sometimes of England
under Sir Robert Walpole, sometimes of Russia under
the Ozar Nicholas. Assuming, as a European is apt to
do, that the working of political machinery fairly reflects
the temper, ideas, and moral standard of the governing
class, and knowing that America is governed by the
whole people, he may form a low opinion of the people.
Perhaps he leaps to the conclusion that they are corrupt.
Perhaps he more cautiously infers that they are heed-
less.» Perhaps he conceives that the better men despair
of politics and wash their hands of it, while the mass of
the people, besotted with a self-confidence born of their
rapid material progress, are blind to the consequences
which the degradation of public life must involve. All
these views one may hear expressed by persons who
have visited America, and of course more confidently

618 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART Il

by persons who have not. It is at any rate a plausible
view that whatever public opinion there may be in
America upon religion, or morality, or literature, there
can be little public opinion about politics, and that the
leading minds, which in all countries shape and direct
opinion, have in America abdicated that function, and
left the politicians to go their own way.

So far is this from being the truth that there is no
country where public opinion is stronger or more active
than in the United States, none where it has the field
so completely to itself, because aristocracies like those of
Europe do not exist, and because the legislative bodies
are relatively less powerful and less independent. It
may seem a paradox to add that public opinion is on
the whole wholesome and upright. Nevertheless, this
also is true.

Here we are brought face to face with the cardinal
problem of American politics. Where political life is
all-pervading, can practical politics be on a lower level
‘than public opinion? How can a free people which
tolerates gross evils be a pure people? To explain this
is the hardest task which one who describes the United
States sees confronting him. Experience has taught
me, as it teaches every traveller who seeks to justify
when he returns to Europe his faith in the American
people, that it is impossible to get Englishmen at any
rate to realize the co-existence of phenomena so unlike
those of their own country, and to draw the inferences
which those phenomena suggest to one who has seen
them with his own eyes. Most English admirers of
popular government, when pressed with the facts, deny
them. But I have already admitted them.

To present a just picture of American public
opinion one must cut deeper than the last few chapters

cHaP,Lxxv WHAT THE PEOPLE THINK OF IT 619

have done, and try to explain the character and con-
ditions of opinion itself beyond the Atlantic, the mental
habits from which it springs, the organs through which
it speaks. This is what I propose to do in the chapters
which follow. Meanwhile it is well to complete the
survey of the actualities of party politics by stating in
a purely positive, or as the Germans say “ objective,”
way, what the Americans think about the various
features of their system portrayed in these last chapters,
about the Spoils system and the Machine, about corrup-
tion and election frauds. I omit attempts at explana-
tion; I seek only to sum up the bare facts of the case
as they strike one who listens to conversation and reads
the newspapers.

Corruption.—Most of it the people, by which I
mean not the masses but all classes of the people, do
not see. The proceedings of Congress excite less in-
terest than those of legislative chambers do in France
or England. Venality occurs chiefly in connection
with private legislation, and even in Washington very
little is known about this, the rather as committees
deliberate with closed doors. Almost the only people
who possess authentic information as to what goes on
in the Capitol are railroad men, land speculators, and
manufacturers who have had to lobby in connection
with the tariff. The same remark applies, though less
forcibly, to the venality of certain ‘State legislatures.
A farmer of Western New York may go through a long
life without knowing how his representative behaves at
Albany. Albany is not within his horizon."

The people see little and they beli¢ve less. True,
the party newspapers accuse their opponents of such

1 This remark does not apply to the malversations of officials in
cities like New York or Philadelphia. These nobody can help knowing.

620 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

offences, but the newspapers are always reviling some-
body ; and it is because the words are so strong that
the tale has little meaning. For instance, in a recent
presidential contest charges (as to whose truth I of
course express no opinion) affecting the honour of
one of the candidates’ were brought against him by
journals supporting the other candidate, and evidence
tendered in support of them. The immense majority
of his supporters did not believe these charges. They
read their own newspapers chiefly, which pooh-poohed
the charges. They could not be at the trouble of sifting
the evidence, against which their own newspapers offered
counter arguments, so they quietly ignored them. I do
not say that they disbelieved. Between belief and dis-
belief there is an intermediate state of mind.

The habit of hearing charges promiscuously bandied
to and fro, but seldom probed to the bottom, makes
men heedless. So does the fact that prosecutions
frequently break down even where there can be little
doubt as to the guilt of the accused. A general im-
pression is produced that things are not as they should
be, yet the line between honest men and dishonest men
is not sharply drawn, because those who are probably
honest are attacked, and those who are almost certainly
dishonest escape punishment. The state of mind of the
average citizen is a state rather of lassitude than of
callousness, He comes to think that politicians have a
morality of their-own, and must be judged by it. «It is
not his morality ; but because it is professional, he does
not fear that it will infect other plain citizens like
himself.

Some people shrug their shoulders and say that
politicians have always been so. Others, especially
among the cultivated classes, will tell you that they wash

cHaP. LXXv WHAT THE PEOPLE THINK OF IT + 621

their hands of the whole affair. “It is only the politicians
what can you expect from the politicians?” But there
afe also many who are shocked, and who, as already
observed, exert themselves through the press, and by
agitating where they see an opportunity of catching the
public ear, to purify politics. Leaving out the cynics
on the one side, and the perfectionist reformers on the
other, and looking at the bulk of ordinary citizens, the
fair conclusion from the facts is that many do not
realize the evil who ought to realize it and be alarmed,
and that those who do realize it are not sufficiently
alarmed, They take it too easily. Yet now and then
when roused they will inflict severe penalties on the
givers and receivers of bribes."

Election Frauds.— As these are offences against
popular government and injure the opposite party, they
excite stronger, or at least more general disapproval
than do acts of venality, from which only the public
purse suffers, No one attempts to palliate them ; but
it is hard to prove, and therefore hard to punish or
suppress them. Legislative remedies have been tried,
and fresh ones are constantly being tried. If people
are less indignant than they would be in England,
it is because they are less surprised. The evil is, how-
ever, not widespread, chiefly occurring in large cities.
There is one exception to the general condemnation
of the practice. In the Southera States negro suffrage
prodyced, during the few years of “ carpet-bagging”
and military government which followed the war,
incredible mischief. When these States recovered full
self-government, and the former “rebels” were readmitted

1 A recent instance is afforded in the punishment of the New
York aldermen who sqld the right of laying a horse-car line in Broad-
way. See also Chapter LXXXIX. in Vol. IIT. on the Philadelphia
Gas Ring.

622 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

to the suffrage, the upper class of the white population
“took hold” again, and in order, as they expressed it,
“to save civilization,” resolved that come what might the
negro and white Republican vote’should not, by obtain-
ing a majority in the State legislatures, be in a position
to play these pranks further. The negroes were at first
roughly handled or, to use the technical term, “ bull-
dosed,” but as this excited anger at the North, it was
found better to attain the desired result by manipulating
the elections in various ways, “using no more fraud than
was necessary in the premises,” as the pleaders say. As
the negroes are obviously unfit for the suffrage, these
services to civilization have been leniently regarded
even at the North, and are justified at the South by men
quite above the suspicion of personal corruption.

The Machine.—The perversion by Rings and Bosses
of the nominating machinery of primaries and conven-
tions excites a disgust whose strength is proportioned to
the amount of fraud and trickery employed, which of
course is not great when the “good citizens” make no
counter exertions. The disgust is everywhere less than
a European expects, for it is mingled with amusement.
The Boss is a sort of joke, albeit an expensive joke.
“ After all,” people say, “it is our own fault. If we all
went to the primaries, or if we all voted an Independent
ticket, we could make an end of the boss.” There is an
odd sort of fatalism in their view of democracy. If a
thing exists in a free country, it has a right to exist, for
it exists by the leave of the people, who may be deemed
to acquiesce in what they do not extinguish.

The Spoils System.—As to favouritism in patronage
and spoils, I have already explained why the average
citizen tolerates both. He has been accustomed to think
rotation in office a recognition of equality, and a check

cHap.uxxv WHAT THE PEOPLE THINK OF IT 623

on the growth of that old bugbear, an “ aristocracy of
office-holders.” He does not see how favouritism can
be prevented, for competitive examinations have seemed
pedantic. Usage has Sanctioned a certain amount of
jobbery, so you must not be too hard on a man who
does no more than others have done before him.

Ihe conduct, as well as the sentiment, of the people
is so much better than the practice of politicians that it
is hard to understand why the latter are judged so
leniently. No ordinary citizen, much less a man of
social standing and high education, would do in his
private dealings what many politicians do with little fear
of disgrace. The career of the latter is not destroyed,
while the former would lose the respect of his neighbours,
and probably his chances in the world. Europe presents
no similar contrast between the tone of public and that
of private life.

There is, however, one respect in which a comparison
of the political morality of the United States with that
of England does injustice to the former.

The English have two moralities for public life,
the one conventional or ideal, the other actual. The
conventional finds expression not merely in the: pulpit,
but also in the speeches of public men, in the
articles in leading newspapers and magazines. Assum-
ing the normal British statesman to be patriotic,
disinterested, truthful, and magnanimous, it treats
every fault as a dereliction from a well-settled standard
of duty, a quite exceptional dereliction which disentitles
the culprit to the confidence even of his own party, but
does not affect the generally high tone of British political
life. The actual morality, as one gathers it in the
lobbies of the legislative chambers, or the smoking-rooms
of political cluks, or committee-rooms at contested elec-

624 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART Il

tions, ‘is a different affair. It regards (or has till very
lately regarded) the bribery of voters as an offence, only
when detection has followed ; it assumes that a minister
will use his patronage to strengthen his party or him-
self; it smiles at election pledges as the gods smiled at
lovers’ vows; it defends the abuse of parliamentary
rules; it tolerates equivocations and misleading state-
ments proceeding from an official even when they have
not the excuse of state necessity.

Perhaps this is only an instance of the tendency in
all professions to develop a special code of rules less
exacting than those of the community at large. As a
profession holds some things to be wrong, because con-
trary to its etiquette, which are in themselves harmless,
so it justifies other things in themselves blamable. In
the mercantile world, agents play sad tricks on their prin-
cipals in the matter of commissions, and their fellow
merchants are astonished when the courts of law compel
the ill-gotten gains to be disgorged. At the English uni-
versities, everybody who took a Master of Arts degree
was, until lately, required to sign the Thirty-nine Articles
of the Church of England. Hundreds of men signed who
did not believe, and admitted that they did not believe,
the dogmas of this formulary; but nobody in Oxford
thought the Worse of them for a solemn falsehood. We
all know what latitude, as regards truth, a “scientific
witness,” honourable enough in his private life, permits
himself in the witness box. Each profession indulges in
deviations from the established rule of morals, but takes
pains to conceal these deviations from the general public,
and continues to talk about itself and its traditions with
an air of unsullied virtue. What each profession does
for itself most individual men do for themselves. They
judge themselves by themselves, that is to say, by their

cHap. xxv WHAT THE PEOPLE THINK OF IT 625

surroundings and their own past acts, and thus erect in
the inner forum of conscience a more lenient code for
their own transgressions than that which they apply to
others. We all know that a fault which a man has often
committed seems to him slighter than one he has refrained
from and sees others committing. Often he gets others
to take the same view. “It is only his way,” they say ;
“it’is just like Roger.” The same thing happens with
nations. The particular forms in which faults like cor-
ruption, or falsehood, or unscrupulous partisanship have
appeared in the recent political history of a nation
shock its moral sense less than similar offences which
have taken a different form in some other country.

Now England, while accustomed to judge her own
statesmen, as well as her national behaviour generally,
by the actual standard, and therefore to overlook many
deflections from the ideal, always applies the conven-
tional or absolute standard to other countries, and
particularly to America, which has been subjected to
that censorious scrutiny which the children of an emi-
grant brother receive on their return from aunts and
uncles.

How then does America deal with herself ?

She is so far lenient to her own defects asto judge them
by her past practice ; that is to say, she is less shocked
by certain political vices, because these vices are familiar,
than might have been expected from the generally high
tone of her people. But so far from covering things up
as the English do, professing a high standard, and apply-
ing it rigorously to other countries, but leniently to her
own offspring, she gives an exceptionally free course to
publicity of all kinds, and allows writers and speakers
to paint the faults of her politicians in strong, not to say
exaggerated, colours. Such excessive candour is not an

VOL. If 28

626 THE PARTY SYSTEM PART III

unmixed gain. It removes the restraint which the main-
tenance of a conventional standard imposes. There is
almost too little of make-believe about Americans 4n
public writing, as well as in private talk, and their dis-
like to humbug, hypocrisy, and what they call English
pharisaism, not only tends to laxity, but has made them
wrong in the eyes of the Old World their real moral
sensitiveness. Accustomed to see constant lip-service
rendered to a virtue not intended to be practised,
Europeans naturally assume that things are in the
United States several shades darker than they are
painted, and interpret frankness as cynicism. Were
American politics judged by the actual and not the
conventional standard of England, the contrast between
the demerits of the politicians and the merits of the
people would be less striking. ,

APPENDIX

NOTE to CHAPTER XLIX

Specimens of Provisions in State Constitutions limiting the taring and
borrowing powers of State Legislatures and local authorities}

ARKANSAS: ConsTITUTION OF 1874

ARTICLE XVI. Section 1. Neither the State nor any city,
county, town, or other municipality in this State shall ever loan its
credit for any purpose whatever. Nor shall any county, city, town,
or other municipality ever issue any interest bearing evidences of
indebtedness, except such bonds as may be authorized by law to
provide for and secure the payment of the present existing indebted-
ness, and the State shall never issue any interest-bearing treasury
warrants or scrip.

Section 7. No city, town, or other municipal corporation other
than provided for in this article, shall levy or collect a larger rate
of taxation in any one year on the property thereof than one half of
one per centum of the value of such property as ansessed for State
taxation during the preceding year.

COLORADO: CoNnsTITUTION oF 1876

ArtTIcLE XI. Section 6. No county shall contract any debt
by loan in any form, except for the purpose of erecting necessary
public buildings, making or repairing public roads and bridges ; and
such indebtedness contracted in any one year shall not exceed the
rates upon the taxable property in such county following, to wit:

1 See also Constitution of California, post, Art. xi. $18, and Art. xvi.

628 THE STATE GOVERNMENTS APPENDIX

counties in which the assessed valuation of taxable property shall
exceed five millions of dollars, one dollar and fifty cents on each
thousand dollars thereof ; counties in which such valuation shall pe
less than five millions of dollars, threg dollars on each thousand
dollars thereof; and the aggregate amount of indebtedness of any
county, for all purposes, exclusive of debts contracted before the
adoption of this Constitution, shall not at any time exceed twice
the amount above herein limited, unless when, in manner provided
by law, the question of incurring such debt shall, at a general “elec-
tion, be submitted to such of the qualified electors of such county
as in the year last preceding such election shall have paid a tax
upon property assessed to them in such county, and a majority of
those voting thereon shall vote in favour of incurring the debt ; but
the bonds, if any be issued therefor, shall not run less than ten
years ; and the aggregate amount of debt so contracted shall not at
any time exceed twice the rate upon the valuation last herein men-
tioned: Provided, that this section shall not apply to counties
having a valuation of less than one million of dollars.

Section 7. No debt by loan in any form shall be contracted by
any school district for the purpose of erecting and furnishing school
buildings or purchasing grounds, unless the proposition to create
such debt shall first be submitted to such qualified electors of the
districts as shall have paid a school tax therein in the year néxt
preceding such election, and a majority of those voting thereon shall
vote in favour of incurring such debt.

Section 8. No city or town shall contract any debt by loan in
any form, except by means of an ordinance, which shall be irrepeal-
able until the indebtedness therein provided for shall have been
fully paid or discharged, specifying the purposes to which the funds
to be raised shall be applied, and providing for the levy of a tax,
not exceeding twelve mills on each dollar of valuation of taxable
property within such city or town, sufficient to pay the annual
interest and extinguish the principal of such debt within fifteen,
but not less than~ten years from the creation thereof; and such
tax, when collected, shall be applied only to the purposes in such
ordinance specified until the indebtedness shall be paid or dis-
charged ; but no such debt shall be created unless the question of
incurring the same shall, at a regular election for councilmen, alder-
men, or officers of such city or town, be submitted to a vote of such
qualified electors thereof as shall, in the year next preceding, have

APPENDIX EXTRACTS FROM CONSTITUTIONS 629

paid a property-tax therein, and a majority of those voting on the
question, by ballot deposited in a separate ballot box, shall vote in
favour of creating such debt ; but the aggregate amount of debt so
created, together with the debt existing at the time of such election,
shall not at any time exceed three per cent of the valuation last
aforesaid. Debts contracted for supplying water to such city or
town are excepted from the operation of this section.

ILLINOIS: ConstiruTion oF 1870

Article IX. Section 8. County authorities shall never assess
taxes, the aggregates of which shall exceed seventy-five cents per one
hundred dollars valuation, except for the payment of indebtedness
existing at the adoption of this Constitution, unless authorized by a
vote of the people of the county.

Section 12. No county, city, township, school district, or other
municipal corporation shall be allowed to become indebted in any
manner or for any purpose to an amount, including existing indebted-
ness, in the aggregate exceeding five per centum on the value of the
taxable property therein, to be ascertained by the last assessment
for the State and county taxes previous to the incurring of such
indebtedness. .

Any county, city, school district, or other municipal corporation
incurring any indebtedness as aforesaid, shall, before or at the time
of doing so, provide for the collection of a direct annual tax sufficient
to pay the interest on such debt as it falls due, and also to pay
and discharge the principal thereof within twenty years from the
time of contracting the same.

PENNSYLVANIA: ConstITUTION oF 1873

Article IX. Section 8. The debt of any county, city, borough,
township, school district, or other municipality or other incorpor-
ated district, except as herein provided, shall never exceed seven per
centum upon the assessed value of the taxable property therein,
nor shall any such municipality or district incur any new debt or
increase its indebtedness to an amount exceeding two per centum
upon such assessed valuation of property without the assent of the
electors thereof at a public election.

630 THE PARTY SYSTEM APPENDIX

NEW YORE: ConsTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT OF 1884
(to Art. viii. § 11 of Constitution of 1846)

No county containing a city of o¥er one hundred thousand
inhabitants, or any such city, shall be allowed to become indebted
for any purpose or in any manner to an amount which, including
existing indebtedness, shall exceed ten per centum of the assessed
valuation of the real estate of such county or city subject to taxagion.

The amount hereafter to be raised by tax for county or city
purposes in any county containing a city of over one hundred
thousand inhabitants, or any such city of this State, in addition to
providing for the principal and interest of existing debt, shall not
in the aggregate exceed in any one year two per centum of the
assessed valuation of the real personal estate of such county or city.

NOTE -ro CHAPTER LXI

EXPLANATION (BY MR. G. BRADFORD) OF THE NOMINATING MACHINERY
AND ITS PROCEDURE IN THE STATE OF MASSACHUSETTS !

1. Ward and City Committees—The city is divided into wards
by act of the city council prescribed by the legislature (number of
wards in the city of Boston, twenty-five). Each ward in its primary
meetings appoints a ward committee of five for the party: that is,
the Republican primary appoints a Republican, and the Democratic
primary a Democratic committee with varying number of members.
This committee attends to the details of elections, such as printing
and distributing notices and posters, and also ballots, canvassing
voters, collecting and disbursing money, etc. The ward primaries
nominate candidates for the common council of the city (consist-
ing of seventy-two members), who are elected in and must be
residents of the ward. The several ward committees constitute
the city committee, which is thus a large body (practically a conven-
tion), and represents all the wards. The city committee chooses:
from its members a president, secretary, and treasurer, and each
ward committee chooses one of its members as a member of a general
executive committee, one for a general finance committee, and one for
a general printing committee. The city committee formerly, acting as

1 Copyright by Gamaliel Bradford, 1888.

APPENDIX NOMINATING MACHINERY 631
a convention, nominated the party candidates for the elective offices,
which are now the mayor, the aldermen (twelve chosen at large
over the city), the members of the school committee, and the street
commissioners. The Demécratic city committee does this still ;
but much dissatisfaction was caused among the Republicans by the
fact that wards which had but very few Republican voters had an
equal share of power in the city committee, and therefore in making
nominations. (It will be seen that in organizing the national con-
vention a similar difficulty has been encountered.) The Republican
city committee has therefore ceased to make nominations, but calls
upon the wards to send delegates, in proportion to their Republican
vote, to a general convention for the nomination of candidates.
The party lines are, however, very loosely drawn, especially in
cities outside of Boston, and anybody may nominate candidates
with chance of success proportional to his efforts.

In the towns as apart from the cities, the people, in primary of
each party, elect a town committee which corresponds to the ward
committees of the city. The town and city committees call the
primaries which elect their successors ; and thus the system is kept
alive. The city committee may by vote modify the structure, mode
of election and functions, both of itself and of the ward committees,
but in the town this power lies with the caucus or primary. The
above account applies to the city of Boston, but the principles are
substantially the same throughout the cities of Massachusetts, the
main difference being in thoroughness of organization.

2. County—The county is much less important in New England
than in any other part of the country. There are to be chosen,
however, county commissioners (three in number, one retiring each
year, having charge of roads, jails, houses of correction, registry of
deeds, and, in part, of the courts), county treasurer, registrar of
deeds, registrar of probate, district attorney, and sheriff. These
candidates are nominated by party conventions of the county, called
by a Committee elected by the last county convention. The dele-
gates are selected by ward and town primaries at the same time
with other delegates.

3. State—First as to representatives to State legislature, 240
in number. The Staie is districted as nearly as may be in propor-
tion to population. If a ward of acity, or a single town, is entitled
to a representative, the party candidate is nominated in the primary,
and must be by the Constitution (of the State) a resident in the dis-

632 THE PARTY SYSTEM APPENDIX

trict, If two or more towns, or two or more wards send a repre-
sentative in common, the candidate is nominated in cities by a joint
caucus of the wards interested called by the ward and city commit-
tee, and in the towns by aconvention called by a committee elected
by the previous convention. The tendency in such cases is that
each of these towns or wards shall have the privilege of making
nomination in turn of one of its residents.

As regards senators the State is divided into forty districts.
The district convention to nominate candidates is called by a com-
mittee elected by the preceding convention, and consists of delegates
elected by ward and town primaries at the same time with those
for State, county, and councillor conventions. Each senatorial
district convention elects one member of the State central committee.

The convention for nominating members of the governor's
council (eight in number) also appoints a committee to call the next
convention.

The State convention consists of delegates from ward and town
primaries in proportion to their party votes at last elections, and is
summoned by the State central committee, consisting of forty
members, elected in October by senatorial convention, and taking
office on Ist January. The State committee organizes by choice of
chairman, secretary, treasurer, and executive committee, who over-
see the whole State campaign. The State convention nominates
the party candidates for governor, lieutenant-governor, secretary of
state, treasurer, auditor, attorney-general.

4, National.—First, representatives to Congress. Massachusetts
is entitled to twelve, and is divided into twelve districts. The
convention in each district to nominate party candidates is called
every two years by a committee elected by the last convention.
The delegates from wards and primaries are elected at the same
time with the other delegates. As United States senators are
chosen by the State legislatures, no nominating convention is needed,
Next are to be chosen, every four years, delegates to the National
convention,—that %s, under present party customs, two for each
senator and representative of the State in Congress. For Massa-
chusetts, therefore, at the present time, twenty-eight. The dele-
gates corresponding to the representative districts are nominated
by a convention in each district, called in the spring by the same
committee which calls the congressional representative nominating
convention in the autumn. The delegates corresponding to senators

APPENDIX wVAZTJONAL NOMINATING CONVENTION 633

are chosen at a general convention in the spring, called by the State
central committee from wards and primaries, as always; and the
twenty-eight delegates at the meeting of the National convention
choose the State members ef the National committee.

The National convention for nominating party candidates for
President is called by a National committee, elected one member by
the delegates of each State at the last National convention. The
Natjonal convention (and this is true in general of all conventions)
may make rules for its own procedure and election—as, for example,
that all State delegates shall be chosen at large instead of by dis-
tricts. At the last National convention it was complained that the
delegates from the Southern States, which had scarcely any Repub-
lican vote, had just as much power in making the nomination as
any Northern State. The National convention therefore instructed
the National committee to report a plan for adjusting this difficulty,
which the latter are now at work upon. The National committee
manage the party campaign, sending money and speakers to the
weaker States, issue documents, collect subscriptions, and dispense
general advice.

NOTE to CHAPTER LXX

A NEWSPAPER ACCOUNT OF THE REPUBLICAN NATIONAL
NOMINATING CONVENTION OF 1884}

‘As early as 10 o'clock on the fourth day of the convention
most of the seats were filled, and by 11, every inch of standing
room, so far as any was allowed to be occupied, was taken. The
windows were also filled, and men fastened themselves on the
timbers that are so numerous and so unornamental along the sides of
the structure. It was a tumultuous crowd, but a very good-natured
one, and the noise of conversation when the Chairman struck his
gavel for order was like the low roar of the sea.

“Now a man of God, with a bald head, calls the Deity dowa into
the melée and bids him make the candidate the right one and induce
the people to elect him in November ; and the idea is so in harmony
with the thoughts of many who believe that only by supernatural
means can James G. Blaine be elected, that the low tone of the
prayer, which was not much above the character of a ward speech,

1 From the Chicago Herald.

634 THE PARTY SYSTEM APPENDIX

provokes general laughter from those who pay any attention to it.
As soon as the farcé is over a lull falls over the entire assembly
and a serious mood becomes universal. Tally sheets are ready,
pencils are out, the delegates who are etill toiling with the weak
and weakening the stubborn, hurry to their places, while the gavel
keeps up its heavy staccato.

“The balloting begins. The strain of anxiety is sternest between
the Blaine cohorts and the still valiant but no longer formidable
following of Arthur, Every time a good vote is recorded for either
there are cheers, whistlings, waving of handkerchiefs, calls of all
sorts most unearthly in their hideousness, and it is apparent that
the entire ten thousand are quite as well posted about the likeli-
hood of the vote from each state and territory as are the managers
themselves. Every novelty is instantly appreciated, and is followed
by a lively recognition.

“When the vote of Arkansas is announced and it is found
divided with Blaine the sibilant murmur flies, ‘Clayton!’ Cali-
fornia’s solid vote is vociferously given to the White Plume;! a
hearty cheer ascends, and is instantly sent back with equal hearti-
ness by the multitude outside, to whom the proceedings are being
faithfully recited by the pickets straddled on the lofty window-sills.
Colorado is cheered, too; and the one vote from Florida, with the
one vote from Alabama previously recorded, shows that the back-
bone of the solid South is weakening at the very outset. A lusty
Arthur cheer greets the unbroken twenty-four of Georgia. .. .
Whenever a Southern State is found divided it is greedily seized as
a Blaine omen, and the solitary vote for the White Plume acknow-
ledged by Massachusetts is accepted as a most precious sign of the
indulgence of Providence. For such favour was not expected from
among the pharisees.

“A pin might have been heard drop while New York is being
counted, and Blaine’s capture of so considerable a portion of its
ballot is the occasion of gleeful folly. The same anxiety waits the
confession of Ohio and Pennsylvania. All parties are highly elated
when the ballot of these two great constituencies is announced. <A
number of the States are unable to believe that their respective
chairmen are men of truth; for they demand the roll-call, and the
process is not only tedious but it generally shows that the chair-

1 Mr. Blaine, who is commonly known as the Plumed Knight, having been
once so called in an ecstatic peroration. So Mr. Logan was called the Black Eagle.

APPENDIX NATIONAL NOMINATING CONVENTION 635

man was perfectly correct. A great deal of laughter is created by
the delegation of the District of Columbia. It is composed of two
persons, Frank Conger and a coloured associate. Frank announces
that the District of Colunebia casts two votes for Arthur. The
coloured man mounts his chair, challenges the accuracy of the count,
and demands that the delegation be polled. Amid unbounded
laughter his name is solemnly called, he records one vote, in sten-
torian tones, for ‘James G. Blaine!’ and this comedy is repeated
on every subsequent ballot. In the final one we will find the
coloured man mounting upon the chair and delivering the vote of
the District of Columbia, to wit, two votes, ‘solid for Blaine.’ Then
up jumps Frank Conger, challenges the count, demands the poll,
and gets it with round after round of cheers, and volley after volley
of laughter.

“At last the whisper of reckoning the totals absorbs the con-
vention and the multitude. With a mighty shriek of triumph the
Blaine cohorts are on the chairs, yelling and shouting; flags are
waving, thousands of infernal little whistles are making the air
hideous, idiots are waving open umbrellas, and at the top of the
din the band snorts out something which is quickly drowned, The
Arthur men are not cast down. They have hope left—and nothing
more. Blaine has 3344 and the President only 278 1—but that gap
may be closed.

“A second ballot is ordered, and is begun while the auditorium
is full of disorder, which is destined not to subside, but to grow
worse and worse until pandemonium is loose. Every change of
importance is in Blaine’s favour, and the yelling and whistling and
all the noises known to lunacy and wicked joy become chronic.
Blaine has ascended to 349 and the President loiters in the distance
with only 276. The outbreak that followed the first ballot is
repeated and intensified. Men become monkeys and maniacs with
hope and fear, and the rushing to and fro, the whispering with
mouths at delegates’ ears, the clatter and shouting and shrieking
are intolerable. No other candidate has become so dangerous.
The contest is still between the President and Blaine of Maine.
A third ballot is ordered. With difficulty and only moderate suc-
cess the Chair obtains order and the call of States is proceeded
with, while the excitement grows more and more keen.

“Tt is felt that on this ballot Arthur must recede to make room

1 Mr. Arthur was President in 1884.

636 THE PARTY SYSTEM APPENDIX

for the favourite of the combination, if combination has indeed been
made. There are excited and hurried consultations among Blaine’s
young brigadiers—and a fine lot of active fellows he has on thte
floor—while there is collusion and consultation between such repre-
sentatives of belles lettres as G. W. C. and L., whose hand C. takes
with no apparent consciousness that it is ungloved and black.
S. B. D. loses his temper, gesticulates, threatens, bullies, rushes
aroynd like an angry steer, defies Chair and sergeant and mace
and the Lord himself, if necessary, to rescue his friend from
the ruin rapidly approaching. The scene is one of intrigue, bar-
gaining, and purchasing. It is everywhere mouth to ear, with
significant nods or shakes; here a pale group hoarsely discusses
their chances, there the aged H. is whispering to a frowsy Sene-
gambian, while mingling everywhere are whites, blacks, browns,
and cinnamons, as happy in each other’s companionship as young
bears in cages at a menagerie. The gavel raps, raps, raps, raps.
As well beat the air with a feather. Until the bargains are made
and the treaty completed there can be no progress. At last the
ballot is announced ; Blaine, 375 ; Arthur, 274. No dark horse ; no
third. The plume is waving on high and the Arthurian reign is over.

“Then a scene discreditable and all but violent ensues. The
field is up against the favourite. If a recess can be had such com-
binations may be made as will down the Knight, and it is a matter
of indifference who is taken up. Away with them all. Only slay
the man that the masses of the Republican party have in three
successive conventions sought to nominate—for good or ill; who
has had no patronage, no organization, no claims except such as
great personality arouse, and who is at last apparently within easy
reach, but still desperately distant from the greatest victory a
Republican can achieve—the nomination for President of the
United States. For half an hour all the spirits of noise, anger,
disdain, frenzy, despair, are let loose.

“When the storm is raging at its height, the Chair paralyzed,
the thousands of guests screaming, yelling, no delegation seated,
most of the people mounted on their chairs, and all vociferous ;
when all the resources of the machinery’of the convention have
been utterly exhausted, and nothing remains in behalf of peace or
tranquillity, the smooth, kindly face and stalwart form of Stephen
B. Elkins, Blaine’s confidential manager, is seen over the edge of
the platform. He waves a small, well-shaped hand gently for a

APPENDIX MWATIONAL NOMINATING CONVENTION 637

moment, and lo! as if Canute had found the sea obediént, the
Blaine men drop into their seats, wipe their brows and puff out
their short breath to make room for easy breathing. The storm
is over. M., acting with great tact for Blaine, acts on Elkins’
diplomatic suggestion, and, with a brief and clear speech with a
cheer in its final phrase, advises Blaine’s friends to waive all tech-
nicalities, let the roll of States be called on the motion to take a
recess, ‘and,’ he oried, with ascending pitch and swelling tone, rich
with the sense of victory already achieved, ‘and vote it down! ;

“Vote it down they did, and in a trice, while the field remains
demoralized, without generals or following, the third ballot is taken.
The day is won. The stampede begins. The Logan column pre-
cipitates a full run into the Blaine camp. In another half hour
the whole multitude is crazy with rapture, for the multitude was
for Blaine, honestly and loyally all the time, and the scene which
follows the formal declaration of his nomination with 520 votes
was one of sheer ecstasy. Transparencies, one with a great rooster
from Kansas, were paraded up and down the aisles. A great black
eagle is borne up and down, and the rooster and the eagle have
a crow together when they meet in the march, while all the
time the air is full of shouting and the blatant band adds to the
confusion, for that shouting mass would drown the howl of a forest.
The ebb comes; adjournment is taken until evening.

“On reassembling the nomination of John A. Logan for second
place on the ticket is found to be a foregone conclusion. A great
many very bad speeches are made, and there is a shy and pensive
disposition on the part of Massachusetts and New York to inti-
mate that for one day they have really had to take a considerable
quantity of acid diet ; and if the convention of the great party of
purity, progress, piety, principle, probity, property, etc., would at
least give them a Vice-President who would be a little less objec-
tionable than the President it had nominated they would be very
muck, obliged for the small favour. With fan covering one eye and
an eye-glass on the other, the dilettanti minority archly but sadly
hints that Gresham or Lincoln would suit her better. But the party
of the people, the party of poverty, the party of pluck, the party
of patriotism, the party of philanthropy, the party of pensions, the
party in which the peasant is the peer of the prince—delights in
snubbing the pharisaic minority. When Mr. C. states pensively
that New York wants time to make up her mind and count up her

638 THE PARTY SYSTEM APPENDIX

votes, a delegate calls out, ‘Let her go home,’ and nobody offers
her any serious pbjection. She counts it up in due time; and,
although with the solitary exception of a merely capricious vate
for Fairchild, every other State and eyery Territory in the United
States has cast its solid ballot for Black Jack, who will put into the
campaign a terrific roar, New York has the impertinence to drop
her courtesy in mock deference, draw her ample skirts aside and
go out of the convention, leaving her compliments, to a slight
extent, for Gresham and Lincoln. Then the nomination of Fogan
goes through with a whoop, and the work is done.

“*Lord! What fools these mortals be.’ Yet Puck was never
at a political convention. Is there something in the atmosphere of
such a place that robs reason of her faculty and transforms humans
into some other species #

“Look at that man who has taken off his coat on the announce-
ment of the ballot nominating Blaine. He is standing in the very
blaze of the hot afternoon sun streaming through the windows.
He has tied a red silk handkerchief around the top of his umbrella
and secured his hand to the handle; and there he is, waving the
ridiculous and meaningless combination with all the muscular
power he possesses. He never exercised half as much energy in
any useful cause. That woman has fastened her blue veil on the
top of her husband’s walking-stick, and, having mounted her chair,
is bobbing it up in air and bringing it down spirally, and doing
this for five or ten minutes without consciousness of its absurdity,
although it may not be clear to her that she is thus promoting
the election of James G. Blaine, for she evidently forgets that all
women are in the condition of the Territories who were so enthusi-
astic for Blaine four years ago, and had their young zeal snubbed
by the sarcastic Roscoe [Conkling], who reminded them that ‘ They
have no votes.’ The woman near by, who is old enough to know
better, is singing the ‘Sweet by and by,’ and alternating ig with
‘Jerusalem’s my happy home.’ The boy is pounding the floor with a
piece of scantling he has broken off a partition. The other boy has
a bird whistle, and is running opposition to the steam tugs that seem
to have heard Blaine is nominated, and seem to know that Logan is
going to be, and, recognizing kindred accomplishments, have already
begun the celebration.

“Those men are tearing down the state shields, and are going

APPENDIX, NATIONAL NOMINATING CONVENTION 639

to fasten them on their swelling bosom and march up arfd down
the aisles ; there they go. These men are engaged on a wager to
see how high they can throw their hats. That young lady is erying
real tears because Blaine is nominated, and for her sweet life she
does not know what interést she has in the nomination, anyhow.
In fact, it seems to be the non-voters that constitute the muscle
and sinew of the campaign racketry—a word made indispensable
by political conventions, All the time that we have been observing
thest trifles 10,000 sane persons have been continuously howling,
shrieking, singing, snorting, clapping their hands, stamping their
feet, waving their hats, waving their bonnets by their long strings,
dancing in the irregular, accented way peculiar to savages and semi-
civilized communities, and they appear to think that all this is a
demonstration in support of our free institutions. Now a few
thousand people cry ‘Sdown, sdown!’ which undoubtedly means
“sit down,’ but that only makes the rest crazier. The hoot goes up
in pitch, thickens in volume, and the familiar tiger is introduced.
The ‘hi, hi!’ which is exasperating in the extreme except to
devotees of Wagner, who naturally admire irregular musical forms,
is also introduced, and is taken up and repeated like small chain-
lightning from east to west on a summer evening. Here is a man
who cannot ‘Hi, hi!’ So he forms his lips into an O, and utters
a monotone ‘Coo, coo,’ as if he thinks he is a mechanical cuckoo in
a Swiss clock. There are at least a hundred dismal black umbrellas
open and waving ; yet we are under roof, and there is not a drop
of rain. One umbrella has just turned inside out and performed
hari-kari upon its own poor ribs, instead of, for justice’s sake, upon
those of its. proprietor. The fat woman has lifted the little girl on
the shoulders of a slim young man, and the child has put her hands
together, and is saying, in a high, shrill key, ‘God bless James G.
Blaine ; God bless James G. Blaine,’ and we all wonder what for.
“Now a floral helmet, with a beautiful snowy plume of the
finest imported horse-hair, is produced at the Chairman’s desk, and
the whole house goes simply wild. It is a happy thought, that it is.

“Now the din has grown perfectly infernal, just because some-
body tried to stop it ; and Good gracious, sir, will you kindly omit
to knock a fellow’s head off with‘ your bootjack? That’s what he
brought to support our free institutions. He was ‘shinin ’em up’
out in the street, and has climbed in through a window, and is now

64u THE PARTY SYSTEM APPENDIX

waving that deadly weapon over his head as if it were the banner
Excelsior carried up the Alps. All this racketry has been going by
the watch for seven minutes, for a week by one’s lacerated ears ;
and all because James G. Blaine is nominated for President. At
this moment there is not the slightest indication that it will ever stop.

“ But it is nothing to the racket there will be all over the United
States before he is elected President.

COMMENTS ON THE CONVENTION.

“The distinguishing feature of the campaign for President is
the effort of the office-holding element to secure delegates, As first —
shown in this paper, more than 100 holders of Federal positions
from the Southern States alone appear in convention, all for Arthur.
The majority of the non-office-holding delegates from the same
States are selected only by sufferance of the former, who are the
leaders and bosses of Republican politics. The influence of office-
holding appears strong in the Administration’s behalf in the North
also, and it may safely be said that but for this agency, directly and
indirectly, 200 of the 276 recorded for Mr. Arthur on the first
ballot would have been added to the columns of other candidates.

“The immediate advisers of the President were not idle either.
The work of Mr. Secretary Chandler shows up well in New Hamp-
shire, the sole Republican State giving Arthur a majority of her
votes yesterday. Mr. Commissioner Evans did his best in Ken-
tucky. Assistant Postmaster-General Hatton worked hard though
fruitlessly in Iowa. Postmaster-General Gresham himself was alert
and early in Indiana, where, by smart tactics, ten Arthur delegates
were secured, despite an absence of popular feeling in favour of the
President’s nomination.

“ The reformers, independents, and conservatives of New England
and New York rally about Edmunds. They gather some delegates
for him, achieve a strategic victory at Utica, and then attack
Mr. Blaine’s yeputation with an old charge. The son of never-
satisfied Ohio plans a shrewd and not over-frank and creditable
campaign, the while proclaiming himself not a candidate, managing
at length to secure a bare majority of the delegates from his State.

“ The various forces arrive at Chicago. It is soon discovered
that the news we had received of Blaine’s great strength with the
Republican people, wherever there are Republican majorities, was

APPENDIX NATIONAL NOMINATING CONVENTION 641

trustworthy. Despite the office-holders, the conservatives,’ Logan
and Sherman, it is seen Blaine is ahead of any rival With his
delegates come not only the old-time enthusiasm, determination, and
intensity of popular feeling at home, but politicians, shrewd, tireless,
and experienced, which are new and welcome features in Blaine’s
convention management. They pull their coats. The field is worked
row by row and hill by hill. It is apparent from the first that
Blaine will win, barring accident. Only the blind, stupid, or in-
diffefent could fail to see it. With such strength from the people
and such an array of political sagacity to handle it, defeat would
have been disgraceful.

“The Administration stands with its feet upon the South, reach-
ing imploringly toward the North. Into the South, quick and sure,
goes Elkins. Rather into the South had he gone two months ago
by a well-kept secret conspiracy with Powell Clayton and Kerrens
and Roots and others of Arkansas, This State comes to Chicago
solid for Arthur. At the proper moment its nearly complete deser-
tion to Blaine is announced. Arthur’s foundation crumbles under
his feet, and there is consternation among his followers. Man by
man, by a hundred influences, some of them doubtless questionable,
the Blaine operators break the lines of the Administration’s solid
South. It is the beginning of the practical triumph already seen
to be logical.

“But a slight reverse comes. Powell Clayton, who arranged the
Arkansas defection, is selected by the national committee for tem-
porary chairman, He is a man of objectionable record. It is given
out the chairmanship is his reward by the Blaine people for his
treachery to Arthur. He is set up as Blaine’s man. The opposition,
quickly welded by opportunity, plans a sudden blow. It is delivered,
and Blaine’s man falls. It is hailed as an anti-Blaine triumph.

“Too late was it discovered that the selection of Clayton was an
Arthur trap into which Blaine fell. The national committee was
not a Blaine committee, and Clayton was first named by an Arthur
man, Arthur members voting for him. The child was of course
immediately said to belong to the Blaine managers, and they could
not deny it without mortally offending Clayton. They fattened it
and stood by it.

“Encouraged by its first tactical victory, the opposition makes
renewed efforts. It has of necessity become a fight of the field
against the favourite. It quickly degenerates into ‘anything to

VOL. I 2T

642 THE PARTY SYSTEM APPENDIX

beat blaine.’ It is eager, bitter, and peculiar. Dudes and roughs,
civil service reformers and office-holding bosses, short-hairs and
college presidents—many men of various kinds of ambition or
selfishness join in midnight conferences, cartoon circulation, or
desperate parliamentary tactics. The “first noticeable effect of the
alliance to drag down the leader is a solidification of all his forces.
The wavering become firm, the indifferent determined. Like an old
guard they rally round their leader.

“The opposition flounders and struggles to ‘sae someththg of
itself. It agrees to keep the prize from Blaine if possible, but it
cannot agree that any other man shall have it. Harmony in spoils-
hunting becomes discord in spoils-dividing. Logan refuses all com-
bination. The Lincoln boom collapses.) The General Sherman
scheme fails. To throw Arthur to Edmunds is impossible. To
transfer Edmunds to Arthur is merely to send Logan and Sherman
to Blaine. Logan will not have Edmunds; the Edmunds men do
not want Logan. Arthur also prefers Blaine to Sherman. Gresham
is looked upon as Arthur’s man.

“ Seeking but not finding the man with whom to beat Blaine, the
opposition fights for time. It desperately contends for postponement
of the inevitable. The end comes, as had been expected, and pre-
cisely as foreshadowed in these columns. Blaine’s naked starting
strength is about 360, but by prudent and skilful handling of indi-
vidual delegates his managers poll oniy 334 on the first ballot. Their
reserve strength does the business. The gain of fifteen votes from
first ballot to second is the signal for the break. But so tenacious
are the allies that a recess is demanded. Hardly fair play, even in
the dubious game of politics. Intense feeling springs up. We have
the singular spectacle of a mob of gentlemen. There is great danger
that the convention will end in a row, and the nomination, if made,
become a doubtful honour. One clear-headed man sees this danger,
by timely word and commanding presence averts it, and on roll-call
a recess is refused. The next ballot makes Blaine—Ohio starting
the break, Illinois finishing it. Logan consents to take second place,
and so Foraker’s name is not presented by Ohio. The convention
shouts for the ticket and adjourns, wondering how many New

Yorkers will join in bolting it.”

They did well to wonder, for it was the bolters of New York
that turned the scale against the Republican candidate in the
election.

CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF
CALIFORNIA’

Adopted in Convention at Sacramento, March 3, a.D. 1879; submitted to
and ratified by the People, May 7, 1879. |

PREAMBLE AND DECLARATION OF RIGHTS
PREAMBLE

We, the people of the State of California, grateful to Almighty God
for our freedom, in order to secure and perpetuate its blessings, do
establish this Constitution.

ARTICLE I
DECLARATION OF RIGHTS

Section 1. All men are by nature free and independent, and have
certain inalienable rights, among which are those of enjoying and defend-
ing life and liberty ; acquiring, possessing, and protecting property ; and
pursuing and obtaining safety and happiness. r)

Sec. 2. All political power is inherent in the people. Government
is instituted for the protection, security, and benefit of the people, and
they have the right to alter or reform the same whenever the public good
may require it.

Sec. 3. The State of California is an inseparable part of the American
Union, and the Constitution of the United States is the supreme law of
the land.

Sec. 4. The free exercise and enjoyment of religious profession and
worship, without discrimination or preference, shall for ever be guaranteed
in this State ; and no person shall be rendered incompetent to be a wit-
ness or juror on account of his opinions on matters of religious belief ;
but the liberty of conscience hereby secured shall not be so construed as
to excuse acts of licentiousness, or justify practices inconsistent with the
peace or the safety of the State.

Src. 5. The privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall not be sus-
pended unless when, in case of rebellion or invasion, the public safety
may require the suspension.

1 1 take this from an official edition published in 1887, and containing a few
amendments made since 1879.
For a reference to some of the more remarkable provisions, see note at end,

644 THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA APPENDIX

Sxc. 6, All persons shall be bailable by sufficient sureties unless for
capital offences when the proof is evident or the presumption great.
Excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines imposed ; nor
shall cruel or unusual punishment be inflicted. Witnesses shall not te
unreasonably detained, nor confined in any room where criminals are
actually imprisoned.

Sec. 7. The right of trial by jury shall be secured to all, and remain
inviolate ; but in civil actions three-fourths of the jury may render a ver-
dict. A trial by jury may be waived in all criminal cases, not amounting
to felony, by the consent of both parties, expressed in open Court, and in
civil actions by the consent of the parties, signified in such manner as
may be prescribed by law. In civil actions, and cases of misdemeanour,
the jury may consist of twelve, or of any number less than twelve upon
which the parties may agree in open Court.

Sec. 8. Offences heretofore required to be prosecuted by indictment
shall be prosecuted by information, after examination and commitment
by a magistrate, or by indictment, with or without such examination
and commitment, as may be prescribed by law. <A grand jury shall be
drawn and summoned at least once a year in each county.

Sec. 9. Every citizen may freely speak, write, and publish his senti-
ments on all subjects, being responsible for the abuse of that right; and
no law shall be: passed to restrain or abridge the liberty of speech or of
the press. In all criminal prosecutions for libels, the truth may be given
in evidence to the jury ; and if it shall appear to the jury that the matter
charged as libellous is true, and was published with good motives, and for
justifiable ends, the party shall be acquitted; and the jury shall have
the right to determine the law and the fact. Indictments found, or infor-
mations laid, for publication in newspapers, shall be tried in the county
where such newspapers have their publication office, or in the county
where the party alleged to be libelled resided at the time of the alleged
publication, unless the place of trial shall be changed for good cause.

Src. 10. The people shall have the right to freely assemble together
to consult for the common good, to instruct their representatives, and to
petition the Legislature for redress of grievances.

Sec. 11. All laws of a general nature shall have a uniform operation.

Sec. 12. The military shall be subordinate to the civil power. No
standing army shall be kept up by this State in time of peace, and no
soldier shall, in time of peace, be quartered in any house without the
consent of the owner ; nor in time of war, except in the manner prescribed
by law.

Sec. 13. In criminal prosecutions, in any court whatever, the *party
accused shall have the right to a speedy and public trial; to have the
process of the Court to compel the attendance of witnesses in his behalf,
and to appear and defend, in person and with counsel. No person shall
be-twice put in jeopardy for the same offence ; nor be compelled, in any
criminal case, to be a witness against himself; nor be deprived of life,
liberty, or property without due process of law. The Legislature shall
have power to provide for the taking, in the presence of the party accused
and his counsel, of depositions of witnesses in criminal cases, other than

APPENDIX THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA 645

cases of homicide, when there is reason to believe that the witness, from
inability or other causes, will not attend at the trial.

. 5c. 14. Private property shall not be taken or damaged for public
use without just compensation having been first made to, or paid into
Court for, the owner, and n@ right of way shall be appropriated to the
use of any corporation other than municipal until full compensation
therefor be first made in money or ascertained and paid into Court for
the owner, irrespective of any benefit from any improvement proposed by
such corporation, which compensation shall he ascertained by a jury,
unless a jury be waived, as in other civil cases in a Court of record, as
shall be prescribed by law.

Sec. 15. No person shall be imprisoned for debt in any civil action,
or mesne or final process, unless in case of fraud, nor in civil actions for
torts, except in cases of wilful injury to person or property ; and no person
shall be imprisoned for a militia fine in time of peace,

Sec. 16. No bill of attainder, ex post facto law, or law impairing the
obligations of contracts, shall ever be passed.

Sec. 17. Foreigners of the white race or of African descent, eligible
to become citizens of the United States under the naturalization laws
thereof, while bona fide residents of this State, shall have the same rights
in respect to the acquisition, possession, enjoyment, transmission, and
inheritance of property as native born citizens.

Sea 18. Neither slavery nor involuntary servitude, unless for the
punishment of crime, shall ever be tolerated in this State.

Src. 19. The right of the people to be secured in their persons,
houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable seizures and searches,
shall not be violated ; and no warrant shall issue, but on probable cause,
supported by oath or affirmation, particularly describing the place to be
searched and the persons and things to be seized.

Sec. 20. Treason against the State shall consist only in levying war
against it, adhering to its enemies, or giving them aid and comfort. No
person shall be convicted of treason unless on the evidence of two
witnesses to the same overt act, or confession in open Court.

Sec. 21. No special privileges or immunities shall ever be granted
which may not be altered, revoked, or repealed by the Legislature, nor
shall any citizen, or class of citizens, be granted privileges or immunities
which, upon the same terms, shall not be granted to all citizens.

Sec. 22. The provisions of this Constitution are mandatory and
prohibitory, unless by express words they are declared to be otherwise.

§ec. 23, This enumeration of rights shall not be construed to impair
or deny others retained by the people,

Sec. 24. No property qualification shall ever be required for any
person to vote or hold office.

ARTICLE II
RIGHT OF SUFFRAGE

Section 1. Every native male citizen of the United States, every
male person who shall have acquired the rights of citizenship under or

646 THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA APPENDIX

by virtue of the treaty of Queretaro, and every male naturalized citizen
thereof, who shall hase become such ninety days prior to any election, of
the age of twenty-one years, who shall have been a resident of the State
one year next preceding the election, and of the county in which he
claims his vote ninety days, and in the election precinct thirty days, shall
be entitled to vote at all elections which are now or may hereafter be
authorized by law ; provided, no native of China, no idiot, insane person,
or person convicted of any infamous crime, and no person hereafter con-
victed of the embezzlement or misappropriation of public money, shall
ever exercise the privilege of an elector in this State. ‘

Sec. 2. Electors shall in all cases, except treason, felony, or breach of
the peace, be privileged from arrest on the days of election, during their
attendance at such election, going to and returning therefrom.

Sxc. 3. No elector shall be obliged to perform militia duty on the day
of election, except in time of war or public danger.

Src. 4. For the purpose of voting, no person shall be deemed to have
gained or lost a residence by reason of his presence or absence while em-
ployed in the service of the United States, nor while engaged in the navi-
gation of the waters of this State or of the United States, or of the high
seas ; nor while a student at any seminary of learning ; nor whilé kept
in any almshouse or other asylum, at public expense ; nor while confined
in any public prison.

Szc. 5. All elections by the people shall be by ballot.

ARTICLE III
DISTRIBUTION OF POWERS

Section 1. The powers of the Government of the State of California
shall be divided into three separate departments—the legislative, execu-
tive, and judicial ; and no person charged with the exercise of powers pro-
perly belonging to one of these departments shall exercise any functions
appertaining to either of the others, except as in this Constitution ex-
pressly directed or permitted.

ARTICLE IV
LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT

Section 1. The legislative power of this State shall be vestedgin a
Senate and Assembly, which shall be designated the Legislature of the
State of California, and the enacting clause of every law shall be as fol-
lows :—‘‘ The People of the State of California, represented in Senate and
Assembly, do enact as follows.”

Sec. 2. The sessions of the Legislature shall commence at twelve
o'clock M. on the first Monday after the first day of January next succeed-
ing the election of its members, and, after the election held in the year
eighteen hundred and eighty, shall be biennial, unless the Governor
shall, in the interim, convene the Legislature by proclamation. No pay

APPENDIX THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA 647

shall be allowed to members for a longer time than sixty days,! except for
the first session after the adoption of this Constitution, for which they
may be allowed pay for one hundred days. And no bill shall be intro-
diced in either house after the expiration of ninety days from the com-
mencement of the first sessionnor after fifty days after the commencement
of each succeeding session, without the consent of two-thirds of the
members thereof.

Src. 3, Members of the Assembly shall be elected in the year eighteen
hundred and seventy-nine, at the time and in the manner now provided
by law. The second election of members of the Assembly, after the
adoption of this Constitution, shall be on the first Tuesday after the first
Monday in November, eighteen hundred and eighty. Thereafter mem-
bers of the Assembly shall be chosen biennially, and their term of office
shall he two years; and each election shall be on the first Tuesday after
the first Monday in November, unless otherwise ordered by the Legislature.

Src. 4, Senators shall be chosen for the term of four years, at the
same time and places as members of the Assembly, and no person shall
be a member of the Senate or Assembly who has not been a citizen and
inhabitant of the State three years, and of the district for which he shall
be chosen one year, next before his election,

Sec. 5. The Senate shall consist of forty members, and the Assembly
of eighty members, to be elected by districts, numbered as hereinafter
provided. The seats of the twenty Senators elected in the year eighteen
hundred and eighty-two from the odd numbered districts shall be vacated
at the expiration of the second year, so that one-half of the Senators
shall be elected every two years ; provided, that all the Senators elected
at the first election under this Constitution shall hold office for the term
of three years.

Sec. 6. For the purpose of choosing members of the Legislature, the
State shall be divided into forty senatorial and eighty assembly districts,
as nearly equal in population as may be, and composed of contiguous
territory, to be called senatorial and assembly districts, Each senatorial
district shall choose one Senator, and each assembly district shall choose
one member of Assembly. The senatorial districts shall be numbered
from one to forty, inclusive, in numerical order, and the assembly districts
shall be numbered from one to eighty, in the same order, commencing at
the northern boundary of the State, and ending at the southern boundary
thereof. In the formation of such districts no county, or city and county,
shall be divided, unless it contains sufficient population within itself to
form,two or more districts, nor shall a part of any county, or of
any city and county, be united with any other county, or city and
county, in forming any district. The census taken under the direction
of the Congress of the United States in the year one thousand eight
hundred and eighty, and every ten years thereafter, shall be the basis of
fixing and adjusting the legislative districts ; and the Legislature shall,
at its first session after each census, adjust such districts and reapportion
the representation so as to preserve them as near equal in population as

11 am informed that this period has by a very recent amendment been
extended to 100 days.

648 THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA APPENDIX

may be. But in making such adjustment no persons who are not eligible
to become citizens of the United States, under the naturalization laws,
shall be counted as forming a part of the population of any district.
Until such districting as herein provided for shall be made, Senators and
Assemblymen shall be elected by the distrists according to the apportion-
ment now provided for by law.

Src. 7. Each house shall choose its officers, and judge of the qualifica-
tions, elections, and returns of its members.

Sec. 8. A majority of each house shall constitute a quorum to do
business, but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day, and «may
compel the attendance of absent members in such manner and under such
penalties as each house may provide.

Sec. 9. Each house shall determine the rule of its proceeding, and
may, with the concurrence of two-thirds of all its members elected, expel
a member.

Sec. 10. Each house shall keep a journal of its proceedings, and pub-
lish the same, and the yeas and nays of the members of either house, on
any question, shall, at the desire of any three members present, be entered
on the Journal.

Src. 11. Members of the Legislature shall, in all cases, except treason,
felony, and breach of the peace, be privileged from arrest, and shall not be
subject to any civil process during the session of the Legislature, nor for
fifteen days next before the commencement and after the termination of
each session.

Sec. 12. When vacancies occur in either house, the Governor, or the
person exercising the functions of the Governor, shall issue writs of election
to fill such vacancies,

Sc. 13. The doors of each house shall be open, except on such occa-
sion as, in the opinion of the house, may require secrecy.

Sec. 14, Neither house shall, without the consent of the other,
adjourn for more than three days, nor to any place other than that in
which they may be sitting. Nor shall the members of either house draw
pay for any recess or adjournment for a longer time than three days.

Src. 15, No law shall be passed except by bill Nor shall any bill
be put upon its final passage until the same, with the amendments thereto,
shall have been printed for the use of the members; nor shall any bill
become a law unless the same be read on three several days in each
house, unless, in a case of urgency, two-thirds of the house where such
bill may be pending shall, by a vote of yeas and nays, dispense with this
provision, Any bill may originate in either house, but may be amended
or rejected by the other; and on the final passage of all bills they shall
be read at length, and the vote shall be by yeas and nays upon each bill
separately, and shall be entered on the Journal, and no bill shall become
a law without the concurrence of a majority of the members elected to
each house.

Src. 16. Every bill which may have passed the Legislature shall,
before it becomes a Jaw, be presented to the Governor. If he approve it,
he shall sign it; but if not, he shall return it, with his oljections, to the
house in which it originated, which shall enter such objections upon the

APPENDIX THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFCRNIA 649

Journal and proceed to reconsider it. If, after such reconsideration, it
avain pass both houses, by yeas and nays, two-thirds of the members
elected to each house voting therefor, it shall become a law, notwith-
standing the Governor’s objections. If any bill shall not be returned
within ten days after it shmll have been presented to him (Sundays
excepted), the same shall become a law in like manner as if he had signed
it, unless the Legislature, by adjournment, prevents such return, in
which case it shall not become a law, unless the Governor, within
ten days after such adjournment (Sundays excepted), shall sign and deposit
the game in the office of the Secretary of State, in which case it shall
become a law in like manner as if it had been signed by him hefore
adjournment. If any bill presented to the Governor contains several
items of appropriation of money, he may object to one or more items,
while approving other portions of the bill. In such case he shall append
to the Dill, at the time of signing it, a statement of the items to which he
objects, and the reasons therefor, and the appropriations so objected to
shall not take effect unless passed over the Governor’s veto, as herein-
before provided. If the Legislature he in session, the Governor shall
transmit to the house in which the bill originated, a copy of such state-
ment, and the items so objected to shall be separately reconsidered in the
same manner as bills which have been disapproved by the Governor.

Src. 17. The Assembly shall have the sole power of impeachment,
and all impeachments shall be tried by the Senate. When sitting for
that purpose, the Senators shall be upon oath or affirmation, and no person
shall be convicted without the concurrence of two-thirds of the members
elected.

Sec. 18. The Governor, Lieutenant-Governor, Secretary of State,
Controller, Treasurer, Attorney-General, Surveyor-General, Chief Justice
and Associate Justices of the Supreme Court, and Judges of the Superior
Courts, shall be liable to impeachment for any misdemeanour in office ;
but judgment in such cases shall extend only to removal from office, and
disqualitication to hold any office of honour, trust, or profit under the
State ; but the party convicted or acquitted shall nevertheless be liable to
indictment, trial, and punishment, according to law. All other civil
officers shall be tried for misdemeanour in office in such manner as the
Legislature may provide.

Sec. 19. No Senator or member of Assembly shall, during the term
fur which he shall have been elected, be appointed to any civil office of
profit under this State which shall have been created, or the emoluments
of which have been increased, during such term, except such offices as
‘may be filled by election by the people.

Sec. 20. No person holding any lucrative office under the United
States, or any other power, shall be eligible to any civil office of profit
under this State ; provided, that officers in the militia, who receive no
annual salary, local officers, or Postmasters whose compensation does not
exceed five hundred dollars per annum, shall not be deemed to hold
lucrative offices.

Sec. 21. No person convicted of the embezzlement or defalcation of
the public funds of the United States, or of any State, or of any county

650 THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA APPENDIX

a
or municipality therein, shall ever be eligible to any office of honour,
trust, or profit under this State, and the Legislature shall provide, by
law, for the punishment of embezzlement or detalcation as a felony.

Src. 22. No money shall be drawn from the treasury but in conse-
quence of appropriations made by law, an® upon warrants duly drawn
thereon by the Controller ; and no money shall ever be appropriated or
drawn from the State Treasury for the use and benefit of any corporation,
association, asylum, hospital, or any other institution not under the exclu-
sive management and control of the State as a State institution, nor shall
any grant or donation of property ever be made thereto by the State ; @ro-
vided, that notwithstanding anything contained in this or any other section
of this Constitution, the Legislature shall have the power to grant aid to
institutions conducted for the support and maintenance of minor orphans
or half orphans, or abandoned children, or aged persons in indigent cir-
cumstances—such aid to be granted by a uniform rule, and proportioned
to the number of inmates of such respective institutions ; provided further,
that the State shall have, at any time, the right to inquire into the man-
agement of such institution ; provided further, that whenever any county,
or city and county, or city, or town, shall provide for the support of minor
orphans, or half orphans, or abandoned children, or aged persons in indi-
gent circumstances, such county, city and county, city, or town, shall be
entitled to receive the same pro rata appropriations as may be granted to
such institutions under church or other control. An accurate statement
of the receipts and expenditures of public moneys shall be attached and
published with the laws at every regular session of the Legislature.

Src. 23. The members of the Legislature shall receive for their ser-
vices a per diem and mileage, to be fixed by law and paid out of the
public treasury ; such per diem shall not exceed eight dollars, and such
mileage shall not exceed ten cents per mile, and for contingent expenses
not exceeding twenty-five dollars for each session. No increase in com-
pensation or mileage shall take effect during the term for which the mem-
bers of either house shall have been elected, and the pay of no attaché
shall be increased after he is elected or appointed.

Szc. 24. Every Act shall embrace but one subject, which subject shall
be expressed in its title. But if any subject shall be embraced in an Act
which shall net be expressed in its title, such Act shall be void only as to
so-much thereof as shall not be expressed in its title. No law shall be
revised or amended by reference to its title; but in such case the Act
revised or section amended shall be re-enacted and published at length as
revised or amended ; and all laws of the State of California, and all official
writings, and the executive, legislative, and judicial proceedings shall be’
conducted, preserved, and published in no other than the English lan-
guage.

Src. 25. The Legislature shall not pass local or special laws in any of
the following enumerated cases, that is to say :—

First—Regulating the jurisdiction and duties of Justices of the Peace,
Police Judges, and of Constables.

Seconl—For the punishment of crimes and misdemeanours,

Third—Regulating the practice of courts of justice.

APPENDIX THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA 651

Fourth—Providing for changing the venue in civil or criminal actions.

Fifth—Granting divorces.

Sirth—Changing the names of persons or places.

Seventh—Authorizing the laying out, opening, altering, maintaining, or
vacating roads, hizhways, str@ets, alleys, town plots, parks, cemeteries,
graveyards, or public grounds not owned by the State.

Eighth—Summoning and impaneling grand and petit juries, and pro-
viding for their compensation.

Ninth—Regulating county and township business, or the election of
county or township ofticers.

Tenth—For the assessment or collection of taxes.

Eleventh—Providing for conducting elections, or designating the places
of voting, except on the organization of new counties.

Twelfth—Affecting estates of deceased persons, minors, or other per-
sons under legal disabilities.

Thirteenth—Extending the time for the collection of taxes.

Fourteenth—Giving effect to invalid deeds, wills, or other instruments.

Fifteenth—Refunding money paid into the State Treasury.

Stcteenth—Releasing, or extinguishing, in whole or in part, the in-
debtedness, liability, or obligation of any corporation or person to this
State, or to any municipal corporation therein.

Seventeenth—Declaring any person of age, or authorizing any minor
to sell, lease, or encumber his or her property.

Eiyhteenth—Legaliziny, except as against the State, the unauthorized
or invalid act of any officer.

Nineteenth—Granting to any corporation, association, or individual
any special or exclusive right, privilege, or immunity,

Twentieth—Exempting property from taxation.

Twenty-first—Changing county seats. .

Twenty-second—Restoring to citizenship persons convicted of infamous
crimes,

Twenty-third—Regulating the rate of interest on money.

Twenty-fourth—Authorizing the creation, extension, or impairing of
liens.

Twenty-fifth—Chartering or licensing ferries, bridges, or roads.

Twenty-sicth—Remitting fines, penalties, or forfeitures,

Twenty-seventh—Providing for the management of common schools,

Twenty-eiyhth—Creating offices, or prescribing the powers and duties
of officers in counties, cities, cities and counties, township, election, or
schoo} districts.

Twenty-ninth—A ffecting the fees or salary of any officer.

Thirtieth—Changing the law of descent or succession.

Thirty-firt—Authorizing the adoption or legitimation of children.

Thirty-second—For limitation of civil or criminal actions.

Thirty-third—In all other cases where a general law can be made
applicable.

Sec. 26. The Legislature shall have no power to authorize lotteries or
gift enterprises for any purpose, and shall pass laws to prohibit the sale in
this State of lottery or gift enterprise tickets, or tickets in any scheme in

652 THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA APPENDIX

the nature of a lottery. The Legislature shall pass laws to regulate or
prohibit the buying and selling of the shares of the capital stock of cor-
porations in any stock board, stock exchange, or stock market under the
control of any association. All contracts for the sale of shares of the
capital stock of any corporation or assdtiation, on margin, or to be
delivered ‘at a future day, shall be void, and any money paid on such con-
tracts may be recovered by the party paying it by suit in any Court of
competent jurisdiction.

Szc. 27. When a congressional district shall be composed of two or
more counties, it shall not be separated by any county belongiag to
another district. No county, or city and county, shall be divided in
forming a congressional district so as to attach one portion of a
county, or city and county, to another county, or city and county,
except in cases where one county, or city and county, has more
population than the ratio required for one or more Congressmen ;
but the Legislature may divide any county, or city and county, into
as many congressional districts as it may be entitled tu by law. Any
county, or city and county, containing a population greater than the
number required for one congressional district, shall be formed into one
or more congressional districts, according to the population thereof, and
any residue, after forming such district or districts, shall be attached by
compact adjoining assembly districts, to a contiguous county or counties,
and form a congressional district. In dividing a county, or city and
county, into congressional districts, no assembly district shall be divided
so as to form a part of more than one congressional district, and every
such congressional district shall be composed of compact contiguous
assembly districts.

Sec. 28. In all elections by the Legislature the members thereof shall
vote viva voce, and the votes shall be entered on the Journal.

Sec. 29. The general appropriation bill shall contain no item or
items of appropriation other than such as are required to pay the salaries
of the State officers, and expenses of the government, and of the institu-
tions under the exclusive control and management of the State.

Sec. 30. Neither the Levislature, nor any county, city and county,
township, school district, or other municipal corporation, shall ever make
an appropriation, or pay from any public fund whatever, or grant any-
thing to or in aid of any religious sect, church, creed, or sectarian purpose,
or help to support or sustain any school, college, university, hospital, or
other institution controlled by any religious creed, church, or sectarian
denomination whatever; nor shall any grant or donation of personal
property or real estate ever be made by the State, or any city, city and
county, town, or other municipal corporation, for any religious creed,
church, or sectarian purpose whatever ; provided, that nothing in this
section shall prevent the Legislature granting aid pursuant to section
twenty-two of this article.

Sec. 31. The Legislature shall have no power to give or to lend, or
to authorize the giving or lending of the credit of the State, or of any
county, city and county, city, township, or other political corporation or
subdivision of the State now existing, or that may be hereafter established,

APPENDIX THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA 653

in aid of or to any person, association, or corporation, whether mfinicipal
or otherwise, or to pledge the credit thereof, in any manner whatever, for
the payment of the liabilities of any individual, association, municipal or
other corporation whatever ; nor shall it have power to make any gift, or
authorize the making of any gift, or any public money or thing of value,
to any individual, municipal or other corporation whatever; provided,
that nothing in this section shall prevent the Legislature granting aid
pursuant to section twenty-two of this article; and it shall not have
power to authorize the State, or any political subdivision thereof, to sub-
scribe for stock, or to become a stockholder in any corporation whatever.

Src. 32. The Legislature shall have no power to grant, or authorize
any county or municipal authority to grant, any extra compensation or
allowance to any public officer, agent, servant, or contractor, after service
has been rendered, or a contract has been entered into and performed, in
whole or in part, nor to pay, or to authorize the payment of, any claim
hereafter created against the State, or any county or municipality of the
State, under any avyreement or contract made without express authority
of law; and all such unauthorized agreements or contracts shall be null
and void.

Szc. 33. The Legislature shall pass Jaws for the regulation and
limitation of the charges for services performed and commodities furnished
by telegraph and gas corporations, and the charges by corporations or
individuals for storage and wharfage, in which there is a public use ; and
where laws shall provide for the selection of any person or officer to regulate
or limit such rates, no person or officer shall be selected by any corporation
or individual interested in the business to be regulated, and no person
shall be selected who is an officer or stockholder in any such corporation.

Sec..34. No bill making an appropriation for money, except the
general appropriation bill, shall contain more than one item of appropria-
tion, and that for one single and certain purpose to be therein expressed.

Sec. 35. Any person who seeks to influence the vote of a member of
the Legislature by bribery, promise of reward, intimidation, or any other
dishonest means, shall be guilty of lobbying, which is hereby declared a
felony ; and it shall be the duty of the Legislature to provide, by law,
for the punishment of this crime. Any member of the Legislature, who
shall be influenced in his vote or action upon any matter pending before
the Legislature by any reward, or promise of future reward, shall be
deemed guilty of a felony, and upon conviction thereof, in addition to
such punishment as may be provided by law, shall be disfranchised
and for ever disqualified from holding any office of public trust.
Any “person may be compelled to testify in any lawful investiga-
tion or judicial proceeding against any person who may be charged
with having committed the offence of bribery or corrupt solicitation, or
with having been influenced in his vote or action, as a member of the
Legislature, by reward, er promise of future reward, and shall not be per-
mitted to withhold his testimony upon the ground that it may criminate
himself, or subject him to public infamy; but such testimony shall not
afterwards be used against him in any judicial proceeding, except for per-
jury in giving such testimony.

654 THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA APPENDIX

ARTICLE V
EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT

Section 1. The supreme executive power of this State shall be vested
in a Chief Magistrate, who shall be styledthe Governor of the State of
California.

Sxc. 2. The Governor shall be elected by the qualified electors at the
time and place of voting for members of the Assembly, and shall hold his
office four years from and after the first Monday after the first day of
January subsequent to his election, and until his successor is elected and
qualified.

Sec. 3. No person shall be eligible to the office of Governor who has
not been a citizen of the United States and a resident of this State five
years next preceding his election, and attained the age of twenty-five years
at the time of such election.

Sec, 4. The returns of every election for Governor shall be sealed up
and transmitted to the seat of government, directed to the Speaker of the
Assembly, who shall, during the first week of the session, open and pub-
lish them in the presence of both Houses of the Legislature. The person
having the highest number of votes shall be Governor ; but, in case any
two or more have an equal and the highest number of votes, the Legisla-
ture shall, by joint vote of both houses, choose one of such persons having
an equal and the highest number of votes for Governor.

Sec. 5. The Governor shall be Commander-in-Chief of the militia,
the army, and navy of this State.

Sec. 6. He shall transact all executive business with the officers of
government, civil and military, and may require information, in writing,
from the officers of the executive department, upon any subject relating to
the duties of their respective offices.

Sec. 7. He shall see that all the laws are faithfully executed.

Sec. 8. When any office shall, from any cause, become vacant, and no
mode is provided by the Constitution and law for filling such vacancy, the
Governor shall have power to fill such vacancy by granting a commission,
which shall expire at the end of the next session of the Legislature, or at
the next election by the people.

Src. 9. He may, on extraordinary occasions, convene the Legislature
by proclamation, stating the purposes for which he has convened it, and
when so convened it shal] have no power to legislate on any subjects
other than those specified in the proclamation, but may provide for the
expenses of the session and other matters incidental thereto. r

Sec. 10. He shall communicate by message to the Legislature, at every
session, the condition of the State, and recommend such matters as he
shall deem expedient.

Sec. 11. In case of disarusitiont between the two houses with re-
spect to the time of adjournment, the Governor shall have power to adjourn
the Legislature to such time as he may think proper; provided, it be not
beyond the time fixed for the meeting of the next Legislature.

Sec. 12, No person shall, while holding any office under the United

APPENDIX THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA 655

States or this State, exercise the office of Governor except as hereinafter
expressly provided.

Sxc. 13, There shall be a seal of this State, which shall be kept hy
the Governor, and used by him officially, and shall be called “The Great
Seal of the State of California”

Src. 14. All grants and commissions shall be in the name and by the
authority of The People of the State of California, sealed with the great
seal of the State, signed by the Governor, and countersigned by the Secre-
tary of State.

Src. 15. A Lieutenant-Governor shall be elected at the same time
and "places, and in the same manner, as the Governor, and his term of
office and his qualifications of eligibility shall also be the same. He shall
he the President of the Senate, but shall have only a casting vote therein.
If, during a vacancy of the office of Governor, the Lieutenant-Governor
shall be impeached, displaced, resign, die, or become incapable of perform-
ing the duties of his office, or be absent from the State, the President pro
tempore of the Senate shall act as Governor until the vacancy be filled or
the disability shall cease. The Lieutenant-Governor shall be disqualified
from holding any other office, except as specially provided in this Con-
stitution, during the term for which he shall have been elected.

SEc. 16. In case of the impeachment of the Governor, or his removal
from office, death, inability to discharge the powers and duties of the said
office, resignation, or absence from the State, the powers and duties of the
office shall devolve upon the Lieutenant-Governor for the residue of the
term, or until the disability shall cease. But when the Governor shall,
with the consent of the Levislature, be out of the State in time of war,
at the head of any military force thereof, he shall continue Commander-
in-Chief of all the military force of the State.

Sec. 17, A Secretary of State, a Controller, a Treasurer, an Attorney-
General, and a Surveyor-General shall be elected at the same time and
places, and in the same manner as the Governor and Lieutenant-
Governor, and their terms of office shall be the same as that of the
Governor.

Sec. 18, The Secretary of State shall keep a correct record of the
official acts of the legislative and executive departments of the government,
and shall, when required,-lay the same, and all matters relative thereto,
before either branch of the Legislature, and shall perform such other duties
as may be assiyned him by law.

Sec. 19. The Governor, Lieutenant -Governor, Secretary of State,
Controller, Treasurer, Attorney-General, and Surveyor-General shall, at
stated times during their continuance in office, receive for their services a
compensation which shall not be increased or diminished during the term
for which they shall have been elected, which compensation is hereby fixed
for the fullowing officers for the two terms next ensuing the adoption of this
Constitution, as follows :—Governor, six thousand dollars per annum ;
Lieutenant-Governor, the same per diem as may be provided by law for
the Speaker of the Assembly, to be allowed only during the session of
the Legislature ; the Secretary of State, Controller, Treasurer, Attorney-
General, and Surveyor-General, three thousand dollars each per annum,

656 THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA APPENDIX

such compensation to be in full for all services by them respectively
rendered in any official capacity or employment whatsoever during their
respective terms of office ; provided, however, that the Legislature, after the
expiration of the terms hereinbefore mentioned, may by law diminish the
compensation of any or all such officers, but in no case shall have the
power to increase the same above the sums hereby fixed by this Constitu-
tion. No salary shall be authorized by law for clerical service, in any
office provided for in this article, exceeding sixteen hundred dollars per
annum for each clerk employed. The Legislature may, in its discretion,
abolish the office of Surveyor-General, and none of the officers hereinbefore
named shall receive for their own use any fees or perquisites for the‘ per-
formance of any official duty.

Sec. 20. The Governor shall not, during his term of office, be elected
a senator to the Senate of the United States.

ARTICLE VI
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

Secrton 1. The judicial power of the State shall be vested in the
Senate sitting as a Court of Impeachment, in a Supreme Court, Superior
Courts, Justices of the Peace, and such inferior courts as the Legisla-
ture may establish in any incorporated city, or town, or city and county.

Src, 2. The Supreme Court shall consist of a Chief Justice and six
Associate Justices. The Court may sit in departments and in bank, and
shall always be open for the transaction of business. There shall be two
departments, denominated, respectively, Department One and Department
Two, The Chief Justice shall assign three of the Associate Justices to
each department, and such assignment may be changed by him from time
to time. The Associate Justices shall be competent to sit in either depart-
ment, and may interchange with each other by agreement among them-
selves or as ordered by the Chief Justice. Each of the departments shall
have the power to hear and determine causes and all questions arising
therein, subject to the provisions hereinafter contained in relation to the
Court in bank. The presence of three Justices shall be necessary to
transact any business in either of the departments, except such as may be
done at chambers, and the concurrence of three Justices shall be necessary
to pronounce a judgment. The Chief Justice shall apportion the business
to the departments, and may, in his discretion, order any cause pending
before the Court to be heard and decided by the Court in bank. © The
order may be made defore or after judgment pronounced by a depart-
ment ; but where a cause has been allotted to one of the departments, and
a judgment pronounced thereon, the order must be made within thirty
days after such judgment and concurred in by two Assoviate Justices, and
if so made it shall have the effect to vacate and set aside the judjment,
Any four Justices may, either before or after judgment by a department,
order a case to be heard in hank. If the order be not made within the
time above limited, the judgment shall be final. No judgment by a

APPENDIX THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA £57

department shall become final until the expiration of the period of thirty
days aforesaid, unless approved by the Chief Justice, in writing, with the
concurrence of two Associate Justices. The Chief Justice may convene
the Court in bank at any time, and shall be the presiding Justice of the
Court when so convened. The concurrence of four Justices present at
the argument shall be necessafy to pronounce a judgment in bank ; Iut if
four Justices, so present, do not concur in a judyment, then all the
Justices qualified to sit in the cause shall hear the argument ; but to ren-
der a judgment a concurrence of four Judges shall be necessary. In the
determination of causes, all decisions of the Court in bank or in depart-
mertts shall be given in writing, and the grounds of the decision shall be
stated. The Chief Justice may sit in either department, and shall preside
“when so sitting, but the Justices assigned to each department shall select
one of their number as presiding Justice. In case of the absence of the
Chief Justice from the place at which the Court is held, or his inability to
act, the Associate Justices shall select one of their own number to perform
the duties and exercise the powers of the Chief Justice during such
absence or inability to act.

Sec. 3. The Chief Justice and the Associate Justices shall be elected
by the qualified electors of the State at large at the general State
elections, at the times and places at which the State officers are
elected ; and the term of office shall be twelve years, from and after the
first Monday after the first day of January next succeeding their election ;
provided, that the six Associate Justices elected at the first election shall,
at their first meeting, so classify themselves, by lot, that two of them
shall go out of office at the end of four years, two of them at the end of
eight years, and two of them at the end of twelve years, and an entry of
such classification shall be made in the minutes of the Court in bank,
signed by them, and a duplicate thereof shall be filed in the office of the
Secretary of State. If a vacancy occur in the office of a Justice, the .
Governor shall appoint a person to hold the office until the election and
qualification of a Justice to fill the vacancy, which electiun shall take
place at the next succeeding general election, and the Justice so elected
shall hold the office fur the remainder of the unexpired term. The first
election of the Justices shall be at the first general election after the adop-
tion and ratification of this Constitution.

Sec. 4. The Supreme Court shall have appellate jurisdiction in all
cases in equity, except such as arise in Justices’ Courts ; also, in all cases
at law which involve the title or possession of real estate, or the legality
of any tax, impost, assessment, toll, or municipal fine, or in which the de-
mana, exclusive of interest, or the value of the property in controversy,
amounts to three hundred dollars ; also, in cases of forcible entry and de-
tainer, and in proceedings in insolvency, and in actions to prevent or
abate a nuisance, and in all such probate matters as may be provided by
law ; also, in all criminal cases prosecuted by indictment or information
in a Court of record on questions of law alone. The Court shall also
have power to issue writs of mandamus, certiorari, prohibition, and habeas
corpus, and all other writs necessary or proper to the complete exercise of
its appellate jurisdiction. Each of the Justices shall have power to issue

VOL. IE 2U

658. LHE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA APPENDIX

writs of..habeas corpus to any part of the State, upon petition by or on
behalf of any person held in actual custody, and may make such writs re-
turnable before himself, or the Supreme Court, or before any Superior
Court in the State, or before any Judye thereof.

Sec. 5. The Superior Court shall have original jurisdiction in all
cases in equity, and in all cases at law whitfi involve the title or posses-
sion of real property, or the legality of any tax, impost, assessment, toll,
or municipal fine, and in all other cases in which the demand, exclusive of
interest orthe value of the property in controversy, amounts to three hundred
dollars, and in all criminal cases amounting to felony, and cases of mis-
demeanour not otherwise provided for; of actions of forcible entry’and
detainer ; of proceedings,in insolvency ; of actions to prevent or abate a
nuisance; of all matters of probate; of divorce and for annulment of
marriage, and of all such special cases of proceedings as are not otherwise
provided for. And said Court shall have the power of naturalization, and
to issue papers therefor. They shall have appellate jurisdiction in such
cases arising in Justices’ and other inferior Courts in their respective
counties as may be prescribed by law. They shall always be open (legal
holidays and non-judicial days excepted), and their process shall extend
to all parts of the State ; provided, that all actions for the recovery of the
possession of, quieting the title to, or for the enforcement of liens upon
real estate, shall be commenced in the county in which the real estate, or
any part thereof affected by such action or actions, is situated. Said
Courts, and their Judges, shall have power to issue writs of mandamus,
certiorari, prohibition, quo warranto, and habeas corpus, on petition by or
on behalf of any person in actual custody in their respective counties.
Injunctions and writs of prohibition may be issued and served on legal
holidays and non-judicial days.

Seo. 6. There shall be in each of the organized counties, or cities and
counties, of the State, a Superior Court, for each of which at least one
Judge shall be elected by the qualified electors of the county, or city and
county, at the general State election; provided, that until otherwise ordered
by the Legislature, only one Judge shall be elected fur the Counties of
Yuba and Sutter, and that in the City and County of San Francisco there
shall be elected twelve Judyes of the Superior Cuurt, any one or more of
whom may hold Court. There may be as many sessions of said Court, at
the same time, as there are Judges thereof. The said Judyes shall choose
from their own number a presiding Judge, who may be removed at their
pleasure. He shall distribute the business of the Court among the
Judges thereof, and prescribe the order of business. The judgments,
orders, and proceedings of any session of the Superior Court, held by any
one or more of the Jyslges of said Courts, respectively, shall be equally
effectual, as if all the Judges of suid respective Courts presided at such
session. In each of the Counties of Sacramento, San Joaquin, Los Angeles,
Sonoma, Santa Clara, and Alameda there shall be elected two such Judges.
The term of otlice of Judges of the Superior Courts shall be six years
from and after the first Monday of January next succeeding their elec-
tion ; provided, that the twelve Judges of the Superior Court elected in
the City and County of San Francisco, at the first election held under

APPENDIX THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA 2659

this Constitution, shall at their first meeting so classify themselves, by
lot, that four of them shall go out of office at the end of two years,
and four of them shall go out of office at the end of four years, and
four of them shall yo out of ottice at the end of six years, and an entry of
such classification shall be made in the minutes of the Court, signed by
them, and a duplicate thereof filed in the office of the Secretary of State.
The first election of Judges of the Superior Courts shall take place at the
first zeneral election held after the adoption and ratification of this Con-
stitution. Ifa vacancy occur in the office of Judge of a Superior Court,
the Governor shall appoint a person to hold the office until the election
and qualification of a Judge to fill the vacancy, which election shall take
place at the next succeeding general election, and the Judge so elected
shall hold ottice for the remainder of the unexpired term.

Seo. 7. In any county, or city and county, other than the City and
County of San Francisco, in which there shall be more than one Judge of
the Superior Court, the Judges of such Court may hold as many sessions of
said Court at the same time as there are Judges thereof, and shall appor-
tion the business among themselves as equally as may be.

Sec. 8. A Judge of any Superior Court may hold a Superior Court
in any county, at the request of a Judge of the Superior Court thereof,
and upon request of the Governor it shall be his duty so to do, But a
cause in a Superior Court may be tried by a Judge pro tempore, who must
be a member of the bar, agreed upon in writing by the parties litigant or
their attorneys of record, approved by the Court, and sworn to try the
cause.

Sec. 9. The Legislature shall have no power to grant leave of ab-
sence to any judicial officer; and any such officer who shall absent
himself from the State for more than sixty consecutive days shall be
deemed to have forfeited his office. The Legislature of the State may,
at any time, two-thirds of the members of the Senate and two-thirds of
the members of the Assembly voting therefor, increase or diminish the
number of Judges of the Superior Court in any county, or city and
county, in the State; provided, that no such reduction shall affect any
Judge who has been elected.

Sec. 10. Justices of the Supreme Court and Judges of the Superior
Courts may be removed by concurrent resolution of both Houses of the
Legislature, adopted by a two-thirds vote of each house. All other
judicial officers, except Justices of the Peace, may be removed by the
Senate on the recommendation of the Governor, but no removal shall be
made by virtue of this section, unless the cause thereof be entered on the
Jouenal, nor unless the party complained of has been served with a copy
of the complaint against him, and shall have had an opportunity of being
heard in his defence. On the question of removal, the ayes and noes
shall be entered on the Journal.

Sec. 11. The Legislature shall determine the number of Justices of
the Peace to be elected in townships, incorporated cities and towns, or
cities and counties, and shall fix by law the powers, duties, and responsi-
bilities of Justices of the Peace; provided, such powers shall not in any
case trench upon the jurisdiction of the several Cuurts of record, except

660 THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA APPENDIX

that said Justices shall have concurrent jurisdiction with the Superior
Courts in cases of forcible entry and detainer, where the rental value does
not exceed twenty-five dollars per month, and where the whvule amount of
damages claimed does not exceed two hundred dollars, and in cases tg
enforce and foreclose liens on personal property when neither the amount
of the liens nor the value of the property amounts to three hundred
dollars.

Src. 12. The Supreme Court, the Superior Courts, and such other
Courts as the Legislature may prescribe, shall be Courts of record, ‘

Src, 13. The Legislature shall fix by law the jurisdiction of any
inferior Courts which may be established in pursuance of section offe of
this article, and shall fix by law the powers, duties, and responsibilities of
the Judges thereof.

Sec, 14, The Legislature shall provide for the election of a Clerk of
the Supreme Court, and shall fix by law his duties and compensation, which
compensation shall not be increased or diminished during the term for
which he shall have been elected. The County Clerks shall be ex officio
Clerks of the Courts of record in and for their respective counties, or
cities and counties. The Legislature may also provide for the appoint-
ment, by the several Superiur Courts, of one or more Commissioners in
their respective counties, or cities and counties, with authority to perform
chamber business of the Judges of the Superior Courts, to take deposi-
tions, and perform such other business connected with the administration
of justice as may be prescribed by law.

Src. 15. No judicial officer, except Justices of the Peace and Court
Commissioners, shall receive to his own use any fees or perquisites of office.

Src. 16. The Legislature shall provide for the speedy publication of
such opinions of the Supreme Court as it may deem expedient, and all
opinions shall be free for publication by any person.

Sec. 17. The Justices of the Supreme Court and Judyes of the
Superior Courts shall severally, at stated times during their continuance
in office, receive for their services a compensation which shall not be
increased or diminished after their election, nor during the term for which
they shall have been elected. The salaries of the Justices of the Supreme
Court shall be paid by the State. One-half of the salary of each Superior
Court Judge shall be paid by the State; the other half thereof shall be
paid by the county for which he is elected. During the term of the first
Judges elected under this Constitution, the annual salaries of the Justices
of the Supreme Court shall be six thousand dollars each. Until other-
wise changed by the Legislature, the Superior Court Judges shall receive
an annual salary of three thousand dollars each, payable monthly, except
the Judges of the City and County of San Francisco, and the Counties of
Alameda, San Joaquin, Los Angeles, Santa Clara, Yuba and Sutter com-
bined, Sacramento, Butte, Nevada, and Sonoma, who shall receive four
thousand dollars each.

Sec. 18. The Justices of the Supreme Court and Judges of the
Superior Courts shall be ineligille to any other office or public employ-
ment than a judicial office or employment during the term fur which they
shall have been elected.

APPENDIX THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA 661

a

Sec. 19. Judges shall not charge juries with respect to matters of
fact, but may state the testimony and declare the law.

Sec. 20. The style of all process shall be, “ The People of the State
of California,” and all prosecutions shall be conducted in their name and
by their authority. .

Szc. 21. The Justices shall appoint a Reporter of the decisions of the
Supreme Court, who shall hold his office and be removable at their plea-
supe. He shall receive an annual salary not to exceed twenty-five hundred
dollars, payable monthly.

exc. 22. No Judge of a Court of record shall practise law in any
Court of this State during his continuance in office.

Src. 23. No one shall be eligible to the office of Justice of the
Supreme Court, or to the office of Judge of a Superior Court, unless he
shall have been admitted to practise before the Supreme Court of the
State.

Sec. 24, No Judge of a Superior Court, nor of the Supreme Court,
shall, after the first day of July one thousand eight hundred and eighty, be
allowed to draw or receive any monthly salary unless he shall take and sub-
scribe to an affidavit before an officer entitled to administer oaths, that no
cause in his Court remains undecided that has been submitted for decision
for the period of ninety days.

ARTICLE VII
PARDONING POWER

Section 1, The Governor shall have the power to grant reprieves,
pardons, and commutations of sentence, after conviction, for all offences
except treason and cases of impeachment, upon such conditions, and with
such restrictions and limitations, as he may think proper, subject to such
regulations as may be provided by law relative to the manner of applying
for pardons. Upon conviction for treason, the Governor shall have power
to suspend the execution of the sentence until the case shall be re-
ported to the Legislature at its next meeting, when the Legislature shall
either pardon, direct the execution of the sentence, or grant a further re-
prieve. The Governor shall communicate to the Legislature, at the
beginning of every session, every case of reprieve or pardon granted,
stating the name of the convict, the crime for which he was convicted,
the sentence, its date, the date of the pardon or reprieve, and the reasons
for granting the same. Neither the Governor nor the Legislature shall
hav8 power to grant pardons, or commutations of sentence, in any case
where the convict has been twice convicted of felony, unless upon the
written recommendation of a majority of the Judges of the Supreme Court.

ARTICLE VIII
MILITIA

Section 1. The Legislature shall provide, by law, for organizing and
disciplining the militia, in such manner as it may deem expedient, not

662 THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA APPENDIX

a a
incompatible with the Constitution and laws of the United States.
Officers of the militia shall be elected or appointed in such manner as the
Legislature shall, from time to time, direct, and shall be commissioned
by the Governor. The Governor shall have power to call forth the
militia to execute the laws of the State, fo suppress insurrections, and
repel invasions.

Sec. 2. All military organizations provided for by this Constitution,
or any law of this State, and receiving State support, shall, while unger
arms, either for ceremony or duty, carry no device, banner, or flag of
any State or nation, except that of the United States or the State of
California,

ARTICLE IX
EDUCATION

‘Section 1. A general diffusion of knowledge and intelligence being
essential to the preservation of the rights and liberties of the people, the
Legislature shall encourage by all suitable means the promotion of intel-
lectual, scientific, moral, and agricultural improvement.

Sec. 2. A Superintendent of Public Instruction shall, at each guber-
natorial election after the adoption of this Constitution, be elected by the
qualified electors of the State. He shall receive a salary equal to that of
the Secretary of State, and shall enter upon the duties of his office on the
first Monday after the first day of January next succeeding his election.

Sec. 3. A Superintendent of Schools for each county shall be elected
by the qualified electors thereof at each gubernatorial election ; provided,
that the Legislature may authorize two or more counties to unite and
elect one Superintendent for the counties so uniting.

Sec. 4, The proceeds of all lands that have been or may be granted
by the United States to this State for the support of common schools,
which may be, or may have been, sold or disposed of, and the five hundred
thousand acres of land granted to the new States under an Act of Congress
distributing the proceeds of the public lands among the several States of
the Union, approved a.D. one thousand eight hundred and forty-one, and
all estates of deceased persons who may have died without leaving a will
or heir, and also such per cent as may be granted, or may have been
granted, by Congress on the sale of lands in this State, shall be and
remain a perpetual fund, the interest of which, together with all the rents
of the unsold lands and such other means as the Legislature may provide,
shall be inviolably appropriated to the support of commun schkovls
throughout the State. .

Sec. 5. The Legislature shall provide for a system of common schools
by which a free school shall be kept up and supported in each district at
least six months in every year, after the first year in which a school has
been established.

Sec. 6. The public school system shall include primary and grammar
schools, and such high schools, evening schools, normal schools, and tech-
nical schools, as may be established by the Levislature, or by municipal
or district authority ; but the entire revenue derived from the State School

APPENDIX THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA 663

Fund, and the State school tax, shall be applied exclusively to the support
of primary and grammar schools.

Sec. 7. The Governor, Superintendent of Public Instruction, and the
Principals of the State Nermal Schools, shall constitute the State Board
of Education, and shall compile, or cause to be compiled, and adopt a
uniform series of text-books for use in the common schools throughout
the State. The State Board may cause such text-books, when adopted, to
be printed and published by the Superintendent of State Printing, at the
State Printing Office, and when so printed and published, to be distri-
buted and auld at the cost price of printing, publishing, and distributing
the same. The text-books so adopted shall continue in use nut less than
four years ; and said State Board shall perform such other duties as may
be prescribed by law. The Legislature shall provide for a Board of Edu-
cation in each county in the State. The County Superintendents and the
County Boards of Education shall have control of the examination of
teachers and the granting of teachers’ certificates within their respective
jurisdictions. [Amendment adopted November 4, 1884.]

Sec. 8. No public money shall ever be appropriated for the support
of any sectarian or denominational school, or any school not under the
exclusive control of the officers of the public schools ; nor shall any sec-
tarian or denominational doctrine be taught, or instruction thereon be
permitted, directly or indirectly, in any of the common schovls of this State.

Sec. 9. The University of California shall constitute a public trust,
and its organization and government shall be perpetually continued in the
form and character prescribed by the organic Act creating the same, passed
March twenty-third, eighteen hundred and sixty-eight (and the several
Acts amendatory thereof), subject only to such legislative control as may
be necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of its endowments and
the proper investment and security of its funds, It shall be entirely in-
dependent of all political or sectarian influence, and kept free therefrom
in the appointment of its Regents, and in the administration of its affairs;
provided, that all the moneys derived from the sale of the public lands
donated to this State by Act of Congress, approved July second, eighteen
hundred and sixty-two (and the several Acts amendatory thereof), shall
be invested as provided by said Acts of Congress, and the interest
of said moneys shall be inviolably appropriated to the endowment,
support, and maintenance of at least one Colleve of Agriculture, where
the leading objects shall be (without excluding other scientific and classical
studies, and including military tactics) to teach such branches of learning
as age related to scientific and practical agriculture and the mechanic arts,
in accordance with the requirements and conditions of said Acts of
Congress ; and the Legislature shall provide that if, through neglect,
misappropriation, or any other contingency, any portion of the funds so
set apart shall be diminished or lost, the State shall replace such portion
so lost or misappropriated, so that the principal thereof shall remain
for ever undiminished. No person shall be debarred admission to any of
the collegiate departments of the University on account of sex.

664 THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA APPENDIX

ARTICLE X
STATE INSTITUTIONS AND PUBLIC BUILDINGS

Section 1, There shall be a State Roard of Prison Directors, to
consist of five persons, to be appointed by the Governor, with the advice
and consent of the Senate, who shall hold office for ten years, except that
the first appointed shall, in such manner as the Legislature may direct, be
so classified that the term of one person sv appointed shall expire at the
end of each two years during the first ten years, and vacancies occurring
shall be filled in like manner. The appvintee to a vacancy, occurring
before the expiration of a term, shall hold ottice only for the unexpired
term of his predecessor. The Governor shall have the power to remove
either of the Directors four misconduct, incompetency, or neglect of duty,
after an opportunity to be heard upon written charges,

Sec. 2. The Board of Directors shall have the charge and superintend-
ence of the State Prisons, and shall possess such powers and perform such
duties, in respect to other penal and reformatory institutions of the State,
as the Legislature may prescribe.

Src. 3. The Board shall appoint the Warden and Clerk, and deter-
mine the other necessary officers of the prisons, The Board shall have
power to remove the Wardens and Clerks for misconduct, incompetency,
or neglect of duty. All other officers and employés of the prisons shall
be appointed by the Warden thereof, and be removed at his pleasure.

Src. 4. The members of the Board shall receive no compensation,
other than reasonable travelling and other expenses incurred while engaged
in the performance of official duties, to be audited as the Legislature may
direct.

Src. 5. The Legislature shall pass such Jaws as may be necessary to
further define and regulate the powers and duties of the Board, Wardens,
and Clerks, and to carry into effect the provisions of this article.

Sec. 6. After the first day of January, eishteen hundred and eighty-
two, the labour of convicts shall not be let out by comtract to any persun,
copartnership, company, or corporation, and the Legislature shall, by law,
provide for the working of convicts for the benefit of the State.

ABTICLE XI
CITIES, COUNTIES, AND TOWNS

Section 1. The several counties, as they now exist, are herehy recog-
nized as legal subdivisions of this State.

Src. 2. No county seat shall be removed unless two-thirds of the
qualified electurs of the county, voting on the proposition at a general
election, shall vote in favour of such removal. A proposition of removal
shall not be submitted in the same county more than once in four years.

Sec. 3. No new county shall be established which shall reduce any
county to a population of less than eight thousand ; nor shall a new
county be formed containing a less population than five thousand, nor
shall any line thereof pass within five miles of the county seat of any

APPENDIX THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA 665

county proposed to be divided. Every county which shall be enlarged or
created from territory taken from any other county or counties, shall be
Mable for a just proportion of the existing debts and liabilities of the
county or counties frum which such territory shall be taken.

Sec. 4. The Legislature Shall establish a system of county govern-
ments which shall be uniform throughout the State, and by general laws
shall provide for township organization, under which any county may
organize whenever a majority of the qualified electors of such county,
voting at a general election, shall so determine ; and whenever a county
shuld adopt tuwnship organization, the assessment and collection of the
revenue shall be made and the business of such county and the local
affairs of the several townships therein shall be managed and transacted
in the manner prescribed by such general laws.

Sec. 5. The Legislature, by general and uniform laws, shall provide
for the election or appointment, in the several counties, of Boards of
Supervisors, Sheriffs, County Clerks, District Attorneys, and such other
county, township, and municipal officers as public convenience may
require, and shall prescribe their duties, and fix their term of office. It
shall regulate the compensation of all such officers in proportion to duties,
and for this purpose may classify the counties by population ; and it shall
provide for the strict accountability of county and township officers for
all fees which may be collected by them, and for all public and municipal
money which may be paid to them, or officially come into their possession.

Sec. 6. Corporations for municipal purposes shall not be created by
special laws ; but the Legislature, by general laws, shall provide for the
incorporation, organization, and classification, in proportion to popula-
tion, of cities and towns, which laws may be altered, amended, or re-
pealed. Cities and towns heretofore erganized or incorporated may
become organized under such general laws whenever a majority of the
electors voting at a general election shall so determine, and shall organize
in conformity therewith; and cities or towns heretofore or hereafter
organized, and all charters thereof framed or adopted by authority of this
Constitution, shall he subject to and controlled hy general laws.

Sec. 7. City and county governments may be merged and consvlidated
into one municipal government, with one set of officers, and may be in-
corporated under general laws providing for the incorporation and
organization of corporations fof municipak purposes. The provisions of
this Constitution applicable to cities, and also those applicable to
counties, so far as nut inconsistent or not prohibited to cities, shall be
applicable to such consolidated government. In consolidated city and
county governments, of more than one hundred thousand population, there
shall be two Boards of Supervisors or houses of legislation—one of which,
to consist of twelve persons, shall be elected by general ticket from the
city and county at large, and shall hold office for the term of four years,
but shall be so classified that after the first election only six shall be
elected every two years; the other, to consist of twelve persons, shall
be elected every two years, and shall hold office for the term of two years.
Any vacancy occurring in the office of Supervisor, in either Bvard, shall
be filled by the Mayor or other chief executive officer.

666 THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA APPENDIX

e

Sec. 8 Any city containing a population of more than one hundred
thousand inhabitants may frame a charter for its own government, con-
sistent with and subject to the Constitution and laws of this State, by
causing a Board of fifteen freeholders, who shall have been for at least
five years qualified electors thereof, to be elected by the qualified voters
of such city, at any general or special election, whose duty it shall be,
within ninety days after such election, to prepare and propose a charter
for such city, which shall be signed in duplicate by the members of such
Board, or a majority of them, and returned, one copy thereof to the
Mayor, or other chief executive otticer of such city, and the other tothe
Recorder of deeds of the county. Such proposed charter shall then be
published in two daily papers of general circulation in such city for at
least twenty days, and within not less than thirty days after such publica-
tion it shall be submitted to the qualified electors of such city at a general
or special election, and if a majority of such qualified electors voting
thereat shall ratify the same, it shall thereafter be submitted to the Levis-
lature for its approval or rejection as a whole, without power of alteration
or amendment, and if approved by a majority vote of the members elected
to each house, it shall become the charter of such city, or if such city he
consolidated with a county, then of such city and county, and shall
become the organic law thereof, and supersede any existing charter and
all amendments thereof, and all special laws inconsistent with such
charter. A copy of such charter, certified by the Mayor or chief execu-
tive officer, and authenticated by the seal of such city, setting forth the
submission of such charter to the electors and its ratification by them,
shall be made in duplicate and deposited, one in the office of the Secretary
of State, the other, after being recorded in the office of the Recorder of
deeds of the county, among the archives of the city ; all Courts shall take
judicial notice thereof. The charter so ratified may be amended at in-
tervals of not less than two years, by proposals therefor, submitted by
legislative authority of the city to the qualified voters thereof, at a general
or special election held at least sixty days after the publication of such
proposals, and ratified by at least three-fifths of the. qualified electors
voting thereat, and approved by the Legislature as herein provided for
the approval of the charter. In submitting any such charter, or amend-
ment thereto, any alternative article or proposition may be presented for
the choice of the voters, and may be voted on separately without preju-
dice to others. Any city containing a population of more than ten
thousand and not more than one hundred thousand inhabitants, may
frame a charter for its own government, consistent with and subjeet to
the Constitution and laws of this State, by causing a Board of fifteen free-
holders, who shall have been for at least five years qualified electors
thereof, to be elected by the qualified voters of said city, at any general
or special election, whose duty it shall be, within ninety days after such
election, to prepare and propose a charter for such city, which shall be
signed in duplicate by the members of such Board, or a majority of them,
and returned, one copy thereof to the Mayor, or other chief executive of
said city, and the other tu the Recorder of the county. Such proposed
charter shall then be published in two daily papers of yeneral circulation

APPENDIX THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFCRNIA 667

Ld

in such city, for at least twenty days ; and the first publication shall be
made within twenty days after the completion of the charter; and within
not less than thirty days after such publication it shall be submitted to the
qualified electors of said city, at a general or special election, and if a
majority of such qualified ele€turs voting thereat shall ratify the same, it
shall thereafter be submitted to the Legislature for its approval or rejec-
tion as a whole, without power of alteration or amendment; and if
approved by a majority vute of the members elected to each house it
shall become the charter of such city, and the organic law thereof,
and ehall supersede any existing charter, and any amendments thereof,
and all special laws inconsistent with such charter. A copy of such
charter, certified by the Mayor or chief executive officer, and authenti-
cated by the seal of such city, setting forth the submission of such charter
to the electors, and its ratification by them, shall be made in duplicate,
and deposited, one in the office of Secretary of State, and the other, after
being recorded in said Recorder’s office, shall be deposited in the archives
of the city ; and thereafter all Courts shall take judicial notice of said
charter, The charter so ratified may be amended, at intervals of not less
than two years, by proposals therefor, submitted by the legislative
authority of the city to the qualified electors thereof, at a general or
special election held at least sixty days after the publication of such pro-
pesals, and ratified by at least three-fifths of the qualified electors voting
thereat, and approved by the Legislature as herein provided for the
approval of the charter. In submitting any such charter, or amendment
thereto, any alternative article or propusition may be presented for the
choice of the voters, and may be voted on separately without prejudice to
others. [Amendment adopted April 12, 1887.]

Sec. 9. The compensation of any county, city, town, or municipal
officer shall not be increased after his election or during his term of office ;
nor shall the term of any such officer be extended beyond the period for
which he is elected or appointed.

Sec. 10, No county, city, town, or other public or municipal corpora-
tion, nor the inhabitants thereof, nor the property therein, shall be released
or discharged from its or their proportionate share of taxes to be levied for
State purposes, nor shall commutation for such taxes be authorized in any
form whatsoever.

Sec, 11. Any county, city, town, or township may make and enforce
within its limits all such local, police, sanitary, and other regulations as
are not in conflict with general laws.

Sec. 12. The Leyislature shall have no power to impose taxes upon
counties, cities, towns, or other public or municipal corporations, or upon
the inhabitants or property thereof, for county, city, town, or other
municipal purposes, but may, by general laws, vest in the corporate
authorities thereof the power to assess and collect taxes for such pur-
poses.

Sec. 13. The Legislature shall not delegate to any special commission,
private corporation, company, association, or individual, any power to
make, control, appropriate, supervise, or in any way interfere with, any
county, city, town, or municipal improvement, money, property, or effects,

668 THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA APPENDIX

e
whether held in trust or otherwise, or to levy taxes or assessments, or
perform any municipel fanctions whatever.

Sec. 14. No State office shall be continued or created in any county,
city, town, or other municipality, for the inspection, measurement, or
graduation of any merchandise, manufacttire, or commodity ; but such
county, city, town, or municipality may, when authorized by general law,
appoint such oflicers.

Src, 15. Private property shall not be taken or sold for the payment
of the corporate debt of any political or municipal corporation.

Sec. 16. All moneys, assessments, and taxes belonging to or collected
for the use of any county, city, town, or other public or municipal corpora-
tion, coming into the hands of any officer thereof, shall immediately be
deposited with the Treasurer, or other legal depositary, to the credit of
such city, town, or other corporation respectively, for the benefit of the
funds to which they respectively belong.

Sec. 17. The making of profit out of county, city, town, or other
public money, or using the same for any purpose not authorized by law,
by any officer having the possession or control thereof, shall be a felony,
and shall be prosecuted and punished as prescribed by law.

Sec. 18. No county, city, town, township, Board of Education, or
school district shall incur any indebtedness or liability in any manner, or
for any purpose, exceeding in any year the income and revenue provided
for it for such year, without the assent of two-thirds of the qualified
electors thereof, voting at an election to be held for that purpose, nor
unless, before or at the time of incurring such indebtedness, provision
shall be made for the collection of an annual tax sutflicient to pay the
interest on such indebtedness as it falls due, and also to constitute a
sinking fund for the payment of the principal thereof within twenty
years from the time of contracting the same. Any indebtedness or lia-
bility incurred contrary to this provision shall be void.

Sec. 19. In any city where there are no public works owned and
controlled by the municipality for supplying the same with water or arti-
ficial light, any individual, or any company duly incorporated for such
purpose under and by authority of the laws of this State, shall, under the
direction of the Superintendent of Streets, or other officer in control
thereof, and under such general regulations as the municipality may pre-
scribe for damages and indemnity for damages, have the privilege of using
the public streets and thoroughfares thereof, and of laying down pipes and
conduits therein, and connections therewith, so far as may be necessary for
introducing into and supplying such city and its inhabitants eithey with
gaslight or other illuminating light, or with fresh water for domestic
and all other purposes, upon the condition that the municipal government
shall have the right to regulate the charges thereof. [Amendment
adopted November 4, 1884.]

APPENDIX THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA 569

ARTICLE XII
CORPORATIONS

Section 1. Corporations may be formed under general laws, but shall
not be created by special Act.? All laws now in force in this State con-
cerning corporations, and all laws that may be hereafter passed pursuant
to this section, may be altered from time to time or repealed.

Sec. 2. Dues from corporatiuns shall be secured by such individual
liability of the corporators and other means as may be prescribed by law.

Suc. 3. Each stockholder of a corporation, or joint-stock association,
shall be individually and personally liable for such proportion of all its
debts and liabilities contracted or incurred, during the time he was a stock-
holder, as the amount of stock or shares owned by him bears to the whole
of the subscribed capital stuck or shares of the corporation or association.
The directors or trustees of corporations and joint-stock associations shall
be jointly and severally liable to the creditors and stockholders for all

- moneys embezzled or misappropriated by the officers of such corporation
or joint-stuck assuciation, during the term of such director or trustee.

Sec. 4. The term corporations, as used in this article, shall be cun-
strued to include all associations and joint-stock companies having any of
the powers or privileges of corporations not possessed by individuals or
partnerships, and all corporations shall have the right to sue and shall be
subject to ke sued, in all Courts, in like cases as natural persons.

Sec. 5, The Legislature shall have no power to pass any Act granting
any charter for banking purposes, but corporations or associations may be
formed for such purposes under general laws, No corporation, assucia-
tion, or individual shall issue or put into circulation, as money, anything
but the lawful money of the United States,

Sec. 6. All existing charters, grants, franchises, special or exclusive
privilezes, under which an actual and bona fide organization shall not
have taken place, and business been commenced in good faith, at the time
of the adoption of this Constitution, shall thereafter have no validity.

Sec. 7. The Legislature shall not extend any franchise or charter
nor remit the forfeiture of any franchise or charter of any corporation
now existing, or which shall hereafter exist under the laws of this State.

Sec. 8. The exercise of the right of eminent domain shall never be so
abridged or construed as to prevent the Legislature from taking the
property and franchises of incorporated companies and subjecting them to
public use the same as the property of individuals, and the exercise of the
police power of the State shall never be so abridged or construed as to
permit corporations to conduct their business in such manner as tu infringe
the rights of individuals or the general well-being of the State,

Sec. 9. No curporation shall engage in any business other than that
expressly authorized in its charter, or the law under which it may have’
been or may hereafter be organized ; nor shall it hold fur a loner period
than five years any real estate except such as may be necessary for carry-
ing on its business,

Sec. 10, The Legislature shall not pass any laws permitting the

676 THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA APPENDIX

leasing* or alienation of any franchise, so as to relieve the franchise or
property held thereunder from the liabilities of the lessor or grantor,
lessee or grantee, contracted or incurred in the operation, use, or enjoy-
ment of such franchise, or any of its privileges.

Sec. 11. No corporation shall issue stock or bunds, except for money
paid, labour done, or property actually receiv ed, and all fictitious increase
of stock or indebtedness shall be void. The atiock and bonded indebted-
ness of corporations shall not be increased except in pursuance of general
Jaw, nor without the consent of the persons holding the larger amount in
value of the stock, at a meeting called for that purpose, giving sixty days’
public notice, as may be provided by law.

Sec. 12. In all elections fur directors or managers of corporations
every stockholder shall have the right to vote, in person or hy proxy, the
number of shares of stock owned by him, for as many persons as there
are directurs or manavers to be elected, or to cumulate said shares and
give one candidate as many votes as the number of directors multiplied
by the number of his shares of stock shall equal, or to distribute them,
on the same principle, amony as many candidates as he” may think fit ;
and such directors or managers shall not be elected in any other manner,
except that members of co-operative sucieties formed for agricultural,
mercantile, and manufacturing purposes may vote on all questions affecting
such societies in manner prescribed by law.

Sec, 13. The State shall not in any manner loan its credit, nor shall
it subscribe to or be interested in the stock of any company, association,
or corporation,

Sec. 14, Every corporation, other than religious, educational, or
benevolent, organized or doing business in this State, shall have and
maintain an office or place in this State fur the transaction of its business,
where transfers of stock shall be made, and in which shall be kept for
inspection, by every person having an interest therein, and legislative
committees, books in which shall be recorded the amount of capital stock
subscribed, and by whom ; the names of the owners of its stock, and the
amounts owned by them respectively ; the amount of stock paid in, and
by whom ; the transfers of stock ; the amount of its assets and liabilities,
and the names and place of residence of its officers.

Sec. 15. No corporation organized outside the limits of this State
shall be allowed to transact business within this State on more favourable
conditions than are prescribed by law to similar corporations organized
under the laws of this State.

Sec. 16, A corporation or assuciation may be sued in the county
where the contract is made or is to be performed, or where the obligation
or liability arises, o~ the breach occurs; or in the county where the
principal place of business of such corporation is situated, subject to the
power of the Court to change the place of trial as in other cases.

Sec. 17. All railroad, canal, and other transportation companies are
declared to be common carriers, and subject to legislative control. Any
association or corporation, organized for the purpose, under the laws of
this State, shall have the right to connect at the State line with railroads
of other States. Every railroad company shall have the right with its

APPENDIX THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA 671

road to intersect, connect with, or cross any other railroad, afid shall
receive and transport each the other’s passengers, tonnage, and cars,
without delay or discrimination.

Sec. 18. No president, director, officer, agent, or employé of any rail-
road or canal company shall be interested, directly or indirectly, in the
furnishing of material or supflies to such company, nor in the business uf
transportation as a common carrier of freight or passengers over the works
owned, leased, controled, or worked by such company, except such interest
in the business of transportation as lawfully flows from the ownership of
stovk therein,

Sec. 19. No railroad or other transportation company shall grant free
passes, or passes or tickets at a discount, to any person holding any
ottice of honvur, trust, or profit in this State ; and the acceptance of any
such pass or ticket by a member of the Legislature or any public officer,
other than Railruad Commissioner, shall work a forfeiture of his office.

Sec. 20. No railroad company or other common carrier shall combine
or make any contract with the owners of any vessel that leaves port or
makes port in fhis State, or with any common carrier, by which coumbina-
tion or contract the earnings of one doing the carrying are to be shared
by the other not doing the carrying, And whenever a railroad
corporation shall, for the purpose of competing with any other common
carrier, lower its rates for transportation of passengers or freight from one
point to another, such reduced rates shall not be again raised or increased
from such standard without the consent of the governmental authority in
which shall be vested the power to regulate fares and freizhts.

Sec. 21. No discrimination in charges or facilities for transportation
shall be made by any railroad or other transportation :ompany between
places or persons, or in the facilities for the transportation of the same
classes of freight or passengers within this State, or coming from or going
to any other State. Persons and property transported over any railroad,
or by any other transportation company or individual, shall be delivered
at any station, landing, or port, at charges not exceeding the charges for
the transportation of persons and property of the same class, in the same
direction, to any more distant station, port, or landing. Excursion and
commutation tickets may be issued at special rates.

Src, 22, The State will be divided into three districts as nearly
equal in population as practicable, in each of which one Railroad Com-
missioner shall be elected by the qualified electors thereof at the regular
gubernatorial elections, whose salary shall be fixed by law, and whose
term of office shall be four years, commencing on the first Monday after
the first day of January next succeeding their election. Said Commis-
sioners shall be qualified electors of this State and of the district from
which they are elected, and shall not be interested in any railroad cor-
poration, or other transportation company, as stockholder, creditor, agent,
attorney, or employé ; and the act of a majority of said Commissioners
shall be deemed the act of said Commission. Said Commissioners shall
have the power, and it shall be their duty, to establish rates of charges
for the transportation of passengers and freight by railroad or other trans-
portation companies, and publish the same from time to time, with such

674 THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA APPENDIX

changes as they may make ; to examine the books, records, and papers
of all railroad and other transportation companies, and for this purpose
they shall have power to issue sulypwnas and all other necessary process ;
to hear and determine complaints against railroad and other transportg-
tion companies, to send for persons and papers, to adininister oaths, take
testimony, and punish fur contempt of theif orders and processes, in the
same manner and to the same extent as Courts of record, and enforce their
decisions and correct abuses through the medium of the Courts, Said
Commissioners hall prescribe a unifurm system of accounts to be kept
by all such corporations and companies. Any railroad corporation or
transportation eompany which shall fail or refuse to conform to sucherates
as shall be established by such Commissioners, or shall charge rates in
excess thereof, or shall fail to keep their accounts in accordance with the
system prescribed by the Commission, shall be fined not exceeding twenty
thousand dollars for each offence ; and every officer, ayent, ur employd of
any such corporation or company, who shall demand or receive rates in
excess thereof, or who shall in any manner violate the provisions of this
section, shall be fined not exceeding five thousand dollars, ér be imprisoned
in the county jail not exveeding one year. In all controversies, civil or
criminal, the rates of fares and freights established by said Commission
shall be deemed conclusively just and reasonable, and in any action
against such corporation or company for damages sustained by charging
excessive rates, the plaintiff, in addition to the actual damage, may, in the
discretion of the Judge or jury, recover exemplary damages. Said Com-
mission shall report to the Governor, annually, their proceedings, and
such other facts as may be deemed important. Nothing in this section
shall prevent individuals from maintaining actions against any of such
companies. The Legislature may, in addition to any penalties herein
prescribed, enforce this article by forfeiture of charter or otherwise, and
may confer such further powers on the Commissioners as shall be neces-
sary to enable them to perform the duties enjuined on them in this and
the foregoing section, The Legislature shall have power, by a two-thirds
vote of all the members elected to each house, to remove any one or more
of said Coinmissioners from office, for dereliction of duty, or corruption,
or incompetency ; and whenever, from any cause, a vacancy in office
shall occur in said Commission, the Governor shall fill the same by the
appointment of a qualified person thereto, who shall hold office for the
residue of the unexpired term, and until his successor shall have been
elected and qualified.

Sec. 23. Until the Legislature shall district the State, the following
shall be the railroad districts -—The First District shall be composed of
the Counties of Alpine, Amador, Butte, Calaveras, Colusa, Del Norte, El
Dorado, Humboldt, Lake Lassen, Mendocino, Modoc, Napa, Nevada,
Placer, Plumas, Sacramentv, Shasta, Sierra, Siskiyou, Solano, Sonoma,
Sutter, Tehama, Trinity, Yolo, and Yuba, from which one Railrvad Com-
missioner shall be elected. The Second District shall he composed of the
Counties of Marin, San Francisco, and San Mateo, from which one Rail-
rvad Commissioner shall be elected. The Third District shall be com-
posed of the counties of Alameda, Contra Costa, Fresno, Inyo, Kern, Los

APPENDIX THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA 673

Angeles, Mariposa, Merced, Mono, Monterey, San Benito, San Bernardino,
San Diego, San Joaquin, San Luis Obispo, Santa Barbara, Santa Clara,
Santa Cruz, Stanislaus, Tulare, Tuolumne, and Ventura, from which one
Railroad Commissivner shall be elected.

Sec. 24, The Legislatureshall pass all laws necessary for the enforce-
ment of the provisions of this article.

ARTICLE XIII
REVENUE AND TAXATION

Secrion 1. All property in the State, not exempt under the laws of
the United States, shall be taxed in pruportion to its value, to be ascer-
tained as provided by law. The word “ property,” as used in this article
and ection, is hereby declared to include moneys, credits, bonds, stocks,
dues, franchises, and all other matters and things, real, personal, and
mixed, capable of private ownership; provided, that growing crops,
property used gxclusively for public schouls, and such as may belong to
the United States, this State, or tu any county or municipal corporation
within this State, shall be exempt from taxation. The Leyislature may
provide, except in case of credits secured by mortyave or trust decd for a
reduction from credits of debts due bona fide residents of this State.

Sec. 2. Land, and the improvements thereon, shall be separately
assessed. Cultivated and uncultivated land, of the same quality, and
similarly situated, shall be assessed at the same value.

Sec. 3. Every tract of land containing more than six hundred and
forty acres, and which has been sectionized by the United States Govern-
ment, shall be assessed, for the purposes of taxation, by sections or fractions
of sections. The Legislature shall provide by law for the assessment, in
small tracts, of all lands not sectionized by the United States Government.

Sec. 4. A mortgage, deed of trust, contract, or other obligation by
which a debt is secured, shall, for the purpose of assessment and taxation,
be deemed and treated as an interest in the property affected thereby.
Except as to railroad and other quasi-public corporations, in case of delit
so secured, the value of the property affected bysuch mortgaye, deed of trust,
contract, or obligation, less the value of such security, shall be assessed and
taxed to the owner of the property, and the value of such security shall be
assessed and taxed to the owner thereof, in the county, city, or district in
which the property affected thereby is situate. The taxes so levied shall
be a lien upon the propetty and security, and may be paid by either party
to such security ; if paid by the owner of the security, the tax so levied
upon the property affected thereby shall become a part of the debt so
secured; if the owner of-the property shall pay the tax so levied on euch
security, it shall constitute a payment thereon, and to the extent of such
payment, a full discharge thereof; provided, that if any such security or
indebtedness shall be paid by such debtor or debtors, after assessment and
before the tax levy, the amount of such levy may likewise be retained by
such debtor or debtors, and shall be computed according to the tax levy
of the preceding year.

Sec. 5. Every contract hereafter made, by which a debtor is obieatad

VOL. If 2x

674 THE CONSTITUTION OF CALIFORNIA APPENDIX

to pay any tax or assessment on money loaned, or on any mortgave, deed
of trust, or other lien, shall, as to any interest specified therein, and as to
such tax or assessment, be null and void.

Sec. 6. The power of taxation shall never be surrendered or suspended
by any grant or contract to which the State ghall be a party.

Sec. 7. The Levislature shall have the power to provide by law for
the payment of all taxes on real property by instalments.

Sec. 8. The Legislature shall ly law require each taxpayer in this
State to make and deliver to the County Assessor, annually, a statement,
under oath, setting forth specifically all the real and personal property
owned by such taxpayer, or in his possession, or under his control, at
twelve o'clock meridian on the first Monday of March.

Sec. 9, A State Board of Equalization, consisting of one member from
each Congressional District in this State, as the same existed in eighteen
hundred and seventy-nine, shall be elected by the qualified electors of
their respective districts, at the general election to be held in the year
one thousand eight hundred and eighty-six, and at each, gubernatorial
election thereafter, whose term of office shall be for four years ; whose
duty it shall be to equalize the valuatiun of the taxable property in the
several counties of the State for the purposes of taxation. The Controller
of State shall be ec officio a member of the Board. The Boards of Super-
fisors of the several counties of the State shall constitute Boards of
Equalization for their respective counties, whose duty it shall be to
equalize the valuation of the taxable property in the county for the pui-
pose of taxation ; provded, such State and County Boards of Equalization
are hereby authorized and empowered, under such rules of notice as the
County Boards may prescribe as to the action of the State Board, to in-
crease or lower the entire assessment roll, or any assessinent contained
therein, so as to equalize the assessment of the property contained
in said assessment roll, and make the assessment conform to the
true value in money of the property contained in said roll; pro-
vided, that no Board of Equalization shall raise any mortgage, deed of
trust, contract, or other obligation by which a debt is secured, money, or
solvent credits, above its face value. The present State Board of Equaliza-
tion shall continue in office until their successors, as herein provided for,
shall be elected and shall qualify. The Legislature shall have power to
redistrict the State into four districts, as nearly equal in population as
practical, and to provide for the elections of members of said Board of
Eyualization. [Amendment, adopted November 4, 1884.]

Sec. 10. All property, except as hereinafter in this section provided,
shall be assessed in the county, city, city and county, town, townshij, or
district in which it is Bituated, in the manner prescribed by law. The
franchise, roadway, roadbed, rails, and rolling stock of all railroads
operated in more than one county in this State shall be assessed by the
State Board of Equalization at their actual value, and the same shall be
apportioned to the counties, cities and counties, cities, towns, townships,
and districts in which such railroads are located, in proportion to the
number of miles of railway laid in such counties, cities and cuunties,
cities, towns, townships, and districts.

UVM UU LL ST AU ALTA
00102650

Digitized with financial assistance from
Shri Brinad Bhartiya Samaj
on 20 February, 2020

tet) ne, emai Bea
* : 9 :
sas Si wie ¢

ve

Saat f.

rel ae
