TLL
00102648

UIQUUUNT VAY TORCH
00102648

Digitized with financial assistance from

Shri Brihad Bhartiya Samaj
on 11 March, 2020

THE AM
i
RICAN COMMONWEA
LTH

Aeeteates—

THE

AMERICAN COMMONWEALTH

BY
JAMES BRYCE,
AUTHOR OF ‘THE HOLY ROMAN ae y) 6 I X
M.P. FOR ABERDEEN () 4

Bp 3let

IN THREE VOLUMES

VOL. I

THe NatTionaAL GOVERNMENT

;
Fee

rn
=! d ; - dy
Londow

MACMILLAN AND CO.

AND NEW YORK

1888

GID
S55
JO2648

‘1

Co my Friends and Colleagues

ALBERT VENN DICEY
THOMAS ERSKINE HOLLAND

PREFACE

As the introductory chapter of this work contains such
explanations as seem needed of its scope and plan,
the Author has little to do in this place except express
his thanks to the numerous friends who have helped
him with facts, opinions, and criticisms, or by the gift
of books or pamphlets. Among these he is especially
indebted to the Hon. Thomas M. Cooley, now Chairman. .
of the Inter-State Commerce Commission in Washington ;
Mr. James B, Thayer of the Harvard Law School,
Cambridge, Mass.; Hon. Seth Low, formerly Mayor of
Brooklyn ; Mr. Theodore Roosevelt of New York ; Mr. G.
Bradford of Cambridge, Mass.; and Mr. Theodore Bacon
of Rochester, N.Y.; by one or other of whom the greater
part of the proofs of these volumes have been read. He
has also received valuable aid from Mr. Justice Holmes
of the Supreme Court of Massachusetts; Mr. Theodore
Dwight, late Librarian of the State Department at
Washington; Mr. H. Villard of New York; Dr. Albert
Shaw of Minneapolis; Mr. Jesse Macy of Grinnell, Ia. ;
Mr. Simeon Baldwin and Dr. George P. Fisher of New-
haven, Conn.; Mr. Henry C. Lea of Philadelphia ; Col.

x PREFACE

T. W. Higginson of Cambridge, Mass.; Mr. Bernard
Moses bf Berkeley, Cal.; Mr. A. B. Houghton of Corn-
ing, N.Y.; Mr. John Hay of Washington; Mr. Henry
Hitchcock of St. Louis, Mo.; President James B. Angell
of Ann Arbor, Mich.; Hon. Andrew D. White of Syra-
euse, N.Y.; Mr. Frank J. Goodnow of New York; Dr.
Atherton of the State College, Pennsylvania; and the
U.S. Bureau of Education. No one of these gentlemen
is, however, responsible for any of the facts stated or
views expressed in the book.

The Author is further indebted to Mr. Low and Mr.
Goodnow for two chapters which they have written, and
which contain, as he believes, matter of much interest
relating to municipal government and politics.

He gladly takes this opportunity of thanking for
their aid and counsel four English friends: Mr. Henry
Sidgwick, who has read most of the proofs with great
care and made valuable suggestions upon them; the
Rev. Stopford A. Brooke, whose literary criticisms have
been very helpful; Mr. Albert V. Dicey, and Mr. W.
Robertson Smith. :

He is aware that, notwithstanding the assistance
rendered by friends in America, he must have fallen into
not a few errors, and without asking to be excused for
these, he desires to plead in extenuation that the book
has been written under the constant pressure of public
duties as well as of other private work, and that the
difficulty of obtaining in Europe correct information
regarding the constitutions and Jaws of American States
and the rules of party organizations is very great.

PREFACE xi

When the book was begun, it was intended to con-
tain a study of the more salient social and intellectual
plienomena of contemporary America, together with
descriptions of the scenery and the aspects of nature and
human nature in the West, all of whose States and
Territories the Author has visited. But as the work
advanced, he found that to-carry out this plan it would
be necessary either unduly to curtail the account of the
government and politics of the United States, or else to
extend the book to a still greater length than that which,
much to his regret, it has now reached. He therefore
reluctantly abandoned the hope of. describing in these
volumes the scenery and life of the West. As regards
the non-political topics which were to have been dealt
with, he has selected for discussion in the concluding
chapters those of them which either were comparatively
unfamiliar to European readers, or seemed specially
calculated to throw light on the political life of the
country, and to complete the picture which he has
sought to draw of the American Commonwealth as a
whole.

October 22, 1888.

CONTENTS

VOL. I

List oF PRESIDENTS

AREA, POPULATION, AND DaTE OF ADMISSION OF THE
STATES

DATES OF SOME REMARKABLE EVENTS IN THE HISTORY
OF THE NortH AMERICAN COLONIES AND UNITED
STATES

CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTORY

PART I—Tue Nationat GoveRNMENT

CHAPTER II

Tur NaTION AND THE STATES

CHAPTER III
Tue ORIGIN oF THE CONSTITUTION

CHAPTER IV

NATURE OF THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT

PAGE

Xxix

XXX

XXXxii

16

bo
ih)

39

xiv CONTENTS

CHAPTER V
THe PRESIDENT

CHAPTER VI
PRESIDENTIAL PowERS AND DUTIES

CHAPTER VII
OBSERVATIONS ON THE PRESIDENCY

CHAPTER VIII
Wuy GREAT MEN ARE NOT CHOSEN PRESIDENTS.

CHAPTER IX
THE CABINET .

CHAPTER X
THE SENATE :

CHAPTER XI

THE SENATE AS AN EXECUTIVE AND JUDICIAL Bopy .

~

CHAPTER XII
Tue SENATE: ITS WORKING AND INFLUENCE .

CHAPTER XIII
THe House oF REPRESENTATIVES

CHAPTER XIV
Tur House aT WorkK

PAGE

47

67

89

100

111

139

147

188

CONTENTS

Pc Ee ee eames mens aeanl

CHAPTER XV

Tuk ComMMITTEES OF CONGRESS

CHAPTER XVI
CONGRESSIONAL LEGISLATION

CHAPTER XVII
CONGRESSIONAL FINANCE

CHAPTER XVIII
THe RELATIONS OF THE Two HousEs .

CHAPTER XIX
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON: CONGRESS

CHAPTER XX
Tue RELATIONS OF CONGRESS TO THE PRESIDENT

CHAPTER XXI
Tue LEGISLATURE AND THE EXECUTIVE

CHAPTER XXII
Tue FEDERAL CouRtTS

CHAPTER XXIII
THE CouRTS AND THE CONSTITUTION

CHAPTER XXIV
Tue WorKING OF THE COURTS

CHAPTER XXV°

CoMPARISON OF THE AMERICAN AND EUROPEAN SYSTEMS

219

348

xvi CONTENTS

' CHAPTER XXVI

OBSERVATIONS ON THE FRAME OF NATIONAL GOVERNMENT

CHAPTER XXVII
THE FEDERAL SYSTEM

CHAPTER XXVIII

WORKING RELATIONS OF THE NATIONAL AND THE STATE

t
GOVERNMENTS

CHAPTER XXIX
CRITICISM OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM

CHAPTER XXX
MERITS OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM

CHAPTER XXXI
GrRowTH AND DEVELOPMENT oF THE CONSTITUTION
CHAPTER XXXII
THE AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION

CHAPTER XXXiIII
Tue INTERPRETATION OF THE CONSTITUTION

CHAPTER XXXIV

THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION BY USAGE .

CHAPTER XXXV
THE RESULTS OF CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT

481

VOL. 1

CONTENTS xvii
APPENDIX ,
PAGE
On ConstituTioNAL CONVENTIONS ; ; ; 539
Waat THE FEDERAL CoNsTITUTION OWES TO THE STATE
CoNSTITUTIONS . : A ‘ 645
‘Expnacrs ade THE RULES OF THE SENATE 549
Private Bits . . ; 3 ; ; 551
THe Losay é . : 555
Tae FeperaL SystEM oF THE ENGLISH UNIVERSITIES 561
ConsTITUTION OF THE CoNFEDERATE States, 1861-65 : 562
Tae FepERAL Constitution oF CANADA . ; : 564
Tae DartMoots CoLtecE Cask . : ; i 565
An AMERICAN VIEW oF PARLIAMENT < : 567
ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION, 1781-88 ; : 569
ConstITUTION oF THE UNITED SraTEs : : ; 576

VOL. Il
PART IIi—Tse Stare Governments

CHAPTER XXXVI

PAGE
NATURE OF THE AMERICAN STATE. : é

CHAPTER XXXVII
, STATE CONSTITUTIONS .

CHAPTER XXXVIII

Tae DEVELOPMENT OF STraTE CONSTITUTIONS .

51
CHAPTER XXXIX
Direct LEGISLATION BY THE PEOPLE... 67
CHAPTER XL
StaTE LEGISLATURES re : : 83
CHAPTER XLI
Tue Strate EX&curIvE 103

CHAPTER XLII

THe Strate JUDICIARY. “419

CONTENTS xix

a ae ee ee Pe a ee ee OS

CHAPTER XLIII
State FINance : ‘ : ; , 125

CHAPTER XLIV
THE WorKING oF STATE GOVERNMENTS F ‘ 145

-

CHAPTER XLV

REMEDIES FOR THE FAULTS OF STATE GOVERNMENTS . 172

CHAPTER XLVI

STATE POoLitics : ; : . . 192

CHAPTER XLVII

Tue TERRITORIES : d : ‘ : 3208

CHAPTER XLVIII

LocaL GOVERNMENT. , : ; ; 290

CHAPTER XLIX

OBSERVATIONS ON RuRAL LocaL GOVERNMENT . 948
CHAPTER L

‘Tue GoVERNMENT OF CITIES . ; ay ; 262
CHAPTER LI

THE WorKING OF City GOVERNMENTS : ., 278

CHAPTER LIT

AN AmericaAN View oF MUuNICIPAL GOVERNMENT IN
THE United STATES : ; " : 296

Xx CONTENTS

sf

PART IJ]]—Tue Party System

CHAPTER LIII
PAGE

PoLiTICAL PARTIES AND THEIR HISTORY P : 321

CHAPTER LIV

THE Parties OF To-DAY : ; : : 344
CHAPTER LV
COMPOSITION OF THE PARTIES . ; : . 355

CHAPTER LVI

FURTHER OBSERVATIONS ON THE PARTIES : ; 367

CHAPTER LVII
Tne PoLiricIANs : : ms . . 386

U

CHAPTER LVIII

Wuy THE Best MEN Do NoT Go INTO PoLitics

403
CHAPTER LIX

PaRTY ORGANIZATIONS . 412
CHAPTER LX

THe MACHINE . 419

CHAPTER LXI

WHAT THE MACHINE HAS TO DO

CONTENTS

ee —reeernenorntere att

CHAPTER LXII

How THE MACHINE worKS

CHAPTER LXIII

Rincs AND Bosses

CHAPTER LXIV

LocaAL EXTENSION OF RINGS AND BOossES

CHAPTER LXV

SPOILS .

CHAPTER LXVI

ELECTIONS AND THEIR MACHINERY

CHAPTER LXVII

CoRRUPTION

CHAPTER LXVIII

THE WAR AGAINST Bosspom .

CHAPTER LXIX

NomiInaTINnG CONVENTIONS

CHAPTER LXX

THe NomInaTiInG CONVENTION AT WoRK

CHAPTER LXxI

THE PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN .

450

479

509

537

549

572

xxii CONTENTS

CHAPTER LXXII

Tue IssuES IN PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS

CHAPTER LXXIII

FURTHER OBSERVATIONS ON NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS

CHAPTER LXXIV
Types oF AMERICAN STATESMEN

CHAPTER LXXV
WHat THE PEOPLE THINK OF IT

APPENDIX

Specimens of Provisions in, State ConsTITCTIONS LIMITING
Taxina AND Borrowina PoWERS

Expianation (By Mr. G. BraprorbD) oF THE NOMINATING
MacHINERY AND IT8 PROCEDURE IN THE StTaTE OF
MassacHtseETTs

A Newsrearer Account oF THE REPUBLICAN NATIONAL

Nomratine CoNVENTION OF 1884 .

CoNSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

PAGE

586

595

606

633
643

VOL. II
PART JV—Pustic Opinion

CHAPTER LXXVI
PAGE

THE NATURE OF PuBLICy OPINION ; : ; 3

; CHAPTER LXXVII
GOVERNMENT BY PUBLIC OPINION . 8 é 14

CHAPTER LXXVIII

How Pusiic OPINION RULES IN AMERICA. ; 24

CHAPTER LXXIX

ORGANS OF PuBLIC OPINION . ‘ 2 ; 34

CHAPTER LXXX

NaTioNAL CHARACTERISTICS AS MOULDING Pustic Opinion 48

CHAPTER LXXXI

CLASSES AS INFLUENCING OPINION . : : 64

CHAPTER LXXXII
Loca TYPEs oF OPINION—-EAST, WEST, AND SOUTH . 81

xxiv CONTENTS

CHAPTER LXXXIII

Tue ACTION OF PUBLIC OPINION

CHAPTER LXXXIV
THE FATALISM OF THE MULTITUDE

CHAPTER LXXXV
THE TYRANNY OF THE MAJORITY

CHAPTER LXXXVI
WHEREIN Pusiic Opinion FAILs

cHaprer ixxthn
WHEREIN Pustic Opinion SUCCEEDS .

PART V—I.iustrRaTions AND REFLECTIONS

CHAPTER LXXXVIII
THE TWEED RING In NEw Yorxk Ciry a

CHAPTER LXXXIX
Tue PHILADELPHIA Gas RING . o

CHAPTER XC
KEARNEYISM IN CALIFORNIA

CHAPTER XcCI
THE PROBLEM OF TERRITOBIAY: EXTENSION

PAGE

98

120

133

144

173

199

223

255

CONTENTS

CHAPTER XCII

LAIssez Faire

CHAPTER XCIII
Women’s SUFFRAGE

CHAPTER XCIV
THE SUPPOSED FAULTS OF DEMOCRACY

CHAPTER XCV

THE TRUE FAULTS OF AMERICAN DEMOCRACY

CHAPTER XCVI
Tue STRENGTH OF AMERICAN DEMOCRACY

CHAPTER XCVII

‘How FAR AMERICAN EXPERIENCE IS AVAILABLE FOR
EUROPE ;

PART VI—Sootat Instrrutions

CHAPTER XCVIII

Tur Bar oe
7 CHAPTER XCIX
THE BrENncH
CHAPTER CG
Rartroaps

304

323

338

355

367

386

400

xxvi CONTENTS

CHAPTER CI

WaLL STREET .

CHAPTER CII
THE UNIVERSITIES

CHAPTER CIII
THE CHURCHES AND THE CLERGY

CHAPTER CIV
THE INFLUENCE OF RELIGION .

CHAPTER CV
THE POSITION OF WOMEN

CHAPTER CVI
EQUALITY

CHAPTER CVII
THE INFLUENCE OF DEMOCRACY ON THOUGHT

.

CHAPTER CVIII
Creative INTELLECTUAL PowER

CHAPTER CIX

THE RELATION OF THE UNITED STATES TO EvuRopR

CHAPTER CX
Tue ABSENCE OF A CapiraL . *

CHAPTER CXI
AMERICAN ORATORY

487

504

541

572

585

CONTENTS xxvii

CHAPTER CXII
PAGE

THE PLEASANTNESS OF AMERICAN LIFE eS “a 607

CHAPTER CxXIII
Tue UNIFORMITY OF AMERICAN LIFE. : : 618

CHAPTER CXIV

Tuk TEMPER OF THE WEST . ; : ; 634

CHAPTER CXV
THE Future OF PoLiricaL INSTITUTIONS . ; 648

: CHAPTER CXVI
SoclaL AND Economic Future ; : : 665

INDEX’. . : 687

LIST OF PRESIDENTS

1789-1793 GEORGE WASHINGTON.
1793-1797 Re-elected.
1797-1801 Joun Apans.
1801-1805 THoMAS JEFFERSON.

1805-1809 Re-elected.
1809-1813 James Manison.
1813-1817 Re-elected.
1817-1821 James Monroe.
1821-1825 Re-elected.

1825-1829 Joun Quincy ADAMS.

1829-1833 ANDREW JACKSON.

1833-1837 Re-elected.

1837-1841 MarrTIN vAN Buren.

1841-1845 Wittiam Henry Harrison (died 1841).
JOHN TYLER.

1845-1849 James K. Pouk.

1849-1853 Zacuary Tayor (died 1850).
MILLARD FILLMORE.

1853-1857 FRANKLIN Pierce.

1857-1861 James BucHanan.

1861-1865 ABRAHAM LINCOLN.

1865-1869 Re-elected (died 1865).

: ANDREW JOHNSON.

1869-1873 ULyssss S. GRANT.

1873-1877 Re-elected.

1877-1881 Ruruerrorp B. Hayes. ;

1881-1885 James ApramM GarFIELD (died 1881).
Custer A, ARTHUR.

1885-1889 SrepHEN GROVER CLEVELAND.

AREA, POPULATION, AND DATE OF ADMISSION
OF THE STATES

Tue THIRTEEN ORIGINAL SraTES, IN THE ORDER IN WHICH THEY
RATIFIBD THE CONSTITUTION.

Ratified the Area in Population

Constitution, square miles.) (1880),
Delaware ‘ : 1787 1,960 146,608
Pennsylvania . ‘ 1787 44,985 4,282,891
New Jersey . : 1787 7,455 1,131,116
Georgia : : 1788 58,980 1,542,180
Connecticut . ; 1788 4,845 622,700
Massachusetts ’ 1788 8,040 1,783,085
Maryland. ‘ 1788 9,860 934,943
South Carolina. 1788 30,170 995,577
New Hampshire. 1788 9,005 346,991
Virginia F P 1788 ° 40,125 1,512,565
New York. ; 1788 47,620 5,082,871
North Carolina. 1789 48,580 1,399,750
Rhode ‘fsland . . 1790 1,085 276,531

STATES SUBSEQUENTLY ADMITTED, IN THE ORDER OF THEIR

ADMISSION.
Vermont : ‘ 1791 9,135 332,286
Kentucky . ; 1792 40,000 1,648,690
Tennessee. : 1796 41,750 1,542,359
Ohio. : : 1802 40,760 ~~ 3,198,062
Lovisiana : 1812 45,420" 939,946
Indiana ; : 1816 35,910 1,978,301
Mississippi. : 1817 46,340 1,131,597
Illinois . : ; 1818 56,000 3,077,871
Alabama. : 1819 51,540 1,262,505
Maine. «tl, 1820 29,895 648,936
Missouri : , 1821 "68,735 2,168,380
Arkansas . 1836 53,045 802,525

1 According to census returns of 1880,

AREA, POPULATION, ETC.

Ratitied the Area in
Constitution. square miles.
Michigan 1837 57,430
Florida . 1845 54,240
Texas 1845 262,290
Towa 1846 55,475
Wisconsin 1848 64,450
California 1850 155,980
Minnesota 1858 79,205
Oregon . 1859 94,560
Kansas .- 1861 81,700
W. Virginia . 1863 24,645
Nevada 1864 109,740
Nebraska 1867 76,185
Colorado 1876 103,645
THE TERRITORIES
Area,

Dakota 147,700

Wyoming . 97,575

Montana 145,310

Idaho 84,290

Washington 66,880

Utah 82,190

New Mexico 122,460

Arizona 112,920

(The population of Dakota and Washington has enormously increased

since 1880.)

Population
(S80).

1,636,937
269,493
1,591,749
1,624,615
1,315,497
864,694
780,773
174,768
996,096
618,457
62,266
452,402
194,327

Population in 1880.
135,177
20,789
39,159
32,610
. 75,116
143,963
119,565
40,440

xxxi

DATES OF SOME REMARKABLE EVENTS IN THE History

oF THE NortH AMERICAN COLONIES AND UNITED
STATES.

1606 First Charter of Virginia.
1607 First Settlement in Virginia.
1620 First Settlement in Massachusetts.
1664 Taking of New Amsterdam (New York).
1759 Battle of Heights of Abraham and taking of Quebec.
1775 Beginning of the Revolutionary War.
1776 Declaration of Independence.
1781 Formation of the Confederation.
1783 Independence of United States recognized.
1787 Constitutional Convention at Philadelphia.
1788 The Constitution ratified by Nine States.

_ 1789 Beginning of the Federal Government.
1793 Invention of the Cotton Gin.
1803 Purchase of Louisiana from France.
1812-14 War with England.
1812-15 Disappearance of the Federalist Party.
1819 Purchase of Florida from Spain.
1819 Steamers begin to cross the Atlantic.
1820 The Missouri Compromise,
1828-32 Formation of the Whig Party.
1830 First Passenger Railway opened.
1840 National Nominating Conventions regularly established.
1844 First Electric Telegraph in operation.
1845 Admission of Texas to the Union. -
1846-48 Mexican War and Cession of California.
1852-56 Fall of the Whig Party.
1854-56 Formation of the Republican Party.
1857 Dred Scott decision delivered.
1861-65 War of Secession.
1869 First Trans-Continental Railway completed.
1877 Final withdrawal of Federal troops from the South.
1879 Specie Payments resumed.

A MAP TO |LLUSTRATE THE

GROWTH or ne UNITED STATES

Scale of Engiah Miles
Lee ee ee

Longitude Weat of Greevnwch

Thalnanies oF” thallgritorice) ord gGetni Tascu
wauae The dan Pasion betel somes
name ef every State except the original thirteen. —

CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY

‘““Wuart do you think of our institutions?” is the ques-
tion addressed to the European traveller in the United
States by every chance acquaintance. The traveller
finds the question natural, for if he be an observant
man his own mind is full of these institutions. But he
asks himself why it should be in America only that he
is so interrogated. In England one does not inquire
from foreigners, nor even -from Americans, their views
on the English laws and government; nor does the
Englishman on the Continent find Frenchmen or Ger-
mans or Italians anxious to have his judgment on their
politics. Presently the reason of the difference appears.
The institutions of the United States are deemed by
inhabitants and admitted by strangers to be a matter of
more general interest than those of the not less famous
nations of the Old World. They are, or are supposed
to be, institutions of a new type. They form, or are
supposed to form, a symmetrical whole, capable of being
studied and judged all together more profitably than
the less perfectly harmonized institutions of older coun-
tries. They represent an experiment in the rule of the
multitude, tried on a scale unprecedentedly vast, and
the results of which every one is concerned to watch.
4+ VOL. I : B

2 THE UNITED STATES CHAP,

And yet they are something more than an experiment,
for they are believed to disclose and display the type of
institutions towards which, as by a law of fate, the rest of
civilized mankind are forced to move, some with swifter,
others with slower, but all with unresting feet.

When our traveller returns home he is again inter-
rogated by the more intelligently curious of his friends.
But what now strikes him-is the inaptness of their
questions. Thoughtful Europeans have begun to realize,
whether with satisfaction or regret, the enormous and
daily-increasing influence of the United States, and the
splendour of the part reserved for them in the develop-
ment of civilization. But such men, unless they have
themselves crossed the Atlantic, have seldom either
exact or correct ideas regarding the phenomena of the
New World. The social and political experiments of
America constantly cited in Europe both as patterns and
as warnings are hardly ever cited with due knowledge
of the facts, much less with comprehension of what they
teach; and where premises are misunderstood inferences
must be unsound.

It is such a feeling as this, a sense of the immense
curiosity of Europe regarding the social and political
life of America, and of the incomparable significance of
American experience, that has led and will lead so
many travellers to record their impressions of the Land
of the Future. Yet the very abundance of descriptions
in existence seems to require the author of another to
justify himself for adding it to the list.

I might plead that America changes so fast that
every few years a new crop of books is needed to de-
scribe the new face which things have put on, the new
problems that have appeared, the new ideas germinat-
ing among her people, the new and unexpected develop-

1 INTRODUCTORY 3

ments for evil as well as for good of which her established
institutions have been found capable. I might observe
that a new generation grows up every few years in
Europe, which does not read the older books, because
they are old, but may desire to read a new one. And if
a further reason is asked for, let it be found in this, that
during the last fifty years no author has proposed to
himself the aim of portraying the whole political system
of the country in its practice as well as its theory,
of explaining not only the National Government but
the State Governments, not only the Constitution but
the party system, not only the party system but
the ideas, temper, habits of the sovereign people.
Much that is valuable has been written on particular
parts or aspects’ of the subject, but no one seems to
have tried to deal with it as a whole; not to add that
some of the ablest writers have been either advocates,
often professed advocates, or detractors of democracy.
To present such a general view of the United States
both as a Government and as a: Nation is the aim of the
present book. But in seeking to be comprehensive it
does not attempt to be exhaustive. The effort to cover
the whole ground with equal minuteness, which a pene-
trating critic—the late Karl Hillebrand—remarked upon
as a characteristic fault of English writers, is to be
avoided not merely because it wearies a reader, but
because it leads the writer to descant as fully upon
matters he knows imperfectly as upon those with which
his own tastes and knowledge qualify him to deal.
I shall endeavour to omit nothing which seems necessary
to make the political life and the national character and
tendencies of the Americans intelligible. to Europeans,
and with this view shall touch upon some topics only
distantly connected with government or politics, But

4 THE UNITED STATES CHAP,

there are also many topics, perhaps no more remote
from the main subject, which I shall pass lightly over,
either because they have been sufficiently handled by
previous writers, or because I have no such minute
acquaintance with them as would make my observations
profitable. For instance, the common-school system of
the United States has been so frequently and fully de-
scribed in many easily accessible books that an account
of it will not be expected from me. But American
universities have been generally neglected by European
observers, and may therefore properly claim some pages.
The statistics of manufactures, agriculture, and commerce,
the systems of railway finance and railway management,
are full of interest, but they would need so much space
to be properly set forth and commented on that it
would be impossible to bring them within the present
volumes, even had I the special skill and knowledge
needed to distil from rows of figures the refined spirit
of instruction. Moreover, although an account of these
facts might be made to illustrate the features of Americah
civilization, it is not necessary to a comprehension of
American character. Observations on the state of liter-
ature and, religion are necessary, and J have therefore
endeavoured to convey some idea of the literary tastes
and the religious habits of the people, and of the part
which these play in forming and colouring the whole life
of the country.

The book which it might seem natural for me to
take as a model is the Democracy in America of Alexis
de Tocqueville. It would indeed, apart from the danger
of provoking a comparison with such an admirable
master of style, have been an interesting and useful task
to tread in his steps, and seek to do for the United
States of 1888, with their sixty millions of people, what

I INTRODUCTORY 5

he did for the fifteen millions of 1832. But what I
have actually tried to accomplish is something different,
for I, have conceived the subject upon quite other
lines. To De Tocqueville America was primarily a
democracy, the ideal democracy, fraught with lessons
for Europe, and above all for his own France.
What he has given us is not so much a degcrip-
tion of the country and people as a treatise, full of
exquisite observation and elevated thinking, upon
democracy, a treatise whose conclusions are illustrated
from America, but are in large measure founded, not so
much on an analysis of American phenomena, as on
general views of democracy which the circumstances of
France had suggested. Democratic government seems
to me, with all deference to his high authority, a
cause not so potent in the moral and social sphere
as he deemed it; and my object has been less to dis-
cuss its merits than to paint the institutions and people
of America as they are, tracing what is peculiar in
them not merely to the sovereignty of the masses, but
also to the history and traditions of the race, to its
fundamental ideas, to its material environment. I
have striven to avoid the temptations of the deductive
method, and to present simply the facts of the case,
arranging and connecting them as best I can, but letting
them speak for themselves rather than pressing upon the
reader my own conclusions. ‘The longer any one studies
a vast subject, the more cautious in inference does he
become. When I first visited America eighteen years
ago, I brought home a swarm of bold generalizations.
Half of them were thrown overboard after a second visit
in 1881. Of the half that remained, some were dropped
into the Atlantic when I returned across it after a
third visit in 1883-84: and. although the two later

6 THE UNITED STATES CHAP,

journeys gave birth to some new views, these views are
fewer and more discreetly cautious than their departed
sisters of 1870. I can honestly say that I shall be far
better pleased if readers of a philosophic turn find in
the book matter on which they feel they can safely build
theories for themselves, than if they take from it theories
ready made, «

In the effort to bring within reasonable compass a -
description of the facts of to-day, I have had to resist
another temptation, that of straying off into history.
The temptation has been strong, for occasional excur-
sions into the past might have been used not only to
enliven but to confirm and illustrate statements the
evidence for which it has sometimes been necessary
to omit. American history, of which Europeans know
scarcely anything, may be wanting in colour and
romance when compared with the annals: of the great
states of the Old World; but it is eminently rich in
political instruction. I hope thatmy American readers,
who, if I am not mistaken, know the history of their
country better than the English know that of England,
will not suppose that I have ignored this instruction, but
will allow for the omissions forced on me by the magnitude
of the subject which I am trying to compress into three
volumes, Similar reasons have compelled me to deal
briefly with the legal aspects of the Constitution ; but
this is a defect which the lay reader will probably deem
a merit.

Even when limited by the exclusion of history and
law, the subject remains so vast and complex as to
make necessary an explanation of the conception I have
formed of it, and of the plan upon which the book has
been constructed. .

There are three main things that one wishes to know

I INTRODUCTORY 7

about a national commonwealth, viz. its framework and
constitutional machinery, the methods by which it is
worked, the forces which move it and direct its course.
It is natural to begin with the first of these. Accord-
ingly, I begin with the Government; and as the powers
of government are two-fold, being vested partly in the
National or Federal authorities and partly in the States,
I begin with the National Government, whose structure
presents less difficulty to European minds, because it
resembles the national government in each of their
own countries. Part I. therefore contains an account of
the several Federal authorities, the President, Congress,
the Courts of Law. It describes the relations of the
National or central power to the several States. It
discusses the nature of the Constitution as a funda-
mental supreme law, and shows how this stable and
rigid instrument has been in a few points expressly, in
many others tacitly and half unconsciously modified.

Part II. deals similarly with the State Governments,
examining the constitutions that have established them,
the authorities which administer them, the practical
working of their legislative bodies. And as local
government is a matter of State regulation, there is also
given some account of the systems of rural and city
government which have been created in the various
States, and which have, rural government for its merits
and city government for its faults, become the theme of
copious discussion among foreign students of American
institutions.

(Part III.) The whole machinery, both of National and
of State governments, is worked by the political parties.
Parties have been organized far more elaborately in the
United States than anywhere else in the world, and have
passed more completely under the control ofa professional

8 THE UNITED STATES CHAP,

class. The party organizations in fact form a second
body of political machinery, existing side by side with
that of the legally constituted government, and scarcely
less complicated. Politics, considered not as the science
of government, but as the art of winning elections
and securing office, has reached in the United States a
development surpassing in elaborateness that of England
or France as much as the methods of those countries
surpass the methods of Servia or Roumania. Part III.
contains a sketch of this party system, and of the men
who “run” it, topics which deserve and would repay
a fuller examination than they have yet received even
in America, or than my limits permit me to bestow.

(Part IV.) The parties, however, are not the ultimate
force in the conduct of affairs. Behind and above them
stands the people. Public opinion, that is the mind and
conscience of the whole nation, is the opinion of persons
who are included in the parties, for the parties taken
together are the nation; and the parties, each, claiming
to be its true exponent, seek to use it for their purposes.
Yet it stands above the parties, being cooler and larger
minded than they are; it awes party leaders and holds
in check party organizations. No one openly ventures to
resistit. It determines the direction and the character of
national policy. It is the product of a greater number
of minds than in any other country, and it is more in-
disputably sovereign. It is the central point of the
whole American polity. To describe it, that is, to sketch
the leading political ideas,habits and tendencies of the
American people, and show how they express themselves
in action, is the most difficult and also the most vital
part of my task; and to this task the twelve chapters of
Part IV. are devoted.

(Part V.) As the descriptions given and propositions

I INTRODUCTORY 9

advanced in treating of the party system and of public
opiuion are necessarily general, they seem to need illus-
. tration by instances drawn from recent American history.
I collect three such instances in Part V., and place
there a discussion of several political questions which
lie outside party politics, together with some chapters
in which the attempt is made to estimate the strength
and weakness of democratic government as it exists in
the United States, and to compare the phenomena which
” it actually shows with those which European speculation
has attributed to democracy in general.

(Part VI.) At this point the properly political sections
of the book end. But there are certain non-political insti-
tutions, certain aspects of society, certain intellectual or
spiritual forces, which count for so much in the total life
of the country, in the total impression which it makes
and the hopes for the future which it raises, that they
cannot be left unnoticed. These, or rather such of them
as I have been able to study and as have not been fully
handled by others before me, will be found briefly
treated in Part VI. In the view which I take of them,
they are all germane, though not all equally germane,
to the main subject of the book, which is the character,
temper, and tendencies of the American nation, as they
are expressed primarily in political and social institu-
tions, secondarily in literature and manners,

This plan involves some repetition. But an author
who finds himself obliged to choose between repetition
and obscurity ought not to doubt as to his choice.
Whenever it has been necessary to trace a phenomenon
to its source, or to explain a connection between
several phenomena, I have not hesitated, knowing
that one must not expect a reader to carry in his mind
all that has been told already, to re-state a material

10 ‘THE UNITED STATES cHar.

fact, or re-enforce a view which gives to the facts what
I conceive to be their true significance.

It may be thought that a subject of this great com- .
pass ought, if undertaken at all, to be undertaken by a
native American. No native American has, however,
undertaken it. Such a writer would doubtless have
great advantages over a stranger. Yet there are two
advantages which a stranger, or at least a stranger who
is also an Englishman, with some practical knowledge
of English politics and English law, may hope to
secure. He is struck by some things which a native
does not think of explaining, because they are too
obvious, and whose influence on politics or society he
forgets to estimate, since they seem to him part of the
order of nature. And-the stranger finds it easier to
maintain a position of detachment, detachment not only
from party prejudice, but from those prepossessions in
favour of persons, groups, constitutional dogmas, national
pretensions, which a citizen can scarcely escape except
by falling into that attitude of impartial cynicism which
sours and perverts the historical mind as much as pre-
judice itself. He who regards a wide landscape from a
distant height sees its details imperfectly, and must
unfold his map in order to make out where each village
lies, and how the roads run. from point to point. But
he catches the true perspective of things better than if
he were standing among them. The great features of
the landscape, the valleys, slopes, and mountains, appear
in their relative proportions he can estimate the height

.of the peaks and the breadth of the plains. So one who

writes of a country not his own may turn his want of
familiarity with details to good account if he fixes his
mind strenuously on the main characteristics of the
people and their institutions, while not forgetting to

1 INTRODUCTORY VW

fill up gaps in his knowledge by frequent reference +o
native authorities. My own plan has been first to write
down what struck me as the salient and dominant facts,
and then to test, by consulting American friends and by
a further study of American books, the views which I
had reached. a.

To be non-partisan, as I trust to have been,
in describing the politics of the United States, is not
difficult for a European, especially if he has the good
fortune to have intimate friends in both the great
American parties. To feel and show no bias in those
graver and more sharply accentuated issues which
divide men in Europe, the issues between absolutism,
oligarchy, and democracy; between strongly unified
governments and the policy of decentralization, this is
a harder task, yet a not less imperative duty. This
much IJ can say, that no fact has been either stated or
suppressed, and no opinion put forward, with the pur-
pose of serving any English party-doctrine or party-policy,
or in any way furnishing arguments for use in any
English controversy. The admirers and the censors of
popular government are equally likely to find in the
present treatise materials suited to their wishes ; and in
many cases, if I may judge from what has befallen some
of my predecessors, they will draw from these materials
conclusions never intended by the author. -

Few things are more difficult than to use aright
arguments founded on the political experience of other
countries. As the chief practical use of history is to|
deliver us from plausible historical analogies, so a com-
prehension of'the institutions of other nations enables us
to expose sometimes the ill-grounded hopes, sometimes
the idle fears, which loose reports about those nations
generate. Direct inferences from the success or failure!

12 THE UNITED STATES CHAP.

of a particular constitutional arrangement or political
usage in another country are rarely sound, because the
conditions differ in so many respects that there can be
no certainty that what flourishes or languishes under
other skies and in another soil will likewise flourish or
languish in our own. Many an American institution
would bear a different fruit if transplanted to England,
as there is hardly an English institution which has not
undergone, like the plants and animals of the Old
World, some change in America. The examination and
appraisement of the institutions of the United States is
no doubt full of instruction for Europe, full of encourage-
ment, full of warning ; but its chief value lies in what
may be called the laws of political biology which it reveals,
in the new illustrations and enforcements it supplies of
general truths in social and political science, truths
some of which were -perceived long ago by Plato and
Aristotle, but- might have been forgotten had not
America poured a stream of new light upon them.
Now and then we may directly claim transatlantic
experience as accrediting or discrediting some specific
constitutional device or the policy of some enactment.
But even in these cases he who desires to rely on the
results shown in America must first satisfy himself that
there is such a parity of conditions and surroundings in
respect to the particular matter as justifies him in reason-
ing directly from ascertained results there to probable
results in his own country.

It is possible that these pages, or at least those of
them which describe the party system, may produce on
European readers an impression which the author
neither intends nor desires. They may set before him a
picture with fewer lights and deeper shadows than I
have wished it to contain. Sixteen years ago I travelled

I INTRODUCTORY 13

in Iceland with two friends. We crossed the great
Desert by a seldom trodden track, encountering, during
‘ two months of late autumn, rains, tempests, snowstorms,
and other hardships too numerous to recount. But
the scenery was so grand and solemn, the life so novel,
the character of the people so attractive, the historic
and poetic traditions so inspiring, that we returned
full of delight with the marvellous isle. When we ex-
_pressed this enchantment to our English friends, we
were questioned about the conditions of travel, and
forced to admit that we had been frozen and starved,
that we had sought sleep in swamps or on rocks, that
the Icelanders lived in huts scattered through a wilder-
ness, with none of the luxuries and few even of the
comforts of life. Our friends passed over the record of
impressions to dwell on the record of physical experi-
ences, and conceived a notion of the island totally
different from that which we had meant to convey.
We perceived too late how much easier it is to state
tangible facts than to communicate impressions. If
I may attempt to apply the analogy to the United
States and their people, I will say that they make
on the visitor an impression so strong, so deep, so
fascinating, so inwoven with a hundred threads of
imagination and emotion, that he cannot hope to
reproduce it in words, and to pass it on undiluted to
other minds. With the broad facts of politics it is
otherwise. These a traveller can easily set forth,
and is bound in honesty to set forth, knowing that in
doing so he must state much that is sordid, much that
will provoke unfavourable comment. The European
reader grasps these tangible facts, and, judging them as
though they existed under European conditions, draws:
from them conclusions disparaging to the country and

14 THE UNITED STATES CHAP.

the people. What he probably fails to do, because
this is what the writer is most likely to fail in enabling
him to do, is to realize the existence in the American
people of a reserve of force and patriotism more than
sufficient to sweep away all the evils which are now
tolerated, and to make the politics of the country
worthy of its material grandeur and of the private
virtues of its inhabitants. America excites an admira-
tion which must be felt upon the’spot to be understood.
The hopefulness of her people communicates itself to
one who moves among them, and makes him perceive
that the graver faults of politics may be far less
dangerous there than they would be in Europe. A
hundred times in writing this book have I been dis-
heartened by the facts I was stating: a hundred times
has the recollection of the abounding strength and
vitality of the nation chased away these tremors.

There are other risks to whicl such a book as this is
necessarily exposed. There is the risk of supposing
that to be generally true which the writer has himself
seen or been told, and the risk of assuming that what is
now generally true is likely to continue so. Against the
former of these dangers he who is’ forewarned is fore-
armed: as to the latter I can but say that whenever I
have sought to trace a phenomenon to its causes I have
also sought to inquire whether these causes are likely
to be permanent, a question which it is well to ask
even when no answer can be given. I have attributed
less to the influence of democracy than most of my
predecessors have done, believing that explanations
drawn from a form of government, being easy and
obvious, ought to be cautiously employed. Some one
has said that the end of philosophy is to diminish
the number of causes, as the aim of chemistry is to re-

PART I

CHAPTER II
THE NATION AND THE STATES

A FEW years ago the American Protestant Episcopal
Church was occupied at its annual Convention in revising
its liturgy. It was thought desirable to introduce among
the short sentence prayers a prayer for the whole
people ; and an eminent New England divine proposed
the words ‘“‘O Lord, bless our nation.” Accepted one .
afternoon on thé spur of the moment, the sentence was
brought up next day for reconsideration, when so many
objections were raised by the laity to the word “ nation,”
as importing too definite a recognition of national unity,
that it was dropped, and instead there were adopted the
words “ O Lord, bless these United States.”

To Europeans who are struck by the patriotism and
demonstrative national pride of their transatlantic
visitors, this fear of admitting that the American’
people constitute a nation seems extraordinary. But
it is only the expression qn its sentimental side of the
most striking and pervading characteristic of the poli-
tical system of the country, the existence of a double
government, a double allegiance, a double patriotism.
America—I call it America (leaving out of sight South
America, Canada, and Mexico), in order to avoid using

CHAP. II THE NATION AND THE STATES 17

at this stage the term United States—America is a
Commonwealth of commonwealths, a Republic of re-
publics, a State which, while one, is nevertheless composed
of other States even more essential to its existence than
it is to theirs.

This is a point of so much consequence, and so apt
to be misapprehended by Europeans, that a few sentences
may be given to it.

When within a large political community smaller
“communities are fad existing, the relation of the
smaller to the larger usually appears in one or other of
the two following forms. One form is that of a
League, in which a number of political bodies, be
they monarchies or -republics, are bound together so
as to constitute for certain purposes, and especially for
the purpose of common defence, a single body. The
members of such a composite body or league are not
individual men but communities. It exists only
as an aggregate of communities, and will therefore
vanish so soon as the communities which compose it
separate themselves from one another. Moreover it
deals with and acts upon these communities only.
With the individual citizen it has nothing to do, no
tight of taxing him, or judging him, or making laws
for him, for in all these matters it is to his own com-
munity that the allegiance of the citizen is due. A
familiar instance of this form is to be found in the
Germanic Confederation as it existed from 1815 till
1866. The Hanseatic League in medizeval Germany,
the Swiss Confederation down till the present century,
are other examples.

In the second form, the -smaller communities are
mere subdivisions of that greater one which we call the
Nation. They have been created, or at any rate they

VOL. I c

18 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

exist, for administrative purposes ‘only. Such powers
as they possess are powers delegated by the nation, and
can be overridden by its will. The nation acts directly
by its own officers, not merely on the communities,
but upon every single citizen ; and the nation, because
it is independent of these communities, would con-
tinue to exist were they all to disappear. Examples of
such minor communities may be found in the depart-
ments of modern France and the counties of modern
England. Some of the English counties were at one
time, like Kent or Dorset, independent kingdoms or
tribal districts; some, like Bedfordshire, were artificial
divisions from the first. All are now merely local
administrative areas, the powers of whose local
authorities have been delegated from the national
government of England. The national government
does not stand by virtue of them, does not:need them.
They might all be abolished or turned into wholly:
different communities without seriously affecting its
structure.

The American Federal Republic corresponds to
neither of these two forms, but may be said: to stand
between them. Its central or national government
is not a mere league, for it does not wholly depend
on the component communities which we call the
States. It is itself a’ commonwealth as well as a
union of commonwealths, because it claims directly
the obedience of every citizen, and acts immediately
upon him through its .courts and executive officers.
Still less are the minor communities, the States, mere
subdivisions of the Union, mere creatures of the national
government, like the counties of England or the de-
partments of France. They have over their citizens
an authority which is their own, and not delegated

citar. 11 THE NATION AND THE STATES 19

by the central government. They have not been called.
into being by that government. They existed before it.
They could exist without it.

The central or national government and the State
governments may be compared to a large building and
a set of smaller buildings standing on the same
ground, yet distinct from each other. It is a com-
bination sometimes seen where a great church has
been erected over’ more ancient homes of worship.
First the soil:is covered by a number of small
shrines and chapels, built at different times and in dif-
ferent styles of architecture, each complete in itself.
Then over them and including them all in its spacious
fabric there is reared a new pile with its own loftier
roof, its own walls, which may perhaps rest on and
incorporate the walls of the older shrines, its own
internal plan.! The identity of the earlier buildings
has however not been obliterated; and if the later
and larger structure were to disappear, a little repair
would enable them to keep out wind and weather, and
be again what they once were, distinct and separate
edifices. So the American States are now all inside the
Union, and have all become subordinate to it. Yet the
Union is more than an aggregate of States, and the
States are more than parts of the Union. It might be
destroyed, and they, adding a few further attributes of
power to those they now possess, might survive as
independent self-governing communities.

This is the cause of that immense complexity which
startles and at first bewilders the student of American
institutions, a complexity which makes American history

1 I do not profess to indicate any one building which exactly corre-
sponds to what I have attempted to describe, but there are several both
in Italy and in Egypt that seem to justify the simile.

20 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1

and current: American politics so difficult to the Euro-
pean who finds in them phenomena to which his own
experience supplies no parallel. There are two loyalties,
two patriotisms ; and the lesser patriotism, as the inci-
dent in the Episcopal Convention shows, is jealous of
the greater. There are two governments, covering the
same ground, commanding, with equally direct author-
ity, the obedience of the same citizen.

The casual reader of American political intelligence
in European newspapers is not struck by this pheno-
menon, because State politics and State affairs generally
are seldom noticed in Europe. Even the traveller who
visits America does not realize its importance, because
the things that meet his eye are superficially similar all
over the continent, and that which Europeans call the
machinery of government is in America conspicuous
chiefly by its absence. But a due comprehension of
this double organization is the first and indispensable
step to the comprehension of American institutions: as
the elaborate devices whereby the two systems of
government are kept from clashing are the most
curious subject of study which those institutions
present. :

How did so complex a system arise, and what influ-
ences have moulded it into its present form? This is
a question which cannot be answered without a few
words of historical retrospect. I am sensible of the
danger of straying into history, and the more anxious
to avoid this danger, because the task of describing
American institutions as tliéy now exist is more than
sufficiently heavy for one writer and one book. But an
outline, a brief and plain outline, of the events which
gave birth to the Federal system in America, and which
have nurtured national feeling without extinguishing

CHAP, II THE NATION AND THE STATES 21

State feeling, seems the most natural introduction
to an account of the present Constitution, and may
dispense with the need for subsequent explanations
and digressions. It is the only excursion into the
historical domain which I shall have to ask the reader
to make.

CHAPTER III
THE ORIGIN OF THE CONSTITUTION

WHEN in the reign of George III. troubles arose between
England and her North American colonists, there existed
along the eastern coast of the Atlantic thirtden little
communities, the largest of which (Virginia) had not
much more than half a million of people, and: the, total
population of which did not reach’ three jbtiogs “all
owned allegiance to the British Crown, all, except Con-
necticut and Rhode Island, received their governors from
the Crown ; in all, causes were carried by appeal from the
colonial courts tothe English Privy Council! Acts of
the British Parliament ran there, as they now run in the
British colonies, whenever expressed to have that effect,
and could over-rule such laws as the colonies might
make. But practically each colony was a self-governing
commonwealth, left to manage its own affairs with
scarcely any interference from home. Lach had its
legislature, its own statutes adding to or modifying the
English common law, its local cofporate life and tradi-
tions, with no small local pride in its own history and in-
stitutions, superadded to the pride of forming part of the

1 In Rhode Island no appeal seems to have lain to the Crown, and
the power of legislation was by the charters of 1643 and 1663 left to
the colony with the proviso only that the laws should be agreeable to
those of England “as near as may be, considering the nature and consti-
tution of the place and people.” .

cHanut THE ORIGIN OF THE CONSTITUTION 23

English race and the great free British realm. Between
the various colonies there was no other political connec-
tion than that which arose from their all belonging to
this race and realm, so ‘that the inhabitants of each
enjoyed in every one of the others the rights and
privileges of British subjects.

When the oppressive measures of the home govern-
‘ment roused the colonies, they naturally sought to
organize their resistance in common.’ Singly they
would have been an easy prey, for it was long doubtful -
whether even in combination they could make head
against regular armies. A congress .of delegates from
nine colonies held at New York in 1765 was followed
by another at Philadelphia in 1774, at which twelve
were represented, which called itself Continental (for the

name American had not yet become established),? and
spoke in the name of “ the good people of these colonies,”
the first assertion of a sort of national unity among the
English of America. This congress, in which from 1775
onwards all the colonies were represented, was a merely
revolutionary body, called into existence by the war
with the mother country. But in 1776 it declared the
independence of the colonies, and in 1777 it gave itself
a new legal character by framing the “Articles of
Confederation and Perpetual Union,”* whereby the
thirteen States (as they now called themselves) entered
into a “firm league of friendship” with each other,
offensive and defensive, while declaring that “each

1 There had been a congress of delegates from seven colonies at
Albany in 1754 to deliberate on measures relative to the impending war
with France, but this, of course, took place with the sanction of the
nother country, and was a purely temporary measure.

? In the earlier part of last century the name “ American” seems to
have denoted the native Indians, as it does in Wesley’s hymn “ The dark

Awericans convert.” The War of Independence gave it its present meaning.
3 See these Articles in the Appendix at the end of this volume.

24 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART |

State retains its sovereignty, freedom, and independence,
and every power, jurisdiction, and right which is not by
this Confederation expressly delegated to the United
States in Congress assembled.”

This Confederation, which was not ratified by all the
States till 1781, was rather a league than a national
government, for it possessed no central authority except -
an assembly in which every State, the largest and the
smallest alike, had one vote, and this authority had no
- jurisdiction over the individual citizens. There was no
Federal executive, no Federal judiciary, no means of
raising money except by the contributions of the States,
contributions which they were slow to render, no power
of compelling the obedience either of States or individuals
to the commands of Congress. The plan corresponded.
to the wishes of the colonists, who ‘did not yet deem
themselves a nation, and who in their struggle against
the power of the British Crown were resolved to set over
themselves no other power, not even one of their own
choosing. But it worked badly even while the struggle
lasted, and’ after the immediate danger from England
had been removed by the peace of 1783, it worked still
' worse, and was in fact, as Washington said, no better
than anarchy. The States were indifferent to Congress
and their common concerns, so indifferent that it was
found difficult to procure a quorum of States for weeks or
even months after the day fixed for meeting. Congress
‘was impotent, and commanded respect as little as obedi-
ence. Much distress prevailed in the trading States, and
the crude attempts which some legislatures made to
remedy the depression by emitting inconvertible paper,
by constituting other articles than the precious metals
legal tender, and by impeding the recovery of debts,
aggravated the evil, and in several instances led to sedi-

cHap.i THE ORIGIN OF THE CONSTITUTION 25

tious outbreaks. The fortunes of the country seemed
at a lower ebb than even during the war with England.

Sad experience of their internal difficulties, and of
the contempt with which foreign governments treated
them, at last produced a feeling that some firmer and
closer union was needed. A convention of delegates
from five States met at Annapolis in Maryland in 1786
to discuss methods of enabling Congress to regulate
commerce. It drew up a report which condemned the
existing state of things, declared that reforms were
necessary, and suggested a further general convention in
the following year to consider the condition of the Union
and the needed amendments in its Constitution. Con-
gress, to which the report had been presented, approved
it, and recommended the States to send delegates to a
convention, which ‘should “revise the Articles of Con-
federation, and report to Congress and the several legis-
latures such alterations and provisions therein as shall,
when agreed to in Congress and confirmed by the States,
render the Federal Constitutionadequate to the exigencies
of government and the preservation of the Union.” ?

1 Rhode Island was the most conspicuous offender. This singular little
commonwealth,«whose area is 1085 square miles (less than that of Ayrshire
or Antrim), is of all the American States that which has furnished the most
abundant analogies to the Greek republics of antiquity, and which best
deserves to have its annals treated of by a philosophic historian, A
curious feature in its politics is the frequent hostility of the agricultural
party in the country to the commercial population in the towns which
was at its height in 1788. By making herself an alarming example of
what the unbridled rule of the multitude may, come to, Rhode Island
did much to bring the other States to adopt that Federal Constitution
which she was herself the last to accept. See the remarks of Mr. M.
Smith,.Elliot’s Debates, ii. 335.

2 The insurrection then raging in Massachusetts may have helped to
stimulate Congress to prompt action, for it revealed the want of strength
in the State governments.

Mr. Justice Miller remarks with reference to the origin of the Anna-

polis Convention, “It is not a little remarkable that the suggestion which
finally led to the relief, without which as a nation we must soon have

26 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

The Convention thus summoned met at Philadelphia
on the 14th May 1787, became competent to proceed to
business on May 25th, when seven States were repre-
sented, and chose George Washington to preside.’ Dele-
gates attended from every State but Rhode Island, and
these delegates, unlike those usually sent to Congress,
were the leading men of the country, influential in their
several States, and now filled with a sense of the need
for comprehensive reforms. The instructions they had
received limited their authority to the revision of the
Articles of Confederation and the proposing to Congress
and the State legislatures such improvements as were re-
quired therein.? But with admirable boldness, boldness
doubly admirable in Englishmen and lawyers, the majority
ultimately resolved to disregard these restrictions, and

‘

perished, strongly supports the philosophical maxim of modern times, that
of all the agencies of civilization and progress, commerce is the most efli-
cient. What our deranged finances, our discreditable failure to pay our
debts, and the sufferings of our soldiers, could not force the several States
to attempt, was brought about by a desire to be released from the evils of
an unregulated and burdensome commercial intercourse.”——-Memorial Ora-
tion at the celebration of the hundredth anniversary of the promulgation
of the Constitution, 17th Sept. 1887.

: 1 For some remarks on Constitutional Conventions in the United
States see the note to this chapter at the end of this volume.

* It was strongly urged when the draft Constitution caine up for
ratification in the State Conventions that the Philadelphia Convention had
no power to do more than amend the Articles of Confederation. To these
objections Mr, Wilson of Pennsylvania made anawer as follows :—‘ The
business we are told which was intrusted to the late Convention was, mercly
to amend the present Articles of Confederation. This observation has been
frequently made, and has often brought ‘to my mind a story that is related
of Mr. Pope, who it is well known “Was not a little deformed. It was
customary for him to use this phrase, ‘God mend me, when any little
accident happened. One evening a link boy was lighting him along, and
coming to a gutter the boy jumped nimbly over it. Mr. Pope called to
him to turn, adding ‘God mend me!’ The arch rogue, turning to light
him, looked at him and repeated ‘God mend you! He would sooner
make half a dozen new ones.’ This would apply to the present Con-
federation, for it would be easier to make another than to amend this.”—
Elliot's Debates, Pennsylvania Convention, vol, ii. p. 472.

Car. I THE ORIGIN OF THE CONSTITUTION 27

to prepare a wholly new Constitution, to be considered
and ratified neither by Congress nor by the State legis-
latures, but by the peoples of the several States.

This famous assembly, which consisted of fifty-five
delegates, thirty-nine of whom signed the Constitution
which it drafted, sat nearly five months, and expended
upon its work an amount of labour and thought commen-
surate with the magnitude of the task and the splendour
of the result. The debates were secret,’ and fortunately
so, for criticism from without might have imperilled a
work which seemed repeatedly on the point of breaking
down, so great were the difficulties encountered from the
divergent sentiments and interests of different parts of
the country, as well as of the larger and smaller States.’
The records of the Convention were left in the hands of
Washington, who in 1796 deposited them in the State
Department. In 1819 they were published along with
the notes of the discussions kept by James Madison
(afterwards twice President), who had proved himself
one of the ablest and most useful members of the body.
From these official records and notes® the history of

1 The fact that the country did not- complain of this secrecy is the
best proof of the confidence felt in the members ‘of the Convention.

? Benjamin Franklin, who was one of the delegates from Pennsylvania
(being then eighty-one years of age), was so much distressed at the
difficulties which arose and the prospect of failure that he proposed that
the Convention, as all human means of obtaining agreement seemed to be
useless, should open its meetings with prayer. The suggestion, remarkable
as coming from one so well known for his sceptical opinions, might have
been adopted but for the fear that the outside public might thus learn
how grave the position of affairs was. The original of Franklin’s pro-
* position, written in his own still clear and firm hand, with his note stating

that only three or four agreed with him, is preserved in the State Depart-
ment at Washington, where may be also seen the original draft of the
Constitution with the signatures of the thirty-nine delegates.

3 They are printed in the work called Elliot’s Debates (Philadel-
phia, 1861), which also contains the extremely interesting debates in some
of the State Conventions which ratified the Constitution.

28 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1

the Convention has been written, and may be found
in the instructive volumes of Mr. G. T. Curtis and of
Mr. George Bancroft, now the patriarch of American
literature.

It is hard to-day, even for Americans, to realize
how enormous those difficulties were. The Conven-
tion had not only to create de novo, on the most
slender basis of pre-existing national institutions, a
national government for a widely scattered people, but
they had in doing so to respect ‘the fears and jealousies
and apparently irreconcilable interests of thirteen
separate commonwealths, to all of whose governments
it was necessary to leave a sphere of action wide enough
to satisfy a deep-rooted local sentiment, yet not so
wide as to imperil national unity. Well might Hamil-
ton say: “The establishment of a Constitution, in time
of profound peace, by the voluntary consent of a whole.
people, is a prodigy to the completion of which I look
forward with trembling anxiety.” ?

1 The nearest parallels to such a Federal Union as that formed in
1789 were then to be found in the Achsan and Lycian Leagues, which,
however, were not mere leagues, but federated nations. Both are referred
to by the authors of the Federalist (sce post), but their knowledge was
evidently scanty. The acuteness of James Wilson had perceived that
the two famous confederations of modern Europe did not supply a model
for America. He observed in the Pennsylvania Convention of 1788:
“The Swiss cantons are connected only by alliances. The United
Netherlands are indeed an assemblage of societies; but this assem-
blage constitutes no new one, and therefore’ it does not correspond
with the full definition of a Confederate Republic.”-—Elliot’s Debates,
vol. ii. p. 422. The Swiss Confederation has now become, a Republic .at
once Federal and national, coming in most respects very near to its Ameri-
can model.

2 Federalist, No. Ixxxv. He quotes the words of David Hume
(Essays ; “ The Rise of Arts and Sciences”): “To balance a large State or
society, whether monarchical or republican, on general laws, is a work of
so great difficulty that no human genius, however comprehensive, is able
by the mere dint of reason and reflection to effect it. The judgments of
many must unite in the work : experience must guide their labour; time

cuar. 1 THE ORIGIN OF THE CONSTITUTION 29

It was even a disputable point whether the colonists
were already a nation or only the raw material out of
which a nation might be formed.!’ There were elements
of unity, there were also elements of diversity. All
spoke the same language. All, except a few descendants
of Dutchmen and Swedes in New York and Delaware,
soure Germans in Pennsylvania, some children of French
Huguenots in New England and the middle States,
belonged to the same race? All, except some Roman
Catholics in Maryland, professed the Protestant religion.
All were governed by the same: English Common Law,
and prized it not only as the bulwark which had
sheltered their forefathers from the oppression of the
Stuart kings, but as the basis of their more recent claims
of right against the encroachments of George III.
and his colonial officers. In ideas and habits of life
there was less similarity, but all were republicans,
managing their affairs by elective legislatures, attached
to local self-goveynment, and animated by a common
pride in their successful resistance to England, which
they then hated with a-true family hatred, a hatred to
which her contemptuous treatment of them added a
sting.

must bring it to perfection ; and the feeling of inconveniences must
correct the mistakes which they inevitably fall into in their first trials and
experiments.” Words strikingly verified in the history of the United
States from 1777. downwards.

1 Mr. Wilson said in the Pennsylvania Convention of 1787: “ By
adopting this Constitution we shall become a ‘nation: we are not now
one. We shall form a national character: We are now too dependent
‘on others.” He proceeds with a remarkable prediction of the influence
which American freedom would exert upon the Old World.—Elliot’s
Debates, vol. ii. p, 526. : ;

2 The Irish, a noticeable element in’ North Carolina and parts
of Pennsylvania, Virginia, and New Hampshire, were not Catholic Celts
.but Scoto-Irish Presbyterians from Ulster, who, animated by resentment
at the wrongs and religious persecution they had suffered at home, had
been among the foremost combatants in the Revolutionary War.

30 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART }

‘On the other hand their geographical position made
communication very difficult. The sea was stormy in
winter, the roads were bad, it took as long to travel by
land from Charleston to Boston as to cross the ocean to
Europe, nor was the journey less dangerous. The
wealth of some States consisted in slaves; of others in
shipping; while in others there was a population of
small farmers, characteristically attached to old habits.
Manufactures had hardly begun to exist. The sentiment
of local independence showed itself in intense suspicion
of any external authority ; and most parts of the country
were so thinly peopled that the inhabitants had lived
practically without any government, and thought that
in creating one they would be forging fetters for them-
selves. But while these diversities and jealousies mace
union difficult, two dangers were absent which -have
beset .the framers of constitutions for other nations.
There were no reactionary conspirators to be feared, for
every one prized liberty and equality. There were no
questions between classes, no animosities against rank
and wealth, for rank and wealth did not exist.

It was inevitable under such circumstances that the
Constitution, while aiming at the establishment of a dur-
able central power, should pay great regard to the existing
centrifugal forces. It was and remains what its authors
styled it, eminently an instrument of compromises ; it is
perhaps the most successful insfdnce in history of what
‘ a judicious spirit of compromise may effect. Yet out of

1 Hamilton observed of it in 1788: “The result of the deliberations
of all collective bodies must necessarily be a compound as well of the
errors and prejudices as of the good sense and wisdom of the individuals
of whom they are composed. The compacts which are to embrace
thirteen distinct States in a common bond of amity and union must as
necessarily be a compromise of as many dissimilar interests and in-

clinations. How can perfection spring from such materials ?”—-Federalist,
No. lxxxy. :

cHarn. ur THE ORIGIN OF THE CONSTITUTION 3!

the points which it was for this reason obliged to
leave unsettled there arose fierce controversies, which
after two generations, when accumulated irritation
and incurable misunderstanding. had been added to the
force of material interests, burst into flame in the War
of Secession.
~ The draft Constitution was submitted, as its last
article provided, to conventions of the several States
(z.e. bodies speciallychosen by the people for the purpose)
for ratification. It was to come into effect as soon as
nine States had ratified, the effect of which would have
been, in case the remaining States, or any of them,
had rejected it, to leave such States standing alone in
the world, since the old Confederation was of course’
superseded and annihilated. Fortunately all the States
did ‘eventually ratify the new Constitution, but two of
the: most important, Virginia and New York,! did
not do so till the middle of 1788, after nine others
had already accepted it; and two, North Carolina and
Rhode Island, at first refused, and only consented to
enter the new Union more than a year later, when
the government it had created had already come into
operation.”
There was a struggle everywhere over the adoption
of the Constitution, a struggle which gave birth to the
two great parties that for many years divided: the

1 Virginia was then much the largest State (population in 1790,
747,610). New York was reckoned among the smaller States (population
340,120) but her central geographical position made her adhesion ex-
tremely important.

2 Mr. Justice Miller observes that the refusal of Rhode Island seems
to have been largely due to her desire that..“‘her superior advantages of
location, and the possession of what was then supposed to be the best
harbour on the Atlantic coast, should not be subjected to the control of-a
Congress which was by that instrument expressly authorized to regulate’
commerce with foreign nations, and provide that no preference should be
given to the ports of any State.”—-Memorial Oration, wé supra.

32 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

American people. The chief source of hostility was the
belief that a strong central government endangered
both the rights of the States and the liberties of the
individual citizen. Freedom, it was declared, would
perish, freedom rescued from George III. would perish
at the hands of her own children.’ Consolidation (for
the word centralization had not yet been invented)
would extinguish the State governments and the local
institutions they protected. The feeling was very bitter,
and in some States, notably in Massachusetts and New
York, the majorities were dangerously narrow. Had the
decision been left to what is now called “the voice of
the people,” that is, to the mass of the citizens all over
the country, voting at the polls, the voice of the people
would probably have pronounced against the Constitu-
tion.’ But this modern method of taking the popular
verdict had not been invented. The question was
referred to conventions in the several States. The con-
ventions were composed of able men, who listened to
weighty arguments, and were themselves influenced by
the authority of their leaders. The judgment of the
wise prevailed over the prepossessions of the multitude.
Yet this judgment would hardly have prevailed but for
. @ cause which is apt to be now overlooked. This was
the dread.of foreign powers.’ The United States had at

1 In the Massachusetts Convention of 1788 Mr. Nason delivered himself
of the following pathetic appeal: “And here, sir, I beg the indulgence of
this honourable body to permit me to make a short apostrophe to Liberty.
O Liberty, thou greatest good ! thou fairest property ! with thee I wish to
live—with thee I wish to die! Pardon me if I drop a tear on the peril
to which she is exposed, I cannot, sir, see this highest of ‘jewels tar-
nished—a jewel worth ten thousand worlds ; and shall we part with it so
soon? Oh no,”—Elliot’s Debates, ii, 133.

2 Especially if the question had been voted on everywhere upon the
same day. The later decisions in doubtful States were influenced by the

approval which other States had already given.
8 The other chief cause was the economic distress and injury to trade

cuap. tt THE ORIGIN OF THE CONSTITUTION 33

that time two European monarchies, Spain and England,
as its neighbours on the American continent. France
had lately held territories to the north of them in
Canada, and to the south of them in Louisiana. She
had been their ally against England, she became in a
few years again the owner of territories on the lower
Mississippi. The fear of foreign interference, the sense
of weakness, both at sea and on land, against the military
monarchies of Europe, was constantly before the mind
of American statesmen, and made them anxious to secure
at all hazards a national government capable of raising
an army and navy, and of speaking with authority on
behalf of the new republic. It is remarkable that the
danger of European ageression or complications was far
more felt in the United States from.1783 down till
about 1820, than it has been during the last half century
when steam has brought Europe five times nearer than
it then was.

Several of the conventions which ratified the Con-
stitution accompanied their acceptance with an earnest
recommendation of various amendments to it, amend-
ments designed to meet the fears of those who thought
that it encroached too far upon the liberties-of the
people. Some of these were adopted, immediately after
the original instrument had come into force, by the
method it prescribes, viz. a two-thirds majority in Con-

consequent on the disorganized condition of several States. See the
observations of Mr. Wilson in the Pennsylvania Convention (Elliot’s
Debates, ii, 524). He shows that the case was one of necessity, and
winds up with the remark, “ The argument of necessity is the patriot’s
defence as well as the tyrant’s plea.”

1 The vast territory then called Louisiana was transferred by France
to Spain in 1762, but Spanish government was not established there till
1789. It was ceded by Spain to France in 1800, and purchased by the

«United States from Napoleon in.1803. Spain held Florida from its °
discovery till 1819, when she sold it to the United States.

VOL. I D

34 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

gress and a majority in three-fourths of the States.
They are the amendments of 1791, ten in number, and
they constitute what the Americans, following a venerable
English precedent, call a Bill or Declaration of Rights.

The Constitution of 1789? deserves the veneration
with which the Americans have been accustomed to regard
it. It is true that many criticisms have been passed
upon its arrangement, upon its omissions, upon the arti-
ficial character of some of the institutions it creates.
Recognizing slavery as an institution existing in some
States, and not expressly negativing the right of a
State to withdraw from the Union, it has been charged
with having contained the germ of civil war, though
that germ took seventy years to come to maturity.
‘And whatever success it has attained must be in large
measure ascribed to the political genius, ripened by long
experience, of the Anglo-American race, by whom it has
been worked, and who might have managed to work
even a worse drawn instrument. Yet, after all de-
ductions, it ranks above every other written con-
stitution for the intrinsic excellence of its scheme,
its adaptation to the circumstances of the people,
the simplicity, brevity, and precision of its language,
its judicious mixture of definiteness in principle
with elasticity in details? One is therefore induced

1 It is hard to say whether one ought to call the Constitution after
the year 1787, when it was drafted, or the year 1788, when it was
accepted by the requisite number of States, or the year 1789, when it took
full effect, the Congress of the Confederation having fixed the first Wed-
nesday in March in that year as the day when it should come into force.
The year 1789 has the advantage of being easily remembered, because it
coincides with the beginning of the great revolutionary movements of
modern Europe. The Confederation may be taken to have expired with
the expiry of its Congress, and its Congress died for want of a quorum.

2 The literary Bostonians laid hold at once of its style as proper for

admiration. Mr, Ames said in the Massachusetts Convention of 1788,
“Considered merely as a literary performance, the Constitution is an

cuap. ul ZHE ORIGIN OF THE CONSTITUTION 35

to ask, before proceeding to examine it, to what
causes, over and above the capacity of its authors, and
the patient toil they bestowed upon it, these merits are
due, or in other words, what were the materials at the
command of the Philadelphia Convention for the achiev-
ment of so great an enterprise as the creation of a nation
by means of an instrument of government. The
American Constitution is no exception to the rule that
everything which has power to win the obedience and
respect of men must have its roots deep in the past, and
that the more slowly every institution has grown, so
much the more enduring is it likely to prove. There is
little in that Constitution that is absolutely new. There
is much that is as old as Magna Charta.

The men of the Convention had the experience of the
English Constitution. That Constitution, very different
then from what it is now, was even then not quite what
they thought it, Their view was tinged not only by recol-
lections of the influence exercised by King George the
Third, an influence due to transitory causes, but which
made them overrate its monarchical element, but also
by the presentation of it which they found in the work
of Mr. Justice Blackstone. He, as was natural in a
lawyer and a man of letters, described rather its theory
than its practice, and its theory was many years behind
its practice. The powers and ‘functions of the cabinet,
the overmastering force of the House of Commons, the
intimate connection between legislation and administra-

honour to our country. Legislators have at length condescended to speak
the language of philosophy.”—Elliot’s Debates, ii. 55.

1 There is always a tendency in colonists (perceptible even now in the
works of such a writer as the Canadian publicist, Mr. Todd) to over-
estimate the importance of the Crown, whose conspicuous position as the
authority common to the whole empire makes it an object of special
interest and respect to persons living at a distance. It touches their
imagination, whereas assemblies excite their criticism.

36 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1

tion, these which are to us now the main characteristics
of the English Constitution were still far from fully
developed. But in other points of fundamental import-
ance they appreciated and turned to excellent account
its spirit and methods.

They had for their oracle of political philosophy the
treatise of Montesquieu on the Spirit of Laws, which,
published anonymously at Geneva forty years before,
had won its way to an immense authority on both sides
of the ocean.! Montesquieu, contrasting the private as
well as public liberties of Englishmen with the despot-
ism of continental Europe, had taken the Constitution of
England as his model system, and had ascribed its
merits to the division of legislative, executive, and judi-
cial functions which he discovered in it, and to the
system of checks and balances whereby its equilibrium
seemed to be preserved. No general principle of politics
laid such hold on the constitution-makers and statesmen
of America as the dogma that the separation of these
three functions is essential to freedom. It had already
been made the groundwork of several State constitutions.
It is always reappearing in their writings: it was never
absent from their thoughts. Of the supposed influence
of other continental authors, such as Rousseau, or even
of English thinkers such as Burke, there are few direct
traces in the Federal Constitution or in the classical
contemporaneous commentary on and defence of it?
which we owe to the genius of Hamilton and his hardly
less famous coadjutors, Madison and Jay. But we need

1 Montesquieu is repeatedly quoted by the speakers in the various

’ State conventions, whose discussions have come down to us. See post,
Chapter XXV. ,

2 The Federalist, a series of papers published in the New York news-

papers in advocacy of the Federal Constitution when the question of
accepting it was coming before the New York State Convention,

cuap, ut THE ORIGIN OF THE CONSTITUTION 37

only turn to the Declaration of Independence and the
original constitutions of the States, particularly the
Massachusetts Constitution of 1780, to perceive that
abstract theories regarding human rights had laid firm
hold on the national mind. Such theories naturally
expanded with the practice of republican government.
But the influence of France and her philosophers belongs
chiefly to the years succeeding 1789, when Jefferson,
who was fortunately absent in Paris during the Consti-
tutional Convention, headed the democratic propaganda,
Further, they had the experience of their colonial and
State governments, and especially, for this was freshest
and most in point, the experience of the working of ‘the
State Constitutions, framed at or since the date when
the colonies threw off their English allegiance. Many of
the Philadelphia delegates had joined in preparing these
instruments: all had been able to watch and test their
operation. They compared notes as to the merits,
‘tested by practice, of the devices which their States had
respectively adopted.’ They had the inestimable advan-
tage of knowing written or rigid constitutions in the
concrete ; that is to say, of comprehending how a system
of government actually moves and plays under the con-
trol of a mass of statutory provisions defining and
limiting the powers of its several organs. The so-called
Constitution of England consists largely of customs,
precedents, traditions, understandings, often vague and
always flexible. It was quite a different thing, and
for the purpose of making a constitution for the
American nation an even more important thing, to have
lived under and learnt to work systems determined by

1 There are frequent references in the Federalist to the State Consti-
tutions (see especially Letters xlvii. and xlviii.), and the record of the
debates in the Convention shows that many of the proposals made were
directly drawn from these Constitutions.

38 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

the hard and fast lines of a single document having the
full force of law, for this experience taught them how
much might safely be included in such a document and
how far room must be left under it for unpredictable
emergencies and unavoidable development.'

Lastly, they had one principle of the English com-
won law whose importance deserves special mention, the
principle that an act done by any official person or law-
making body in excess of his or its legal competence is
simply void. Here lay the key to the difficulties which |
the establishment of a variety of authorities not subor-
dinate to one another, but each supreme in its own
defined sphere, necessarily involved. The application of
this principle made it possible not only to create a
national government which should leave free scope for
the working of the State governments, but also so to
divide the powers of the national government among
various persons and bodies as that none should absorb or
overbear the others. By what machinery these objects
were attained will sufficiently appear when we come to
consider the effect of a written or rigid constitution em-
bodying a fundamental law, and the functions of the
judiciary in expounding and applying such a law.

1 The novelty of written constitutions is dwelt wpon with great force

by James Wilson in the Pennsylvania Convention.—Elliot’s Debates, vol. ii.
2 See post, Chapters XXIII. and XXXIII.

CHAPTER IV
NATURE OF THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT

THE acceptance of the Constitution of 1789 made the
American people a nation. It turned what had been a
League of States into a Federal State,’ by giving it a
National Government ‘with a direct authority over all
citizens. But as this national government was not to
supersede the governments of the States, the problem
which the Constitution-makers had to solve was two-
fold. They had to create a central government. They
had also to determine the relations of this central
government to the States as well as to the individual
citizen. An exposition of the Constitution and criticism
of its working must therefore deal with it in these two
aspects, as a system of national government built up
of executive powers and legislative bodies, like the
monarchy of England or the republic of France, and as
a Federal system linking together and regulating the
relations of a number of commonwealths which are for
certain purposes, but for certain purposes only, sub-
ordinated to it. It will conduce to clearness if these
two aspects are kept distinct ; and the most convenient

1 The distinction is happily expressed in German by the words
Staatenbund and Bundesstaat. English has unfortunately no equally
concise expressions.

40 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

course will be to begin with the former, and first to
describe the American system as a National system,
leaving its Federal character for the moment on one side.

It must, however, be remembered that the Consti-
tution does not: profess to be a complete scheme of
government, creating organs for the discharge of all
the functions and duties which a civilized community
undertakes. It presupposes the State governments.
It assumes their existence, their wide and constant
activity. It is a scheme designed to provide for the
discharge of such and so many functions of government
as the States do not already possess and discharge. It
is therefore, so to speak, the complement and crown of
the State Constitutions, which must be read along with
it and into it in order to make it cover the whole’ field
of civil government, as do the Constitutions of such
countries as France, Belgium, Italy.

The administrative, legislative, and judicial functions
for which the Federal Constitution provides are those
relating to matters which must be deemed common to the
whole nation, either because all the parts of the nation are
alike interested in them, or because it is only by the nation
as a whole that they can be satisfactorily undertaken.
The chief of these common or national matters are +—

War and peace: treaties and foreign relations
generally.

Army and navy.

Federal courts of justice.

Commerce, foreign and domestic.

*

1 The full list will be found in the Constitution, Art. i. § 8 (printed
in the Appendix), with which may be compared the British North
America Act 1867 (30 and 31 Vict. cap. 8), and the Federal Council of
Australasia Act 1885 (48 and 49 Vict. cap. 60), and the Swiss Constitution
of 1874 (Arta 8, 22, 30, 42, 64, 64, 67-70).

cHap.iv WATURE OF THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT 41

Currency.

Copyright and patents.

The post-office. and post roads.

Taxation for the foregoing purposes, and for the
general support of the Government.

The protection of citizens against unjust or discrimi-
nating legislation by any State.’

This list includes the subjects upon which the
national legislature has the right to legislate, the
national executive to enforce the Federal laws and
generally to act in defence of national interests, the
national judiciary to adjudicate. All other legislation
and administration is left to the several States, without
power of interference by the Federal legislature or
Federal executive.*

Such then being the sphere of the National govern-
ment, let us see in what manner it is constituted, of
what departments it consists.

The framers of this government set before them-
selves four objects as essential to its excellence, viz.—

Its vigour and efficiency.

The independence of each of its departments (as
being essential to the permanency of its form).

Its dependence on the people.

The security under it of the freedom of the indivi-
dual.

The first of these objects they sought by creating a
strong executive, the second by separating the legis-
lative, executive, and judicial powers from one another,

1 Amendments xiv. and xv.

2 This list is not intended to be exhaustive, because the respective
limits of Federal and State action are fully explained in subsequent
chapters. It is given here asa provisional list, sufficient to show in a
general way what are the main functions of the national government.

42 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

and by the contrivance of various checks and balances,
the third by making all authorities elective and elections
frequent, the fourth both by the checks and balances
aforesaid, so arranged as to restrain any one department
from tyranny, and by placing certain rights of the
citizen under the protection of the written Constitution.

They had neither the rashness nor the capacity
necessary for constructing a Constitution @ priors.
There is wonderfully little genuine inventiveness in the
world, and perhaps least of all has been shown in the
sphere of political institutions. These men, practical
politicians who knew how infinitely difficult a business
government is, desired no bold experiments. They
preferred, so far as circumstances permitted, to walk in
the old paths, to follow methods which experience had
tested... Accordingly they started from the system on
which their own colonial governments, and afterwards
their State governments, had been conducted. This
system bore a general resemblance to the British Consti-
tution ; and in so far it may: with truth be said that
the British Constitution became a model for the new
national government. They held England to be the
freest and best-governed country in the world, but
were resolved to avoid the weak points which had
enabled King George III. to play the tyrant, and
which rendered English liberty, as they thought, far
inferior to that which the constitutions of their own
States secured. With this venerable mother, and these

1 Mr. Lowell has said with equal point and truth of the men of the
Convention: “They had a profound disbelief in theory and knew better
than to commit the folly of breaking with the past. They were not
seduced by the French fallacy that a new system of government ¢ould be
ordered like a new suit of clothes. They would as soon have thought of
ordering a suit of flesh and skin. It is only on the roaring loom of time
that the stuff is woven for such a vesture of their thought and experience
as they were meditating.”—Address on Democracy, delivered Oct. 6, 1884.

cnarniIv NATURE OF THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT 43

children, better in their judgment than the mother,
before their eyes, they created an executive magis-
trate, the President, on the model of the State
Governor, and of the British Crown. They created
a legislature of two Houses, Congress, on the model of
the two Houses of their State legislatures, and of the
‘British Parliament. And following the precedent of
the British judges, irremovable except by the Crown
and Parliament combined, they created a judiciary
appointed for life, and irremovable save by impeach-
ment.?

In these great matters, however, as well as in many
lesser matters, they copied not so much the Constitution
of England as the constitutions of their several States,
in which, as was natural, many features of the English
Constitution had been embodied. It has been truly
said that nearly every provision of the Federal Consti-
tution that has worked well is one borrowed from or
suggested by some State constitution; nearly every
provision that has worked badly is one which the
Convention, for want of a precedent, was obliged to
deyise for itself. ‘l'o insist on this is not to detract from
the glory of that illustrious body, for if we are to credit
them with less inventiveness than has sometimes been
claimed for them, we must also credit them with a
double portion of the wisdom which prefers experience to
a priori theory, and the sagacity which selects the best

1 Minor differences between the English and American systems are
that the American Federal judge is appointed by the President, “ with
the advice and consent of the Senate,” an English judge by the Crown
alone: an American judge is impeachable by the House of Representa-
tives, and tried by the Senate, .an English judge is removable by the
Crown on an address by both Houses.

In many States a State judge is removable by the legislature or by

the governor on an address by the legislature, a provision which has
obviously been borrowed from England.

Ag THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

materials from a mass placed before it, aptly combining
them to form a new structure.'

Of minor divergences between their work and the
British Constitution I shall speak subsequently. But
one profound difference must be noted here. The
British Parliament had always been, was then, and
remains now, a sovereign and constituent assembly.
It can make and unmake any and every law, change
the form of government or the succession to the crown,
interfere with the course of justice, extinguish the most
sacred private rights of the citizen. Between it and the
people at large there is no legal distinction, because the
whole plenitude of the people’s rights and powers resides
in it, just as if the whole nation were present within the
chamber where it sits. In point of legal theory it is
the nation, being the historical successor of the Folk
Moot of our Teutonic forefathers. Both practically and
legally, it is to-day the only and the sufficient depositary
of the authority of the nation; and is therefore, within
the sphere of law, irresponsible and omnipotent.

In the American system there exists no such body.
Not merely Congress alone, but also Congress and the
President conjoined, are subject to the Constitution, and
cannot move a step outside the circle which the Con-
stitution has drawn around them. If they do, they
transgress the law and exceed their powers. Such acts
as they may do in excess of their’ powers are void, and

may be, indeed ought to be, treated as void by the
meanest citizen. The only power which is ultimately
sovereign, as the British Parliament is always and

1 This truth has been worked out with much force and fulness by
Mr. Alexander Johnson, in an artitle in the New Princeton Review
for Septeniber 1887 (published since the text of this chapter was written),

some extracts from which will be found in a note at the end of this
volume,

cHap.iv MATURE OF THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT 45

directly sovereign, is the people of the States, acting in
the manner prescribed by the Constitution, and capable
in that manner of passing any law whatever in the form
of a constitutional amendment.

This fundamental divergence from the British system
is commonly said to have been forced upon the men of
1787 by the necessity, in order to safeguard the rights
of the several States, of limiting the competence of. the
national government.’ But even without this necessity,
even supposing there had been no States to be protected,
the jealousy which the American people felt of those
whom they chose to govern them, their fear lest one
power in the government should absorb the rest, their
anxiety to secure the primordial rights of the citizens
from attack, either by magistrate or by legislature,
would doubtless have led, as happened with the earlier
constitutions of revolutionary France, to the creation of
a supreme constitution or fundamental instrument of
government, placed above and controlling the national
legislature itself. They had already such fundamental
instrument in the charters of the colonies, which had
passed into the constitutions of the several States; and
they would certainly have followed, in creating their
national constitution, a precedent which they deemed
So precious.

The subjection of all the ordinary authorities and
organs of government to a supreme instrument express-
ing the will of the sovereign people, and capable of

1 It is often assumed by writers on constitutional subjects that a
Federal Government presupposes & written or rigid constitution. This
is not necessarily so. There have been federations with no fundamental
rigid constitution (the Achan League had apparently none) ; and it is
clear that in America such a fundamental document would in any case
have been created to detine and limit the powers of each department of
government. ;

46 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

being altered by them only, has been usually deemed
the most remarkable novelty of the American system.
But it is merely an application to the wider sphere of
the nation, of a plan approved by the experience of the
several States. And the plan had, in these States, been
the outcome rather of a slow course of historical develop-
ment than of conscious determination taken at any one
point of their progress from petty settlements to
powerful commonwealths. Nevertheless, it may well
be that the minds of the leaders who guided this
development were to some extent influenced and in-
spired by recollections of the English Commonwealth
of the seventeenth century, which had seen the estab-
lishment, though for a brief space only, of a genuine
supreme or rigid constitution, in the form of the
famous Instrument of Government of A.D. 1653, and
some of whose sages had listened to the discourses in
which James Harrington, ofe of the most prescient
minds of that great age, showed the necessity for such
a constitution, and laid down its principles.

We may now proceed to consider the several depart-
ments of the National Government. It will be simplest
to describe each separately, and then to examine the
relations of each to the others, reserving for subsequent
chapters an account of the relations of the National
Government as a whole to the several States.

1 A most interesting analysis of Harrington’s views and inquiry into
their influence on the development of the American Constitutions may
be found in an atticle by Professor Theodore W. Dwight in the American
Political Science Quarterly for March 1887. Harrington suggested that
the Constitution to be drawn up for England should be subscribed by the
people themselves, so as to base it on their consent.

CHAPTER V
THE PRESIDENT

Every one who undertakes to describe the American
system of government is obliged to follow the American
division of it into the three departments—Executive,
Legislative, Judicial. I begin with the executive, as the
simplest of the three.

The President is .the creation of the Constitution
of 1789. Under the Confederation there was only a
presiding officer of Congress, but no head of the
nation.

Why was it thought necessary to have a President
at all? The fear of monarchy, of a strong government,
of a centralized government, prevailed widely in 1787.
George ITI. was an object of bitter hatred: he remained
a bogey to succeéding generations of American children.
The Convention found it extremely hard to devise a
satisfactory method of choosing the President, nor has
the method they adopted proved satisfactory. That
a single head is not necessary to a republic might
have been suggested to the Americans by those ancient
examples to which they loved to recur. The experi-
ence of modern Switzerland has made it still more
obvious to us now. Yet it was settled very early
in the debates of 1787 that the central executive

48 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

authority must be vested in one person; and the
opponents of the draft Constitution, while quarrelling
with his powers, did not accuse his existence.

The explanation is to be found not so much in the
wish to reproduce the British Constitution as in the
familiarity of the Americans, as citizens of the several
States, with the office of State governor (in some States
then called President) and in their disgust with thé
feebleness which Congress had shown under the Con-
federation in its conduct of the war, and, after peace
was concluded, of the general business of the country.
Opinion called for a man, because an assembly had been
found to lack promptitude and vigour. And it may be
conjectured that the alarms felt as to the danger from
one man’s predominance were largely allayed by the
presence of George Washington. Even while the debates
were proceeding, every one must have thought of him as
the proper person to preside over the Union as he was
then presiding over the Convention. The creation of
the office would seem justified by the existence of o
person exactly fitted to fill it, one whose established
influence and ripe judgment would repair the faults then
supposed to be characteristic of democracy, its impulsive-
ness, itg want of respect for authority, its incapacity for
consistent policy.

Hamilton felt so strongly the need for having a
vigorous .executive who could Yhaintain a continuous
policy, as to propose that the head of the state
should be appointed for good behaviour, ze. for life,
subject to removal by impeachment. The proposal
was defeated, though it received the support of persons
so democratically-minded as Madison and Edmund
Randolph ; but nearly all sensible men, including many
who thought better of democracy than Hamilton himself

CHAP. V THE PRESIDENT 49

did,! admitted that the risks of foreign war, risks in-
finitely more serious in the infancy of the Republic than
they have subsequently proved, required the concentra-
tion of executive powers into a single hand. And
the fact that in every one of their commonwealths there
existed an officer in whom the State constitution vested
executive authority, balancing him against the State
legislature, made the establishment of a Federal chief
magistrate seem the obvious course.

Assuming that there was to be such a magistrate,
the statesmen of the Convention, like the solid practical
men they were, did not try to construct him out of their
own brains, but looked to some existing models. They
therefore made an enlarged copy of the State governor,
or to put the same thing differently, a reduced and im-
proved copy of the English king. He is George III.
shorn of a part of his prerogative by the intervention of
the Senate in treaties and appointments, of another
part by the restriction of his action to Federal affairs,
while his dignity as well as his influence are diminished
by his holding office for four years instead of for
life? His salary is too small to permit him either to
maintain a Court or to corrupt the legislature; nor
can he seduce the virtue of the citizens by the gift of
titles of nobility, for such titles are altogether forbidden.
Subject to these precautions, he was meant by the

1 «The disease we are suffering from is democracy,” says Hamilton in
one of his later letters.

2 When-the Romans got rid of their king, they did not really ex-
tinguish the office, but set up in their consul a sort of annual king,
limited not only by the short duration of his power, but also by the
existence of another consul with equal powers, The Americans hoped to
restrain their President not merely by the shortness of his term, but also
by diminishing the power which they left to him; and this they did by
setting up another authority to which they entrusted certain executive func-
tions, making its consent necessary to the validity of certain classes of
the President’s executive acts. This is the Senate, whereof more anon.

VOL. I E

5° THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

constitution-framers to resemble the State governor and
the British king, not only in .being the head of the
executive, but in standing apart from and above political
parties. He was to represent the nation as a whole,
as the governor represented the State commonwealth.
The independence of his position, with nothing either to
gain or to fear from Congress, would, it was hoped, leave
him free to think only of the welfare of the people.

_ This idea appears in the method provided for the
election of a President. To have left the choice of the
chief magistrate to a direct popular vote over the whole
country would have raised a dangerous excitement, and
would have given too much encouragement to candidates
of merely popular gifts. To have entrusted it to Con-
gress would have not only subjected the executive to
the legislature in violation of the principle which requires
these departments to be kept distinct,’ but have tended
to make him the creature of one particular faction
instead of the choice of the nation. Hence the device
of a double election was adopted, perhaps with a faint
reminiscence of the methods by which the Doge was
then still chosen at Venice and the Emperor in Germany,
The Constitution directs each State to choose a number of
presidential electors equal to the number of its repre-
sentatives in both Houses of Congress, Some weeks later,
these electors meet in each State on a day fixed by law,
and give their votes in writing for the President and
Vice-President.? The votes are transmitted, sealed up, to

1 See the remarks of Mr. Wilson in the Pennsylvania Convention.
Elfiot’s Debates, vol. ii. p. 511.

2 Originally the person who received most votes was deemed to have
been chosen President, and the person who stood second, Vice-President.
This led to confusion, ‘and was accordingly altered by the twelfth constitu-
tional amendment, adopted in 1804, which provides that the President
and Vice-President shall be voted for separately.

CHAP, V THE PRESIDENT 51

the capital and there opened by the president of the
Senate in the presence of both Houses and counted. To
preserve the electors from the influence of faction, it is
provided that they shall not be members of Congress,
nor holders of any Federal office. This. plan was ex-
pected to secure the choice by the best citizens of each
State, in a tranquil and deliberate way, of the man
whom they in their unfettered discretion should deem
fittest to be chief magistrate of the Union. Being them-
selves chosen electors on account of their personal merits,
they would be better qualified than the masses to select
an able and honourable man for President. Moreover,
as the votes are counted promiscuously, and not by
‘States, each elector’s voice would have its weight. He
might be in a minority in his own State, but his vote
would nevertheless tell because it would be added to
those given by electors in other States for the same
candidate.

No part of their scheme seems to have been regarded
by the constitution-makers of 1787 with more com-
placency than this,’ although no part had caused them
so much perplexity. No part has so utterly belied their
expectations. The presidential electors have become a
mere cog-wheel in the machine; a mere contrivance for
giving effect to the decision of the people. Their personal
qualifications are a matter of indifference. They have
no discretion, but are chosen under a pledge—a pledge of
honour merely, but a pledge which has never (since
1796) been violated—to vote for a particular candi-
date. In choosing them the people virtually choose

1 “The mode of appointment of the chief magistrate of the United
States is almost the only part of the system which has escaped without
some censure, or which has received the slightest mark of approbation
from its: opponents.” —Federalist, No. lxvii., cf. No, 1. and the observations
of Mr. Wilson in the Convention of Pennsylvania.

52 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

the President, and thus the very thing which the men
of 1787 sought to prevent has happened,—the Presi-
dent is chosen by a popular vote. Let us see how
this happened.

In the first two presidential elections (in 1789 and
1792) the independence of the electors did not come
into question, because everybody was for Washington,
and parties had not yet been fully developed. Yet in
the election of 1792 it was generally understood that
electors of one way of thinking were to vote for Clinton
as their second candidate (1.e. for Vice-President) and
those of the other side for John Adams. - In the third
election (1796) no pledges were exacted from electors,
but the election contest in which they were chosen was
conducted on party lines, and although, when the voting
by the electors arrived, some few votes were scattered
among other persons, there were practically only two
presidential candidates before the country, John Adams
and Thomas Jefferson, for the former of whom the
electors of the Federalist party, for the latter those of
the Republican (Democratic)! party were expected to
vote. The fourth election was a regular party struggle,
carried on in obedience to party arrangements. Both
Federalists and. Republicans put the names of their
candidates for President and Vice-President before the
country, and round these names the battle raged. The
notion of leaving any freedom or™discretion to the elec-
tors had vanished, for it was felt that an issue so great
must and could be decided by the nation alone. From
that day till now there has never been any question of
reviving the true and original intent of the plan of

1 The party then called Republican has for the last sixty years or so

been called Democratic. The party now called Republican did not arise
till 1854. itd

CHAP. V THE PRESIDENT 53

double election,) and consequently nothing has ever
turned on the personality of the electors. They are now
so little significant that to enable the voter to know for
which set of electors his party desires him to vote, it is
found necessary to put the name of the presidential
candidate whose interest they represent at the top of
the voting ticket on which their own names are
printed.

The completeness and permanence of this change
has been assured by the method which now prevails
of choosing the electors. The Constitution leaves the
method to each State, and in the earlier days many
States entrusted the choice to their legislatures. But as
democratic principles became developed, the practice of
choosing the electors by direct popular vote, originally
adopted by Virginia, Pennsylvania, and Maryland, spread
by degrees through the other States, till by 1832 South
Carolina was the only State which retained the method
of appointment by the legislature. She dropped it
in 1868, and popular election now rules everywhere.’
In some States the electors were for a time chosen
by districts, like members of the House of Repre-
sentatives. But the plan of choice by a single
popular vote over the whole of the State found
increasing favour, seeing that it was in the interest
of the party for the time being dominant in the State.
In 1828 Maryland was the only State which clung

1 In 1876 the suggestion was thrown out that the disputed election of
that year might be settled by the exercise of free choice on the part of the
electors ; but the idea found no favour with the politicians,

2 This, however, is merely matter of State law. Any State could go
back to choice by the legislature. Colorado, not having time, after her
admission to the Union in 1876, to provide by law for a popular choice
of electors to vote in the election of a President in the November of that
year, left the choice to the legislature, but now elects its presidential

electors by popular vote like the other States,

54 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

to district voting. She, too, adopted the “general
ticket” system in 1832, since which year it has been uni-
versal. Thus the issue comes directly before the people.
The parties nominate their respective candidates, in man-
ner to ‘be hereinafter described,! a tremendous “ cam-
paign” of stump speaking, newspaper writing, street
parades, and torchlight processions sets in and rages for
about four months: the polling for electors takes place
early in November, on the same day over the whole
Union, and when the result is known the contest is over,
because the subsequent meeting and voting of the electors
in their several States is mere matter of form.

So far the method of choice by electors may seem to
be merely a roundabout way of getting the judgment of
the people. It is more than this. It has several singular
consequences, unforeseen by the framers of the Constitu-
tion. It has made the election virtually an election by
States, for the present system of choosing electors by
“general ticket” over the whole State causes the whole
weight of a State to be thrown into the scale of one
candidate, that candidate whose list of electors is carried
in the given State. Pennsylvania, for instance, with her
population of four and a half millions, has thirty electoral
votes. Each party runs its list or “ticket” of thirty
presidential electors for that State, who are bound to
vote for the party’s candidate, let us say Mr. Blaine or
Mr. Cleveland. The Republican list (i.e. that which in-
cludes the thirty Blaine electors) is carried by a majority
of 473,000 against 392,000. It is of course carried
entire, if carried at all, because it would be absurd for
any partisans of Mr. Blaine to vote for some only and
not for all of the electors whose only function is to
vote for him. The Blaine list being thus carried, all

1 See the chapter on National Nominating Conventions in Vol. II.

CHAP, V THE PRESIDENT 55

the thirty electoral votes of Pennsylvania are secured
for Mr. Blaine. The hundreds of thousands of votes
given by the people for the Democratic list (i.e. for the
Cleveland electors) do not go to swell the support which
Mr. Cleveland obtains in other States, but are utterly
lost. Hence in a presidential election, the struggle con-
centrates itself in the doubtful States, where the great
parties are pretty equally divided, and is isnmucd in
States where a distinct majority either way may be
anticipated, because, since it makes no difference whether
a minority be large or small, it is not worth while to
struggle hard to increase a minority which cannot be
turned into a majority. And hence also a man may be,
and has been,’ elected President by a minority of popular
votes.

When such has been the fate of the plan of 1787,
it need hardly be said that the ideal President, the great
and good man above and outside party, whom the judi-

1 This happened in 1876, when Mr. Hayes received, on the showing
_ of his own partisans, only 4,033,708 popular votes, against 4,285,992
given for Mr. Tilden, but was elected President by 185 electoral votes
against 184 for Mr, Tilden, In 1880 Mr. Garfield was elected by 214
against 155 electoral votes, but had a popular majority of only 4,454,146 |
against 4,444,952, less than 10,000 out of the whole Union. In 1860
Abraham Lincoln received much less than half the total popular vote, but
had an electoral majority among the presidential electors of 180 against
123 voting for his various rivals. “So neither Polk in 1844, nor
Taylor in 1848, nor Buchanan in 1856, had an absolute majority of
the popular vote. In 1884 the whole ‘thirty. -six votes of New York
State were cast for Mr. Cleveland, although his popular majority .in
that State, out of a poll of more than 1,100,000, was just over 1100.
And as these thirty-six votes turned the election, it was a majority of only
1100 that determined the issue of the struggle over the whole Union, in
which nearly 10,000,000 votes were given.

It is an odd result of the system that the bestowal of the suffrage on
the negroes has operated against the Republican party which bestowed it.
The Southern States have in respect of this increase in their voting popu-
lation received 37 additional presidential votes, and these have in the
two last elections (1880 and 1884) been all thrown for the Democratic
candidate.

56 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

cidus and impartial electors were to choose; has not been
secured. The ideal was realized once and once only in
the person of George Washington. His successor in the
chair (John Adams) was a leader of one of the two great
parties then formed, the other of which has, with some
changes, lasted down to our own time. Jefferson, who
came next,’was the chief of that other party, and his
election marked its triumph. Nearly every subsequent
‘President has been elected as a party leader by a party
vote, and has felt: bound to carry out the policy of the
men who put him in power.’ Thus instead of getting
an Olympian President raised above faction, America
has, despite herself, reproduced the English system of
executive government by a party majority, reproqduced
it in a more extreme form, because in England the titular
head of the State, in whose name administrative acts are
done, stands in isolated dignity outside party politics.
The disadvantages of the American plan are patént ; but
in practice they are less serious than might be expected,
for the responsibility of a great office and the feeling
that he represents the whole nation have tended to
sober and control the President. Except as regards
patronage, he has seldom, at least since the War of Seces-
sion, acted as a mere tool of faction, or sought to abuse
his administrative powers to the injury of his political
adversaries. se

The Constitution prescribes no limit for the re-eligi-
bility of the President. He may go on being chosen

1 John Tyler and Andrew Johnson, both of whom quarrelled with
their party, were both elected as Vice-Presidents, and succeeded to the
chair on the death of the persons who had been elected Presidents, James
Monroe was chosen President in 1820 with practical unanimity ; but this
was because one of the two parties had for the time been crushed out and
started no candidate. So also J. Q. Adams, Monroe’s successor, can hardly

be called a party leader. After him the party-chosen Presidents go on
without interruption,

CHAP, V THE PRESIDENT 57

for one four year period after another for the term of his
natural life. But tradition has supplied the place of law.
Elected in 1789, Washington submitted to be re-elected
in 1792. But when he had served this second term he
absolutely refused to serve a third, urging the risk to
republican institutions of suffering the same. man to
continue constantly in office. Jefferson, Madison, Mon-
roe, and Jackson obeyed the precedent, and did not seek,
nor their friends for them, re-election after two terms.
After them no President was re-elected, except Lincoln,
down to General Grant. Grant was President from 1869
to 1873, and again from 1873 to 1877, then came Mr.
Hayes; and in 1880 an attempt was made to break the
unwritten rule in Grant’s favour. ach party, as will be
more fully explained hereafter, nominates its candidates
in a gigantic party assembly called the National Conven-
tion. In the Republican party Convention ‘of 1880 a
powerful group of the delegates put forward Grant
for nomination as the party candidate, alleging his
special services as a ground for giving him the honour of
a third term. Had there not been among the Repub-
licans themselves a section personally hostile to Grant,
er rather to those who surrounded him, the attempt
might have succeeded, though it would probably have
involved defeat at the polls. But this hostile section
found the prepossession of the people against a third
term so strong that, by appealing to the established
tradition, they defeated the Grant men in the Conven-
tion, and obtained the nomination of Mr. Garfield, who
was victorious at the ensuing election. This precedent
has been taken as practically decisive for the future,
because General Grant, though his administration: had
been marked by grave faults, was an exceptionally
popular figure. A principle affirmed against him is not

58 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

likely to be departed from in favour of any aspirant
for many elections to come.

The Constitution (Amendment xii, which in this
point repeats the original Art. xi. § 1) requires for
the choice of a President “a majority of the whole
number of electors appointed.” If no such majority is
obtained by any candidate, 2.e. if the votes of the
electors are so scattered among different candidates,
that out of the total number (which is now 401) no one
receives an absolute majority (i.¢. at least 201 votes),
the choice goes over to the House of Representa-
tives, who are empowered to choose a President
from among the three candidates who have received
the largest number of electoral votes. In the House
_ the vote is taken by States, a majority of all the States
(.e. at present of twenty States out of thirty-eight)
being necessary for a choice. As all the members of
the House from a State have but one collective vote, it
follows that if they are equally divided among them-
selves, eg. if half the members from a given State,
‘say Pennsylvania, are Democratic and half Republican,
the vote of that State is lost. Supposing this to be the |
case in half the total number of States, or supposing
the States so to scatter their votes that no candidate
receives an absolute majority, then no President is
chosen, and the Vice-President becomes President.’

Only twice has the election gone to'the House.
In 1800, when the rule still prevailed that the candidate
with the largest number of votes became President, and
the candidate who came second Vice-President, Jefferson
and Aaron Burr received the same number. The
Jeffersonian electors meant to make him President, but

£ 1 As to the choice of the Vice-President by the Senate see Constit.,
m, xii,

CHAP. V THE PRESIDENT 59

as they had also all voted for Burr, there was a tie.
After a long struggle the House chose Jefferson.’ Feeling
ran high, and had Jefferson been kept out by the votes
of the Federalist party, his partisans might possibly
have taken up arms. In 1824 Andrew Jackson had
99 electoral votes, and his three competitors (J. Q.
‘Adams, W. H. Crawford, and Henry Clay), 162 votes
between them, so that Jackson wanted 32 of an
absolute majority. The House chose J. Q. Adams by
a vote of thirteen States against seven for Jackson
and four for Crawford.2 In this mode of choice, the
popular will may be still less recognized than it is by
the method of voting through presidential electors, for
if the twenty smaller States were through their re-
presentatives in the House to vote for candidate A, and
the eighteen larger States for candidate B, A would be
seated, though the population of the twenty smaller
States is, of course, very much below that of the
eighteen larger.

The Constitution seems, though its language is not
explicit, to have intended to leave the counting of the
votes to the president of the Senate (the Vice-President
of the United States); and in early days this officer
superintended the-count, and decided questions as to the
admissibility of doubtful votes. However, Congress has
in virtue of its right to be present at the counting
assumed the further right of determining all questions

1 The votes of two States were for a long time divided; but
Hamilton’s influence at last induced the Federalist members to vote for
Jefferson as a person less dangerous to the, country than Burr. His
action—highly patriotic, for Jefferson was his bitter enemy—cost him his
life at Burr's hands.

2 Clay, unlucky throughout in his ambitions for the presidency, had
stood fourth in the electoral vote, and so could not be chosen by the

House. Jackson had received the largest popular vote in those States
where electors were chosen by the people.

60 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

which arise regarding the validity of electoral votes, and
has, it need hardly be said, determined them on each
occasion from party motives. This would be all very
well were a decision by Congress always certain of
attainment. But it often happens that one party has
a majority in the Senate, another party in the House,
and then, as the two Houses vote separately and each
differently from the other, a deadlock results. I must
pass by the minute and often tedious controversies
which have arisen on these matters. But one case
deserves special mention, for it illustrates an ingrained
and formidable weakness of the present electoral system.

In 1876, Mr. Hayes was the Republican candidate for
the presidency, Mr. Tilden the Democratic. The former
carried his list of electors in seventeen States, whose
ageregate electors numbered 163, and the latter
carried his list also in seventeen States, whose aggre-
gate electors numbered 184. Four States remained
out of the total thirty-eight, and in each of these four
two sets of persons had been chosen by popular vote,
each set claiming, on grounds too complicated to be
here explained, to be the duly chosen electors from
those States respectively. The electoral votes of these
four States amounted to twenty-two, so that if in any
one of them the Democratic set of electors had been
found to have been duly chosen, the Democrats would
have secured a majority of electoral votes (the total
number of electors being then 369, so that 184 was
within one of being a half of that number) whereas even

1 In Oregon the question was whether one of the chosen electors was
disqualified because he was a post master. In Florida there were com-
plaints of fraud, in South Carolina of intimidation, in Louisiana two
rival State governments existed, each claiming the right to certify electoral
returns, ‘There had doubtless been a good deal of feud and some violence
in several of the Southern States.

CHAP, V THE PRESIDENT 61

if in all of them Republican electors had been chosen,
the Republican electors would have had a majority
of one only. In such circumstances the only course for
the Republican leaders, as good party men, was to claim
all these doubtful States. This they promptly did,—
party loyalty is the last virtue that deserts politicians,—
and the Democrats did the like.

Meanwhile the electors met and voted in their
respective States. In the four disputed States the two.
sets of electors met, voted, and sent up to Washington,
from each of these four, double returns of the electoral
votes. The result of the election evidently depended
on the question which set of returns should be admitted
as being the true and legal returns from the four States
respectively. The excitement over the whole Union was
intense, and the prospect of a peaceful settlement
remote, for the Constitution appeared to provide no
means of determining the legal questions involved.
Congress, as remarked above, had in some previous
instances assumed jurisdiction, but: seeing that the
Republicans had a majority in the Senate, and the
Democrats in the House of Representatives, it was clear
that the majority in one House would vote for admitting -
the Republican returns, the majority in the other for
admitting the Democratic. Negotiations between the
leaders at last arranged a method of escape. A statute
was passed creating an electoral commission of five
Senators, five members of the House of Representatives,
and five Justices of the Supreme Court, who were to
determine all questions as to the admissibility of
electoral votes from States sending up double returns.’

1 Power was reserved to Congress to set aside by a vote of both

Houses the decisions of the Commission, but as the two Houses differed
in every case, the Democrats of the House always voting against each

62 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

Everything now turned on the composition of the
electoral Commission, a body such as had never before
been created. The Senate appointed three Republicans
and two Democrats. The House of Representatives
appointed three Democrats and two Republicans. So
far there was an exact balance. The statute had in-
dicated four of the Justices who were to sit, two
Republicans and two Democrats, and had left these four
to choose a fifth. This fifth was the odd man whose
casting vote would turn the scale as between the seven
Republican members of the Commission and the seven
Democrats. The four Justices chose a Republican
Justice, and this choice practically settled the result, for
every vote given by the members of the Commission
was a strict party vote! They were nearly all lawyers,
and had all taken an oath of impartiality. The legal
questions were so difficult, and for the most part so
novel, that it was possible for a sound lawyer and
honest man to take in‘each case either the view for
which the Republicans or that for which the Democrats
contended. Still it is interesting to observe that the
legal judgment of every commissioner happened to
coincide with his party proclivities.? All the points in
dispute were settled by a vote of eight to seven in
favour of the returns transmitted by the Republican
electors in the four disputed States, and Mr. Hayes was
accordingly declared duly electef by a majority of 185
determination of the Commission, and the Republicans of the Senate
supporting it, this provision made no difference.

1 The Commission decided unanimously that the Democratic set of
electors from South Carolina were not duly chosen, but they divided
eight to seven as usual on the question of recognizing the Republican
electors of that State. :

2 The same phenomenon has been observed in committees of the

English House of Commons appointed to deal with purely legal questions,
or to sit in a virtually judicial capacity.

CHAP, V THE PRESIDENT 63

electoral votes against 184. The decision may have
been right as matter of law,—it is still debated by
lawyers,—and there had been so much force and
fraud on both sides in Florida, Louisiana, and South
Carolina, that no one can say on which side sub-
stantial justice lay. Mr. Tilden deserves the credit
of-having induced his friends both to agree to a com-
promise slightly to his own disadvantage, and to accept
peaceably, though with long and loud complaints, a
result which baffled their hopes. I tell the story here
because it points to a grave danger in the presidential
system. The stake played for is so high that the
temptation to fraud is immense ; and as the ballots given
for the electors by the people are received and counted
by State authorities under State laws, an unscrupulous
State faction has opportunities for fraud at its command.
Ten years passed after the election of 1876, but
Congress, although successive Presidents pressed the
subject on its attention, did nothing till 1887 to provide
against a recurrence of the danger described. It has
now enacted a statute which to some extent meets the
problem by providing that tribunals appointed in and
by each State shall determine what electoral votes from
the State are legal votes; and that if the State has ap-
pointed no such tribunal, the two Houses of Congress
shall determine which votes (in case of double returns)
are legal. If the Houses differ the vote of the State is
lost. It is, of course, possible under this plan that the
State tribunal may decide unfairly ; but the main thing
is to secure some decision. Unfairness is better than
uncertainty.

A President is removable during his term of

1 There are further provisions in the Act which need not be given
here.

64 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

office only by means of impeachment, a procedure
familiar on both sides of the Atlantic in 1787, when the
famous trial of Warren Hastings was still lingering on
at Westminster. Impeachment, which had played no
small part in the development of English liberties, was
deemed by the Americans of those days a valuable
element in their new constitution, for it enabled Congress
to depose, and the fear of it might be expected to
restrain, a treasonally ambitious President. In obedi-
ence to State precedents, it is by the House of Repre-
sentatives that the President is impeached, and by
the Senate, sitting as a law court, with the chief justice
of the Supreme court, the highest legal official of the
country, as presiding officer, that he is tried. A two-
thirds vote is necessary to conviction, the effect of
which is simply to remove him from and disqualify him
for office, leaving him ‘‘liable to indictment, trial,
judgment, and punishment, according to law” (Constitu-
tion, Art. i. § 8, Art. ii. § 4). The impeachable offences
are “treason, bribery, or other high crimes and mis-
demeanours,” an expression which some have held to
cover only indictable offences, while others extend it to
include acts done in violation of official duty and
against the interests of the nation, such acts, in fact, as
were often grounds for the English impeachments of the
seventeenth century. As yet, Andrew Johnson is the
only President who has been impeached. His foolish
and headstrong conduct made his removal desirable, but
as it was doubtful whether any single offence justified a
conviction, several of the senators politically opposed to

1 Impeachment was taken, not directly from English usage, but rather
from the Constitutions of Virginia (1776), and Massachusetts (1780),
which had, no doubt following the example of England, established this
remedy against culpable officials.

CHAP. V THE PRESIDENT 65

him voted for acquittal! A two-thirds majority not
having been secured upon any one article (the numbers
being thirty-five for conviction, nineteen for acquittal)
he was declared acquitted.

In case of the removal of a President by his impeach-
ment, or of his death, resignation, or inability to discharge
his duties, the Vice-President steps into his place. The
Vice-President is chosen at the same time, by the same
electors, and in the same manner as the President.
His only functions are to preside: in the Senate
and to succeed the President. Failing both President
and Vice-President it was formerly provided by
statute, not by the Constitution, that the presiding
officer for the time being of the Senate should suc-
ceed to the presidency, and, failing him, the Speaker
of the House of Representatives. To this plan there
was the obvious objection that it might throw power
into the hands of the party opposed to that to which
the lately deceased President belonged ; and it has there-
fore been now (by an Act of 1886) enacted that on
the death of a President the secretary of state shall
succeed, and after him other officers of the administration,
in the order of their rank. Four Presidents (Harrison,
Taylor, Lincoln, Garfield) have died in office, and been
succeeded by Vice-Presidents, and in the first and third
of these instances the succeeding Vice-President has
reversed the policy of his predecessor, and become
involved in a quarrel with the party which elected him,
such as has never yet broken out between a man elected
to be President and his party. In practice very little
pains are bestowed on the election of a Vice-President.

1 They may have questioned the expediency of turning him out at
that moment; or their political prepossessions against him may have
been restrained by a doubt whether the evidence was quite sufficient to
support a quasi-criminal charge. .

VOL. I F

66 THE: NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1

The convention which selects the party candidates usually
gives the nomination to this post to a man in the second
rank, sometimes as a consolation to a disappointed
candidate for the presidential nomination, sometimes to
a friend of such a disappointed candidate in order to
“placate” his faction, sometimes as a compliment to an
elderly leader who is personally popular. If the party
carries its candidate for President, it also as a matter of
course carries its candidate for Vice-President, and thus
if the President happens to die, a man of small account
may step into the chief magistracy of the nation.

CHAPTER VI

PRESIDENTIAL POWERS AND DUTIES

THE powers and duties of the President as head of the
Federal executive are the following :—
Command of Federal army and navy and of militia

of several States when called into service of the
United States.

Power to make treaties, but with advice and con-

3

23

sent of the Senate, z.e. consent of two-thirds of
senators present.

to appoint ambassadors and consuls, judges of
Supreme court, and all other higher Federal
officers, but with advice and consent of Senate.
to grant reprieves and pardons for offences
against the United States, except in cases of
impeachment.

to convene both Houses on extraordinary occasions.
to disagree with (7.e. to send back for re-
consideration) any bill or resolution passed by
Congress, but subject to the power of Congress to
finally pass the same, after re-consideration, by a
two-thirds majority in each House.

Duty to inform Congress of the state of the Union,

23

and to recommend measures to Congress.
to receive foreign ambassadors.

68 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

‘Duty to “take care that the laws be faithfully exe-
cuted.”
», to commission all the officers of the United
States.

These functions group themselves into four classes—

Those which relate to foreign affairs.

Those which relate to domestic administration.

Those which concern legislation.

The power of appointment.
The conduct of foreign policy would be a function of
the utmost importance did not America, happy America,
stand apart in a world of her own, unassailable by
European powers, easily superior to the other republics of
her continent, but with no present motive for ageres-
sion upon them. The President, however, has not a
free hand in foreign policy. He cannot declare war, for
that belongs to Congress, though to be sure he may, as
President Polk did in 1845-6, bring affairs to a point at
which it is hard for Congress to refrain from the declara-
tion. Treaties require the approval of two-thirds of
the Senate; and in order to secure this, it is usually
necessary for the Executive to be in constant com-
munication with the Foreign Affairs Committee of that
body. The House of Representatives has no legal right
to interfere, but it often passes resolutions enjoining or
disapproving a particular line of policy ; ; and sometimes
invites the Senate to coincide in these expressions of
opinion, which then become weightier. The President
is by no means bound by such resolutions, and has more
than once declared that he does not regard them. But
as some treaties, especially commercial treaties, cannot be
carried out except by the aid of statutes, and as no war
can be entered on without votes of money, the House
of Representatives can sometimes indirectly make good

cHap. vi PRESIDENTIAL POWERS AND DUTIES 69

its claim to influence. Many delicate questions, some
of them not yet decided, have arisen,upon these points,
which the Constitution has, perhaps unavoidably, left in
half light.’ In all free countries it is most difficult to
define the respective spheres of the legislature and
executive in foreign affairs, for while publicity and
parliamentary control are needed to protect the people,
promptitude and secrecy are the conditions of diplomatic
success. Practically, however, and for the purposes of
ordinary business, the President is independent of the
House, while the Senate, though it can prevent his
settling anything, cannot keep him from unsettling
every thing He, or rather his secretary of state, for
the President has rarely leisure to give close or
continuous attention to foreign policy, retains an
unfettered initiative, by means of which he may embroil
the country abroad or excite passion at home.

The domestic authority of the President is in time
of peace very small, because by far the larger part of
law and administration belongs to the State governments,
and because Federal administration is regulated by
statutes which leave little discretion to the executive.
In war time, however, and especially in a civil war, it
expands with portentous speed. Both as commander-
in-chief of the army and navy, and as charged with the
“faithful execution of the laws,” the President is likely
to be led to assume all the powers which the emergency
requires. How much he can legally do without the aid
of statutes is disputed, for the acts of President Lincoln
during the earlier part of the War of Secession, including
his proclamation suspending the writ of Habeas Corpus,
were subsequently legalized by Congress; but it is at

1 An acute discussion of some of these questions may be found in
Dr. Von Holst’s Staatsrecht der Vereinigten Staaten, § 58.

70 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1

least clear that Congress can make him, as it did
make Lincoln, almost a dictator, And how much
the war power may include appears in this, that by
virtue of it and without any previous legislative sanction
President Lincoln issued his emancipation proclamations
of 1862 and. 1863, declaring all slaves in the insurgent
States to be thenceforth free, although these States were
deemed to be in point of law still members of the Union.!
It devolves on the executive as well as on Congress
to give effect to the provisions of the Constitution
whereby a republican form of government is guaranteed
to every State: and a State may, on the application of
its legislature, or executive (when the legislature cannot
be convened), obtain protection against domestic violence.
Where, as in Louisiana in 1873, there are two govern-
ments disputing by force the control of a State, or
where an insurrection breaks out, as in Rhode Island in
' 1840-2, this power becomes an important one, for it in-
volves the employment of troops, and enables the Pre-
sident (since it is usually on him that the duty falls)
to éstablish the government he prefers to recognize.’
Fortunately the case has been one of rare occurrence.

1 The proclamation was expressed not to apply to States which had
not seceded, nor to such parts of seceding States as had then already been
reconquered by the northern armies. Slavery was finally legally ex-
tinguished everywhere by the thirteenth constitutional amendment of 1865.

2 In the Louisiana case Federal troops were employed: in the Rhode
Island case the President authorized the sending in of the militia of
Massachusetts and Connecticut, but the Rhode Island troops succeeded in
suppressing the rebellion, whose leader was ultimately convicted of high
treason against the State and imprisoned. See as to the guarantee of order
and republican government in the States, the case of Luther v. Borden (7
How. 42) and the instructive article of Judge T. M. Cooley in the Interna-
tional Review for January 1875. He observes: “The obligation to guarantee
a republican form of government to the States, and to protect them
against invasion and domestic violence, is one imposed upon ‘the United
States.’ The implication is that the duty was not to depend for its fulfil-

ment on the legislative department exclusively, but that all departments of
the government, or at least more than one, were or might be charged with

cHap.vit PRESIDENTIAL POWERS AND DUTIES 71

The President has the right of speaking to the nation
by addresses or proclamations, a right,not expressly con-
ferred by the Constitution, but inherent in his position.
Occasions requiring its exercise are uncommon. On
entering office, it is usual for the new magistrate to issue
an inaugural address, stating his views on current
public questions. Washington also put forth a farewell
address, but Jackson’s imitation of that famous document
was condemned as a piece of vain-glory. It is thought
bad taste for the President to deliver stump speeches,
and Andrew Johnson injured himself by the practice.
But he retains that and all other rights of the ordinary
citizen, including the right of voting at Federal as well
as State elections in his own State. And he has some-
times taken an active, though a covert, share in the
councils of his own party.

- The position of the President as respects legislation
is a peculiar one. The King of England is a member
of the English legislature, because Parliament is in
theory his Great Council which he summons and in
which he presides, hearing the complaints of the people,
and devising legislative remedies.’ It is as a member of
the legislature that he assents to the bills it presents to
him, and the term “ veto power,” since it seems to sug-
gest an authority standing outside to approve or reject,
some duty in this regard. It has been Congress which hitherto has assumed
to act upon the guarantee, while application for protection against domestic
violence has, on the other hand, been made to the President. From the
nature of the case the judiciary can have little or nothing to do with ques-
tions arising under this provision of the Constitution.”

1 It need hardly be said that the actual separation of Parliament into
two branches, each of which deliberates apurt under the presidency of its
own chairman (the chairman of one House named by the sovereign, whom
he represents, that of the other chosen by the House, but approved by
the sovereign), does not exclude the theory that the King Lords and

Commons constitute the common council of the nation. They are indeed
deemed to be the whole nation, assembled for national purposes.

72 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT er

does not happily describe his right of dealing with a
measure which has been passed by the council in which
he is deemed to sit, though in point of fact he no longer
does so except at the beginning and ending of a session.
The American President is not a member of the legisla-
ture at all. He is an independent and separate power
on whom the people, for the sake of checking the legis-
lature and of protecting themselves against it, have
specially conferred the function of arresting by his dis-
approval its acts. So again the King of England can
initiate legislation. According to the older Constitution,
statutes purported to be made by him, but “with the
advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal
and of the Commons.”’ According to the modern practice,
nearly all important measures are brought into Parliament
by his ministers, and nominally under, his instructions.
The American President cannot introduce bills, either
directly or through his ministers, for they do not sit in
Congress. All that the Constitution permits him to
do in this direction is to inform Congress of the state
of the nation, and to recommend the measures which
his experience in administration shows to be necessary.
This latter function is discharged by the messages
which the President addresses to Congress. The most
important is that sent by the hands of his private secre-
tary at the beginning of each session.

1 In the fourteenth century English statutes are expressed to be made
by the king, “ par conseil et par assentement” of the lords and the com-
monalty. The words “by the authority” of the Lords and Commons
first appear in the eleventh year of Henry VI. (1433), and froin the first
of Henry VII. (1485) downwards a form substantially the same as the
present is followed, viz, “Be it enacted by the Queen’s most excellent
Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons, and by the authority of the same.”- See
Stubbs, Constitutional History, vol. iii. chap. xx.; Anson, Law of the
Constitution, vol, i. p. 127.

cnar.vi PRESIDENTIAL POWERS AND DUTIES 73

George Washington used to deliver his addresses
orally, like an English king, and drove in a coach and
six to open Congress with something of an English
king’s state. But Jefferson, when his turn came in 1801,
whether from republican simplicity, as he said him-
self, or because he was a poor speaker, as his critics
“said, began the practice of sending communications in
writing; and this has been followed ever since. The
message usually discusses the leading questions of the
moment, indicates mischiefs needing a remedy, and
suggests the requisite legislation. But as no bills are_
submitted by the President, and as, even were he to
submit them, no one of his ministers sits in either House
to explain and defend them, the message is a shot in
the air without practical result. It is rather a mani-
festo, or declaration of opinion and policy, than a step
towards legislation. Congress is not moved: members
go their own ways and bring in their own bills. Pre-
sident Cleveland, for instance, has recently (1887) in two
successive messages called attention to the necessity for
dealing with the silver question, but Congress has not
even attempted to handle the matter.

Far more effective is the President's part in the last
stage of legislation, for here he finds means provided for
carrying out his will. When a bill is presented to him,
he may sign it, and his signature makes it law. - If, how-
ever, he disapproves of it, he returns it within ten days
to the House in which it originated, with a statement of
his grounds of disapproval. If both Houses take up the
bill again and pass it by a two-thirds majority in each
House, it becomes law forthwith without requiring the
President’s signature.’ If it fails to obtain this majority
it drops.

1 If Congress adjourns within the ten days allowed the President for

74 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PARTI

i\Considering that the arbitrary use, by George III.
and his colonial governors, of the power of refusing bills
passed by a colonial legislature had been a chief cause
of the Revolution of 1776, it is to the credit of the
Americans that they inserted this apparently undemo-
cratic provision in the Constitution of 1789.' It has
worked wonderfully well. Most Presidents have used it
sparingly, and only where they felt either that there
was a case for delay, or that the country would support
them against the majority in Congress. Perverse or
headstrong Presidents have been generally defeated by
the use of the two-thirds vote to pass the bill over their
objections. Washington vetoed (to use the popular ex-
pression) two bills only; his successors down till 1830,
seven; and till the accession of President Cleveland
in 1885 the total number vetoed was only seventy-
seven (including the so-called pocket vetoes) in ninety-
six years.” Mr. Cleveland had up to March 1887
vetoed a much larger number than this, the great
majority being bills for granting pensions to persons who
served in the northern armies during the War of Seces-
returning the bill, it is lost. His retaining it under these circumstances
at the end of a session is popularly called a “ pocket veto.”

1 At that time there was only one State, Massachusetts, whose con-
stitution allowed the governor a veto. As to the veto power in the States,
an interesting subject, see post, Chapters XL. and XLI.

2 Mr. Horace Davis (in Johns Hopkins University Studies, Third Series,
Nos, ix. x.) gives the following particulars, up te 1885: “ Forty-three of the
seventy-seven vetoes emanated from four Presidents, viz. Jackson, eleven ;
Tyler, ten; Johnson, thirteen; Hayes, nine. All these administrations
were periods of fierce conflict with a hostile Congress. Add Madison, six ;
Pierce, five ; Buchanan, seven ; and Grant, six; and we have sixty-seven
out of seventy-seven vetoes, and only ten remain to the other twelve
Presidents. Five subjects comprise the majority of all the vetoes, viz.
Internal improvements, seventeen ; United States Bank, four; Recon-
struction Acts, seven; Rebel claims, four; Interference at elections by
marshals and soldiers, seven; in all, thirty-seven out of seventy-seven.

Ten bills have been passed over vetoes, viz. one under Tyler, seven under
Johnson, one under Hayes, and one under Arthur.”

cuar.vit PRESIDENTIAL POWERS AND DUTIES 75

sion.! Though many of these bills had been passed with
little or no opposition scarcely any were yepassed
against his veto. The only President who used the
power in a reckless way was Andrew Johnson, who, in
the course .of his three years’ struggle with Congress,
returned to them the chief bills they passed for carry-
Ing out their Southern Reconstruction policy. As the
majority opposed to him was a large one in both
Houses, these bills were promptly passed over his veto.
So far from exciting the displeasure of the people by
resisting the will of their representatives, a President
generally gains popularity by the bold use of his veto
power. It conveys the impression of firmness; it shows
that he has a view and does not fear to give effect to it.
The nation, which has often good grounds for distrusting
Congress, a body liable to be moved by sinister private
influences, or to defer to the clamour of some noisy
section outside, looks to the man of its choice
to keep Congress in order. By “killing” more bills
than all his predecessors put together had done,
Mr. Cleveland raised himself in public opinion and
improved the prospects of his re-election. The reasons
why the veto provisions of the Constitution have
succeeded appear to be two. One is that the Presi-
dent, being an elective and not a hereditary magis-
- trate, is deemed to act for the people, is responsible to
the people, and has the weight of the people behind him.
The people regard him as a check, an indispensable
check, not only upon the haste and heedlessness of their

1 In 1886 Mr, Cleveland returned to Congress 115 bills in all, of
which 101 were pension bills. It was attempted to pass a second time
only eight of these, and only one was in fact repassed. His chief ground
was that a regular bureau exists for dealing with and awarding pensions
under the general law, that many of the claims recognized by these bills
had been reported against, and that others were open to suspicion.

76 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

representatives, the faults that the framers of the Con-
stitution chiefly feared, but upon their tendency to
yield either to pressure from any section of their constitu-
ents, or to temptations of a private nature. He is ex-
pected to resist these tendencies on behalf of the whole
people, whose interests may suffer from the selfishness as
well.of sections as of individuals. The other reason is that
a veto can never take effect unless there is a substantial
minority of Congress, a minority exceeding one-third
in one or other House, which agrees with the President.
Shculd the majority threaten him he is therefore sure of
considerable support. Hence this arrangement is pre-
ferable to-a plan, such as that of the French Constitution
of 1791} (under which the king’s veto could be overridden
by passing a bill in three successive years), for enabling
the executive simply to delay the passing of a measure
which may be urgent, or which a vast majority of the
legislature may desire. In its practical working the
presidential veto power furnishes an interesting illustra-
tion of the tendency of unwritten or flexible constitu-
tions to depart from, of written or rigid constitutions to
cleave to, the letter of the law. The strict legal theory
of the rights of the head of the State is in this point
exactly the same in England and in America. But
whereas it is now the undoubted duty of an English
king to assent to every bill passed by both Houses of
Parliament, however strongly he may personally dis-
approve its provisions,? it is the no less undoubted duty

1 As the majority in France was unable to attain its will by constitu-
tional means without waiting three years, it was the more disposed to
overthrow the Constitution.

2 Queen Elizabeth, in a.p. 1597, assented to forty-three bills passed
in that session, and “advised herself upon” forty-eight. William III,
refused to assent to five bills. The last instance of the use of the “veto
power” in England was by Queen Anne in 1707 on a Scotch militia bill.
Mr. Tod (Parliamentary Government in the English Colonies, ii. p. 319)

cHar.vi PRESIDENTIAL POWERS AND DUTIES 77

of an American President to exercise his independent
judgment on every bill, not sheltering himself under
the representatives of the people, or foregoing his own
opinion at their bidding.’

As the President is charged with the whole Federal
administration, and responsible for its due conduct, he
“aust of course be allowed to choose his executive sub-
ordinates. But as he may abuse this tremendous power
the Constitution associates the Senate with him, requiring
the “advice and consent” of that body to the appoint-
ments he makes. It also permits Congress to vest in the
courts of law, or in the heads of departments, the right
' of appointing to “inferior offices.”* This last elause has
been used to remove many posts from the nomination
of the President. Buta vast number, roughly estimated

mentions that in 1858 changes in a private railway bill were compelled
by an intimation to its promoters that, if they were not made, the royal
power of rejection would be exercised.

1 The practical disuse of the “veto power” in England is due not
merely to the decline in the authority of the Crown, but to the fact that,
since the Revolution, the Crown acts only on the advice of responsible
ministers, who necessarily command a majority in the House of Commons.
A pill therefore cannot be passed against the wishes of the ministry unless
in the rare case of their being ministers on sufferance, and even in that
event they would be able to prevent its passing by advising the Crown to
prorogue or dissolve Parliament before it had gone through all its stages.
In 1868 a bill (the Irish Church Suspension Bill) was carried through the
House of Commons by Mr. Gladstone against the opposition of the then
Tory ministry which was holding office on sufferance ; but it was rejected
on second reading by a large majority in the House of Lords. Had that
House seemed likely to accept it the case would have arisen which I have
referred to, and the only course for the ministry would have been to dis-
solve Parliament.

It was urged against the provision in the Constitution of 1789 for the
President’s veto that the power would be useless, because in England the
Crown did not venture to use it. Wilson replied by observing that the
English Crown had not only practically an’ antecedent negative, but also
a means of defeating a bill in the House of Lords by creating new peers.
~—Elliot’s Debates, ii. p. 472.

2 The Constitution also permits Congress to vest the appointment of
such inferior offices as it thinks fit in the President alone, so as not to
require the Senate’s concurrence.

78 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

at 3500, and including for example nearly 600 places
under the Treasury, and nearly 2000 post-masterships,
still remain in his gift. The confirming power entrusted
to the Senate has become a political factor of the highest
moment. The framers of the Constitution probably
meant nothing more than that the Senate should check
the President by rejecting nominees who were personally
unfit, morally or intellectually, for the post to which he
proposed to appoint them. The Senate has always, ex-
cept in its struggle with President Johnson, left the Pre-
sident free to choose his cabinet ministers. But it early
assumed the right of rejecting a nominee to any other
office on any ground which it pleased, as for instance, if it
disapproved his political affiliations, or simply if it dis-
liked him, or wished to spite the President. Presently
the senators from the State wherein a Federal office to
which the President had made a nomination lay, being
the persons chiefly interested in the appointment, and
most entitled to be listened to by the rest of the Senate
when considering it, claimed to have a paramount voice
in deciding whether the nomination should be confirmed.
This claim was substantially yielded, for it applied all
round, and gave every senator what he wanted. The sena-
tors then proceeded to put pressure on the President.
They insisted that before making a nomination to an
office in any State he should consult the senators from that
State who belonged to his own party, and be guided by
their wishes, Such an arrangement’ benefited all sena-
tors alike, because each obtained the right of practically
dictating the appointments to those Federal offices which
he most cared for, viz. those within the limits of his
own State; and each was therefore willing to support
his colleagues in securing the same right for themselves
as regarded their States respectively. Of course when

cHar.vit PRESIDENTIAL POWERS AND DUTIES 79

a senator belonged to the party opposed to the President,
he had no claim to interfere, because places are as a
matter of course given to party adherents only. When
both senators belonged to the President’s party they
agreed among themselves as to the person whom
they should require the President to nominate. By
this system, which obtained the name of the Courtesy
of the Senate, the President was practically enslaved as
regards appointments, because his refusal to be guided
by the senator or senators within whose State the office
lay exposed him to have his nomination rejected. The
senators, on the other hand, obtained a mass of
patronage by means of which they could reward their
partisans, control the Federal civil servants of their
State, and build up a faction devoted to their interests.’
Successive Presidents chafed under the yoke, and some-
times carried their nominees either by making a bargain
or by fighting hard with the senators who sought to
dictate to them. But it was generally more prudent to
yield, for an offended senator could avenge a defeat
by playing the President a shrewd trick in some other
matter ; and as the business of confirmation is transacted
in secret session, intriguers have little fear of the public
before their eyes. The senators might, moreover, argue
that they knew best what would strengthen the party
in their State, and that the men of their choice were
just as likely to be, good as those whom some private
friend suggested to the President. Thus the system
throve and still thrives, though it received a blow

1 As the House of Representatives could not allow the Senate to en-
gross all the Federal patronage, there has been a tendency towards a sort
of arrangement, according to which the greater State offices belong to the
senators, while as regards the lesser ones, lying within their respective
Congressional districts, members of the House are recognized as entitled
to recommend candidates.

80 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

from the conflict in 1881 between President Garfield
and one of the New York senators, Mr. Roscoe Conkling.
This gentleman, finding that Mr. Garfield would not
nominate to a Federal office in that State the person he
proposed, resigned his seat in the Senate, inducing his
co-senator Mr. Platt to do the same. Both then offered
themselves for re-election by the State legislature of
New York, expecting to obtain from it an approval of
their action, and thereby to cow the President. The
State legislature, however, in which a faction hostile to
the two senators had become powerful, rejected Mr.
Conkling and Mr. Platt in favour of other candidates.
So the victory remained with Mr. Garfield, while the
nation, which had watched the contest eagerly, rubbed
its hands in glee at the unexpected dénouement.

Before we quit this subject, to which I may re-
turn in a later chapter, it must be remarked that the
“‘ Courtesy of the Senate” would never have attained its
present strength but for the growth in and since the
time of President Jackson, of the so-called Spoils System,
whereby holders of Federal offices have been turned out
at the accession of a new President to make way for the
aspirants whose services, past or future, he is expected
to requite or secure by the gift of places.!

The right of the President to remove from office has
given rise to long controversies on which I can only
touch. In the Constitution ther® is not a word about
removals ; and very soon after it had come into force
the question arose whether, as regards those offices for
which the confirmation of the Senate is required, the
President could remove without its consent. Hamilton
had argued in the Federalist that the President

1 See further as to the use of Federal patronage the chapter on the
Spoils System in Vol. II.

cHanvi PRESIDENTIAL POWERS AND DUTIES 81

could not so remove, because it was not to be supposed
that the Constitution meant to give him so immense
and dangerous a reach of power. Madison argued soon
after the adoption of the Constitution that it did
permit him so to remove, because the head of the
executive must have subordinates whom he can trust,
-and may discover in those whom he has appointed
defects fatal to their usefulness. This was also the
view of Chief-Justice Marshall... When the question
came to be settled by Congress during the presidency
of Washington, Congress, influenced perhaps by respect
for his perfect uprightness, took the Madisonian view
and recognized the power of removal as vested in the
President alone. So matters stood till a conflict
arose in 1866 between President Johnson and the
Republican majority in both Houses of Congress. - In
1867, Congress fearing that the President would
dismiss a great number of officials who sided with
it against him, passed an Act, known as the Tenure
of Office Act, which made the consent of the Senate
necessary to the removal of office-holders, even of
the President’s (so-called) cabinet ministers, permit-
ting him only to suspend them’ from office during the
time when Congress was not sitting. The constitution-
ality of this Act has been much doubted, and its policy
is now generally condemned.’ It was a blow struck in
the heat of passion. When President Grant succeeded

1 Mr. Justice Story in his Commentaries on the Constitution, argues
against the Madison doctrine, but he does so in view not of such ques-
tions as presented themselves in 1867, but of the conduct of President
Jackson (who was in power when Story wrote) in making wholesale
partisan removals. The whole subject of the President’s appointing power
. ig elaborately and judiciously treated in an article in the Papers of the
American Historical Association, vol. i., by Lucy M. Salmon.

‘2 Mr. James G. Blaine, for instance, who was a member of the
Congress which passed the Act, has in his Twenty Years in Congress ex-
pressed his disapproval of it.

VOL. I G

82 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

in 1869, the Act was greatly modified, and it hag now
(1887) been with general approval repealed.

How dangerous it is to leave all offices tenable at
' the mere pleasure of a partisan Executive using them
for party purposes, has been shown by the fruits of the
Spoils system. On the other hand a President ought to
be free to choose his chief advisers and ministers, and
even in the lower ranks of the civil service it is hard to
secure efficiency if a specific cause, such as could be
proved to a jury, must be assigned for dismissal.

Although Congress has transferred many minor
appointments to the courts and the heads of depart-
ments, and by the Civil Service Reform Act of 1883 has
instituted competitive examinations for a number esti-
mated at 14,000, many remain in the free gift of the
President ; and even as regards those which lie with his
ministers, he may be invoked if disputes arise between
the minister and politicians pressing the claims of their
respective friends. The business of nominating is in
ordinary times so engrossing as to leave the chief
magistrate of the nation little time for his other
functions. ; :

Artemus Ward’s description of Abraham Lincoln
swept along from room to room in the White House by
a rising tide of office seekers is hardly an exaggeration.
From the 4th of March, when Mr. Garfield came into
power, till he was shot in thé July following, he was
engaged almost incessantly in questions of patronage.’
Yet the President’s individual judgment has little scope.
He must reckon with the Senate; he must requite the
supporters of the men to whom he owes his election:

1 It is related that a friend, meeting Mr. Lincoln one day during the
war, observed, “You look anxious, Mr. President; is there bad news
from the front?” ‘‘No,” answered the President, “it isn’t the war : it’s
that post-mastership at Brownsville, Ohio.”

cuar.vit PRESIDENTIAL POWERS AND DUTIES $3

he must so distribute places all over the country as to
keep the local wire-pullers in good humour, and gener-
ally strengthen the party by “doing something” for
those who have worked or will work for it. Although the
minor posts are practically left to the nomination of the’
senators or congressmen from the State or district,
“conflicting claims give infinite trouble, and the more
lucrative offices are numerous enough to make the task
of selection laborious as well as thankless and disagree-
able. No one has more to gain from a thorough scheme
of civil service reform than the President. The present
system makes a wire-puller of him. It throws work on
him unworthy of a fine intellect, and for which a man
of fine intellect may be ill qualified. On the other
hand the President’s patronage is, in the hands of a
skilful intriguer, an engine of far-spreading potency.
By it he can oblige a vast number of persons, can bind
their interests to his own, can fill important places
with the men of his choice. Such authority as he has
over the party in Congress, and therefore over the
course of legislation, such influence as he exerts on his
party in the several States, and therefore over the
Selection of candidates for Congress, is due to his
patronage. Unhappily, the more his patronage is used
for these purposes, the more it is apt to be diverted
from the aim of providing the country with the best
officials.

In quiet times the power of the President is not
great. He is hampered at every turn by the necessity
of humouring his party. He is so much engrossed by
the trivial and mechanical parts of his work as to have
little leisure for framing large schemes of policy, while
in carrying them out he needs the co-operation of
Congress, which may be jealous, or indifferent, or

84 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

hostile. He has less influence on legislation,—that is
to say, his individual volition makes less difference
to the course legislation takes, than the Speaker of
the House of Representatives. In troublous times it
is otherwise, for immense responsibility is then thrown
on one who is both the commander-in-chief and the
head of the civil executive. Abraham Lincoln wielded
more authority than any single Englishman has
done since Oliver Cromwell. It is true that the
ordinary law was for some purposes practically sus-
pended during the War of Secession. But it will
always have to be similarly suspended in similar
crises, and the suspension enures to the benefit of the
President, who becomes a sort of dictator.

Setting aside these exceptional moments, the dignity
and power of the President have, except in respect to
the increase in the quantity of his patronage, been
raised but little during the last fifty years, that is,
since the time of Andrew Jackson, the last President
who, not so much through his office as by his personal
ascendency and the vehemence of his character, led and
guided his party from the chair. Here, too, one sees‘
how a rigid or supreme Constitution serves to keep
things as they were. But for its iron hand, the office
would surely, in a country where great events have
been crowded on one another and opinion changes
rapidly under the teaching of eVents, have either risen
or fallen, have gained strength or lost it.

In no European country is there any personage to
whom the President can be said to correspond. If we
look at parliamentary countries like England, Italy,
Belgium, he resembles neither the sovereign nor the
prime minister, for the former is not a party chief at
all, and the latter is palpably and confessedly nothing

cHar. vi PRESIDENTIAL POWERS AND DUTIES 85

else. The President enjoys more authority, if less
dignity, than a European king. He has powers for the
moment narrower than a European prime minister, but
these powers are more secure, for they do not depend
on the pleasure of a parliamentary majority, but run
on to the end of his term. One naturally compares
him with the French president, but the latter has a
prime, minister and cabinet, dependent on the chamber,
at once to relieve and to eclipse him: in America
the President’s cabinet is a part of himself and has
nothing to do with Congress. The president of the
Swiss Confederation is merely the chairman for a year
of the Administrative Federal Council (Bundesrath),
and can hardly be called the executive chief of the
nation.

The difficulty in forming a just estimate of the
President’s power arises from the fact that it differs so
much under ordinary and under extraordinary circum-
stances. This is a result which republics might seem
specially concerned to prevent, and yet it is specially
frequent under republics, as witness the cases of Rome
and of the Italian commonwealths of the Middle Ages.
In ordinary times the President may be compared to the
Senior or managing clerk in a large business establishment,
whose chief: function is to select his subordinates, the
policy of the concern being in the hands of the board of
directors. But when foreign affairs become critical, or
when disorders within the Union require his interven-
‘tion,—when, for instance, it rests with him to put down
an insurrection or to decide which of two rival State
governments he will recognize and support by arms,
everything may depend on his judgment, his courage,
and his hearty poyalty to the principles of the
Constitution.

86 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

, It used to be thought that hereditary monarchs
were strong because they reigned by a right of their
own, not derived from the people. A President is
strong for the exactly opposite reason, because his
rights come straight from the people. We shall have
frequent occasion to observe that nowhere is the rule of
public opinion so complete as in America, nor so direct,
that is to say, so independent of the ordinary machin-
ery of government. Now the President is deemed to
represent the people no less than do the members of the
legislature. Public opinion governs by and through
him no less than by and through them, and makes him
powerful even against the legislature. This is a fact
to be remembered by those Europeans who seek in the
strengthening of the monarchical principle a cure for
the faults of government by assemblies. And it also
suggests the risk that attaches to power vested in the
hands of a leader directly chosen by the people. A high
authority observes * :—

“ Our holiday orators delight with patriotic fervour to
draw distinctions between our own and other countries,
and to declare that here the law is master and the
highest officer but the servant of the law, while even in
free England the monarch is irresponsible and enjoys
the most complete personal immunity. But such com-
parisons are misleading, and may prove mischievous.

1 Judge T. M. Cooley, in the International Review for Jan. 1875.
He quotes the words of Edward Livingston: ‘‘ The gloss of zeal for the
public service is always spread over acts of oppression, and the people are
sometimes made to consider that as a brilliant exertion of energy in their
favour which, when viewed in its true light, would be found a fatal blow
to their rights. In no government is this effect so easily produced as in
a free republic; party spirit, inseparable from its existence, aids the illu-
sion, and a popular leader is allowed in many instances impunity, and
sometimes rewarded with applause, for acts which would make a tyrant
tremble on his throne.”

cHap.vi PRESIDENTIAL POWERS AND DUTIES 87

In how many directions is not the executive authority
in America practically superior to what it is in Eng-
land? And can we say that the President is really in
any substantial sense any more the servant of the law
than is the Queen? Perhaps if we were candid we
should confess that the danger that the executive may
be tempted to a disregard of the law may justly be
believed greater in America than in countries where the
chief magistrate comes to his office without the selection
of the people; and where consequently their vigilance
is quickened by a natural distrust.”

Although recent Presidents have shown no disposition
to strain their authority, it is still the fashion in America to
be jealous of the President’s action, and to warn citizens
against what is called “the one man power.” General
Ulysses 8. Grant was hardly the man to make himself a
tyrant, yet the hostility to a third term of office which
moved many people who had not been alienated by the
faults of his administration, rested not merely on rever-
ence for the example set by Washington, but also on the
fear that a President repeatedly chosen would become
dangerous to republican institutions. This particular
alarm seems to a European groundless. I do not deny
that a really great man might exert ampler authority
from the presidential chair than its recent occupants have
done. The same observation applies-to the Popedom
and even to the English throne. The President has a
position of immense dignity, dn unrivalled platform
from which to impress his ideas (if he has any) upon
the people. Buit it is hard to imagine a President over-
throwing the existing Constitution. He has no stand-
ing army, and he cannot create one. Congress can
checkmate him by stopping supplies! There is no

1 Assuming his conduct to be such as to warrant this extreme step,

8x7 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

aristocracy to rally round him. Every State furnishes |
an independent centre of resistance. If he were to
attempt a coup d’état, it could only be by appealing to
the people against Congress, and Congress could hardly,
considering that it is re-elected every two years, attempt
to oppose the people. One must suppose a condition
bordering on civil war, and the President putting the
resources of the executive at the service of one of the
intending belligerents, already strong and organized, in
order to conceive a case in which he will be formid-
able to freedom. - If there be any danger, it would seem
to lie in another direction. The larger a community:
becomes the less does it seem to respect an assembly,
the more is it attracted by an individual man. A bold
President who knew himself to be supported by a
majority in the country, might be tempted to override
the law, and deprive the minority of the protection
which the law affords it. He might be a tyrant, not
against the masses, but with the masses. But nothing
in the present state of American politics gives weight
to such apprehensions. ,

to which Congress is loth to resort, for the reasons stated in Chapter XX.

post. Contests between Congress and the President have tended to take
the form of attaching riders to appropriation bills.

CHAPTER VII
OBSERVATIONS ON THE PRESIDENCY

AurHoucH the President has been, not that independent
good citizen whom the framers of the Constitution
contemplated, but, at least during the last sixty years,
a ‘party man, seldom much above the average in
character or abilities, the office has attained the main
objects for which it was created. Such mistakes as have
been made in foreign policy, or in the conduct of the
administrative departments, have been rarely owing to
the constitution of the office or to the errors of its holder.
This is more than one who should review the history of
Kurope during the last hundred years could say of any
European monarchy. Nevertheless, the faults charge-
able on hereditary kingship, faults more serious than
Englishmen, who have watched with admiration the
wisdom of the Crown during the present reign, can
easily realize, must not make us overlook certain defects

incidental to the American presidency, perhaps to any
plan of vesting the headship of the State in a person
elected for a limited period.

In a country where there is no hereditary throne
nor hereditary aristocracy, an office raised far above
all other offices offers too great a stimulus to ambi-
tion. This glittering prize, always dangling before

go THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

the eyes of prominent statesmen, has a power stronger
‘than any dignity under a European crown to lure them
(as it lured Clay and Webster) from the path of straight-
forward consistency. One who aims at the presidency
—and all prominent politicians do aim at it—has the
strongest possible motives to avoid making enemies.
Now a great statesman ought to be prepared to make
enemies. It is one thing to try to be popular—an
unpopular man will be uninfluential—it is another to
seek popularity by pleasing every section of your party.
This is the temptation of presidential aspirants.

A second defect is that the presidential election, occur-
ring once in four years, throws the country for several
months into a state of turmoil, for which there may
be no occasion. Perhaps there are no serious party
issues to be decided, perhaps the best thing would
be that the existing Administration should pursue ‘the
even tenor of its way. The Constitution, however,
requires an election to be held, so the whole costly and
complicated machinery of agitation is put in motion ;
and if issues do not exist, they have to be created.’
Professional politicians who have a personal interest
in the result, because it involves the gain or logs
of office to themselves, conduct what is called a
“campaign,” and the country is forced into a factitious
excitement from midsummer, when each party selects the
candidate whom it will nominate, to the first week of
November, when the contest is decided. There is some

1 In England, also, there is necessarily a campaign once at least in
every six or seven years, when a general election takes place, and some-
times oftener. But note that in England (1) this is the only season of
disturbance, whereas in America the Congressional elections furnish a
second ; (2) the period is usually shorter (three to six weeks, not four
months) ; (8) there have usually been real and momentous issues, dividing
the great parties, which the nation had to settle.

cHar.vil OBSERVATIONS ON THE PRESIDENCY g!

political education in the process, but it is bought
dearly, not to add that business, and especially finance,
is disturbed, and much money spent unproductively.

Again, these regularly recurring elections produce a
discontinuity of policy. Even when the new President
belongs to the same party as his predecessor, he usually
- nominates a new cabinet, having to reward his especial |
supporters. Many of the inferior offices are changed ;
men who have learned their work make way for others
who have everything to learn. If the new President
belongs to the opposite party, the change of officials is
far more sweeping, and involves larger changes of
policy. The evil would be more serious were it not
that in foreign policy, where the need for continuity: is
greatest, the United States have little to do, and that
the co-operation of the Senate in this department
prevents the divergence of the ideas of one President
from those of another from being so wide as it might
otherwise be.

Fourthly. The fact that he is re-eligible once, but
(practically) only once, operates unfavourably on the
President. He is tempted to play his cards for 4
re-nomination by so pandering to active sections of his
own party, or so using his patronage to conciliate
influential politicians, as to make them put him forward
at the next election. On the other hand, if he is in his
second term of office, he has no longer much motive to
regard the interests of the nation at large, because he
sees that his own political death is near. It may be
answered that these two evils will correct one another,
that the President will in his first term be anxious to
win the respect of the nation, in his second he will
have no motive for yielding to the unworthy pressure
of party wire-pullers.

92 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1

But the fact is, as has een pointed out by some
foreign observers, that if he were held ineligible for
the next term, but eligible for any future term, both
sets of evils might be avoided, and both sets of benefits
secured. The argument against such a provision’ would
be that it makes that breach in policy which may
now happen only once in eight years, necessarily
happen once in four years. It would, for instance,
have prevented the re-election of Abraham Lincoln
in 1864.1 The founders of the Southern Confederacy
of 1861-65 were so much impressed by the objections
to the present system that they provided that their
President should hold office for six years, but not be
re-eligible.

Fifthly. An out-going President is a weak
President. During the four months of his stay in
office after his successor has been chosen, he declines,
except in cases of extreme necessity, to take any new
departure, to embark on any executive policy which
cannot be completed hefore he quits office. This is, of
course, even more decidedly the case if his successor
belongs to the opposite party.’

Lastly. The result of an election may be doubtful,

1 A more obvious and practically sufficient answer is that it would
need the passing of an amendment to the Constitution, and it needs a
very strong case to induce three-fourths of the States to agree to change
this time-honoured document.

2 Mr. E. A. Freeman (History of Federal Governtitent, i. 302) adduces
from Polybius (iv. 6, 7) a curious instance showing that the same mischief
arose in the Achaian League: “The tolians chose for an inroad the
time when the official year (of the Achaian General) was drawing to its
close, as a time when the Achaian counsels were sure to. be weak. Aratos,
the General elect, was not yet in office ; Timoxenos, the outgoing General,
shrank from energetic action so late in his year, and at ast yielded up
his office to Aratos before the legal time.” This effort of Timoxenos to
escape from the consequences of the system could not have occurred in

governments like those of Rome, England, or the United States, where
“the reign of law” is far stricter than it was in the Greek republics.

cHarnvir OBSERVATIONS ON THE PRESIDENCY 93

not from equality of votes, for this is provided against,
but from a dispute as to the validity of votes given’ in
or reported from the States. This difficulty arose in
1876, between Mr. Hayes and Mr. Tilden, disclosing
the existence of a set of cases for which the Constitution
had not provided. It will not recur in quite the same
form, for provision has now been made by statute for
dealing with disputed returns.’ But cases may arise in
which the returns from a State of its electoral votes
will, because notoriously obtained by fraud or force,
fail to be recognized as valid by the party whose
candidate they prejudice. No presidential election
passes without charges of this kind, and these charges
are ‘not always unfounded. Should manifest unfairness
coincide with popular excitement over a really im-
portant issue,’ the self-control of the people, which has
hitherto restrained, as it did in 1877, the party passions
of their leaders, may prove unequal to the strain such a
crisis would put upon it.

Further observations on the President, as a part of
the machinery of government, will be better reserved
for the discussion of the relations of the executive and
legislative departments. I will therefore only observe
here that, even when we allow for the defects last
enumerated, the presidential office, if not one of the
conspicuous successes of the American Constitution, is
nowise to be deemed a failure. The problem of con-
structing a stable executive in a democratic country is
so immensely difficult that anything short of a failure
deserves to be called a success) Now the President

1 See above, page 61.

‘2 Tt was a piece of singular good fortune that the contest between
Tilden and Hayes was only a contest between. persons, between office-
holders and office-seekers, and that no really grave political issue, heating
the public mind, was involved.

94 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1

has, during ninety-nine years, carried on the internal
administrative business of the nation with due efficiency.
Once or twice, as when Jefferson purchased Louisiana,
and Lincoln emancipated the slaves in the revolted
States, he has courageously ventured on stretches of
authority, held at the time to be doubtfully constitu-
tional, yet necessary, and approved by the judgment of
posterity. He has kept the machinery working quietly
and steadily when Congress has been distracted by party
strife, or paralyzed by the dissensions of the two Houses,
or enfeebled by the want of first-rate leaders. The
executive has been able, at moments of peril, to rise
into a dictatorship, as during the War of Secession, and
when peace returned, to sink back into its proper con-
stitutional position. It has shown no tendency so to
dwarf the other authorities of the State as to pave the
way’ for a monarchy.

Europeans are struck by the faults of a plan which
plunges the nation into a whirlpool of excitement once
every four years, and commits the headship of the State
to a party leader chosen for a short period.’ But there
is another aspect in which the presidential election
may be regarded, and one whose importance is’ better
appreciated in America than in Europe. The elec-
tion is a solemn periodical appeal to the nation to
review its condition, the way in which its business
has been carried on, the conduct of: the two great
parties. It stirs and rouses the nation as nothing else
does, forces every one not merely to think about public
affairs but to decide how he judges the parties. It isa

1 Such faults as belong to the plan of popular election are not neces-
sarily incident to the existence of a President; for in France the chief
magistrate is chosen by the Chambers, and the interposition between him
“and the legislature of a responsible ministry serves to render his position
less distinctly partisan, :

cnar. vir OBSERVATIONS ON THE PRESIDENCY 95

direct expression of the will of ten millions of voters, a
force before which everything must bow. It refreshes
the sense of national duty; and at great crises it
intensifies national patriotism. A presidential election is
sometimes, as in 1800, and as again most notably in 1860
and 1864, a turning-point in history. In form it is
nothing. more than the choice of an administrator who
cannot influence policy otherwise than by refusing his
assent to bills. In reality it is the deliverance of the
mind of the people upon all such questions as they feel
able to decide. A curious parallel may in this respect
be drawn between it and a general election of the
House of Commons in England. A general election is
in form a choice of representatives, with reference
primarily to their views upon various current questions.
In substance it is often a national vote (what the
French call a plebiscite), committing executive power
to some one prominent statesman. Thus the elections
of 1868, 1874, 1880, were practically votes of the
nation to place Mr..Gladstone or Mr. Disraeli at the
head of the government. So conversely in America, a
presidential election, which purports to be merely the
selection of a man, is often in reality a decision upon
issues of policy, a condemnation of the course taken by
one party, a mandate to the other to follow some
different course.

The choice of party leaders as Presidents has in
America caused far less mischief than might have been
expected. Nevertheless, those who have studied the
scheme of constitutional monarchy as it works in England,
or Belgium, or Italy, or the reproductions of that scheme
in British colonies, where the Crown-appointed governor
stands outside the strife of factions as a permanent
official, will, when they compare the institutions of these

96 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

countries with the American presidency, be impressed
by the merits of a plan which does not unite all the
dignity of office with all the power of office, and which,
by placing the titular chief of the executive above and
apart from party, makes the civil and military services
feel themselves the servants rather of the nation than
of any section of the nation, and suggests to them that
their labours ought to be rendered with equal heartiness
to whatever party may hold the reins of government.
Party government may be necessary. So far as we can
see, it is necessary. But it is a necessary evil; and
whatever tends to diminish its mischievous influence
upon the machinery of administration, and to prevent
it from obtruding itself upon foreign states; whatever
holds up a high ideal of devotion to the nation as a
majestic whole, living on from century to century while
parties form and dissolve and form again, strengthens
and ennobles the commonwealth and all its citizens.
Such an observation of course applies only to mon-
archy as a political institution. Socially regarded, the
American presidency deserves nothing but admiration.
The President is simply the first citizen of a free nation,
depending for his dignity on no title, no official dress,
no insignia of state. It was originally proposed, doubt-
less in recollection of the English Commonwealth
of the seventeenth century, to give him the style
of “ Highness,” and “ Protector of the Liberties of the
United States.” Others suggested “ Excellency ” ;1 and
Washington is said to have had leanings to the Dutch
style of “High Mightiness.” The head of the ruling
President does not appear on coins, nor even on postage

1 In ridicule of this the more democratic members of Congress pro-
posed to call that more ornamental than useful officer the Vice-President
“His Superfluous Excellency.”

cuap.vil OBSERVATIONS ON THE PRESIDENCY 97

stamps.’ His residence at Washington called officially
“the Executive Mansion,” and familiarly “the White
House,” building with a stucco front and’ a portico
supported by Doric pillars, said to have been modelled
upon the Duke of Leinster’s house in Dublin, stands in
a shrubbery, and has the air of a large suburban villa
rather than of a palace. The rooms, though spacious,
are not spacious enough for the crowds that attend the
public receptions. The President’s salary, which is only
350,000 (£10,000) a year, does not permit display, nor
indeed is display expected from him.

Washington, which even so lately as the days of the
war was a, wilderness of mud and negroes, with a few big
houses scattered here and there, has now become one a
the handsomest capitals in the world, and cultivates the
graces and pleasures of life with eminent success. Besides
its political society and its diplomatic society, it is becom-
ing a winter resort for men of wealth and leisure from
all over the continent. It is a place where a court might
be created, did any one wish to create it. No President
has made the attempt; and as the earlier career of the
chief magistrate and his wife has seldom qualified them
to lead the world of fashion, none is likely to make it.
However, the action of the wife of President Hayes,
an estimable and energetic lady, whose ardent advocacy
of temperance caused the formation of a great many total
abstinence societies, called by her name (Lucy Webb),
showed that there may be fields in which a President’s
consort can turn her exalted position to good account,
while of course such graces or charms as she possesses
will tend to increase his popularity.

1 The portraits on American postage stamps are those of eminent past

Presidents—such as Washington, Jefferson, Lincoln, Grant, Garfield, and of a
few famous statesmen, such as Benjamin Franklin and Alexander Hamilton,

VOL. I H

98 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

To a European observer, weary of the slavish obse-
quiousness and lip-deep adulation with which the mem-
bers of reigning families are treated on the eastern side
of the Atlantic, fawned on in public and carped at in
private, the social relations of an American President to
his people are eminently refreshing. There is a great re-
spect for the office, and a corresponding respect for theman
asthe holder of the office, if he has done nothing to degrade
it. There is no servility, no fictitious self-abasement on
the part of the citizens, but a simple and hearty deference
to one who represents the majesty of the nation, the sort
of respect which the proudest Roman paid to the consul-
ship, even if the particular consul was, like Cicero, a “ new
man.” The curiosity of the visitors who throng the White
House on reception days is sometimes too familiar ; but’
this fault tends to disappear, and Presidents have now
more reason to complain of the persecutions they endure
from’ an incessantly observant journalism. After oscil-
lating between the ceremonious state of George Wash-
ington, who drove to open Congress in his coach and
six, with outriders and footmen in livery, and the osten-
tatious plainness of Citizen Jefferson, who rode up alone
and hitched his horse to the post at the gate, the President
has settled down into an attitude between that of the
mayor of a great English town on a public occasion, and
that of a European cabinet minister on a political tour:
He is followed about and féted, and inévery way treated
as the first man in the company; but the spirit of
equality which rules the country has sunk too deep
into. every American nature for him to expect to be
addressed with bated breath and whispering reverence,
He has no military guard, no chamberlains or grooms-
in-waiting ; his everyday life is simple ; his wife enjoys
precedence over all other ladies, but is visited and re-

cHar. vit OBSERVATIONS ON THE PRESIDENCY 99

ceived just like other ladies; he is surrounded by no
such pomp and enfoyces no such etiquette as that which
belongs to the governors even of second-class English
colonies, not to speak of the viceroys of India and
Ireland.

It begins to be remarked in Europe that monarchy,
which used to be deemed politically dangerous but
socially useful, has now, since its claws have been cut,
become politically valuable, but of more doubtful social
utility. In the United States the most suspicious
democrat—and there are democrats who complain that
the office of President is too monarchical—cannot accuse
the chief magistracy of having tended to form a court,
much less to create those evils which thrive in the
atmosphere of European courts. No President dare
violate social decorum as European sovereigns have so
often done. If he did, he would be the first to suffer.

CHAPTER VIII
WHY GREAT MEN ARE NOT CHOSEN PRESIDENTS

Europeans often ask, and Americans do not always
explain, how it happens that this great office, the greatest
in the world, unless we except the Papacy, to which any
man can rise by his own merits, is not more frequently
filled by great and striking men? In America, which is
beyond all other countries the country of a “ career open
to talents,” a country, moreover, in which political life
is unusually keen and political ambition widely diffused,
it might be expected that the highest place would always
be won by a man of brilliant gifts. But since the heroes
of the Revolution died out with Jefferson and Adams
and Madison some sixty years ago, no person except
General Grant has reached the chair whose name would
have been remembered had he not been President, and
no President except Abraham Lincoln has displayed rare
or striking qualities in the chair. Whe-now knows or
cares to know anything about the personality of James
K. Polk or Franklin Pierce? The only thing remarkable
about them is that being so commonplace they should
have climbed so high. |

Several reasons may be suggested for the fact, which
Americans are themselves the first to admit.

One is that the proportion of first-rate ability drawn

cuar. vis IVA Y GREAT MEN ARE NOT CHOSEN 101

into politics is smaller in America than in most European
countries. This is a phenomenon whose causes must be
elucidated later: in the meantime it is enough to say
that in France and Italy, where half-revolutionary con-
ditions have made public life exciting and accessible ; in
Germany, where an admirably-organized civil service
cultivates and develops statecraft with unusual success ;
in England, where many persons of wealth and leisure
seek to enter the political arena, while burning questions
touch the interests of all classes and make men eager
observers of the combatants, the total quantity of
talent devoted to parliamentary or administrative work
is far larger, relatively to the population, than in
America, where much. of the best ability, both for
thought and for action, for planning and for executing,
rushes into a field which is comparatively narrow in
Europe, the business of developing the material resources
ofthe country. —

Another is that the methods and habits of Congress,
and indeed of political life generally, seem to give
fewer opportunities for personal distinction, fewer modes
in which a man may commend himself to his countrymen
by eminent capacity in thought, in speech, or in adminis-
tration, than is the case in the free countries'of Europe.
This is a point to be explained in later chapters. I
merely note here in passing what will there be dwelt on.

A third reason is that eminent men make more
enemies, and give those enemies more assailable points,
than obscure men do. They are therefore in so far less
desirable candidates. It is true that the eminent man
has also made more friends, that his name is more
widely known, and may be greetéd with louder cheers.
Other things being equal, the famous man is preferable.
But other things never are equal. The famous man has

102 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

probably attacked some leaders in his own party,
has supplanted others, has expressed his dislike to the
crotchet of some active section, has perhaps committed
errors which are capable of being magnified into offences.
No man stands long before the public and bears a part
in great affairs without giving openings to censorious
criticism. Fiercer far than the light which beats upon
a throne is the light which beats upon a presidential
candidate, searching out all the recesses of his past life.
Hence, when the choice lies between a brilliant man and
a safe man, the safe man is preferred. Party feeling,
strong enough to carry in on its back a man without
conspicuous positive merits, is not always strong enough
to procure forgiveness for a man with positive faults,

A European finds that this phenomenon needs in its
turn to be explained, for in the free countries of Europe
brilliancy, be it eloquence in speech, or some striking
achievement in war or administration, or the power
through whatever means of somehow impressing the
popular imagination, is what makes a leader triumphant.
Why should it be otherwise in Arnerica? Because in
America party loyalty and party organization have been
hitherto so perfect that any one put forward by the
party will get the full party vote if his character is good
and his “record,” as they call it, unstained. The safe
candidate may not draw in quite so-many votes from
the moderate men of the other side as-the brilliant one
would, but he will not lose nearly so many from his own
ranks. Even those who admit his mediocrity will vote
straight when the moment for voting comes. Besides,
the ordinary American voter does not object to medio-
crity. He has a lower conception of the qualities
requisite to make a statesman than those who direct
public opinion in Europe have. He likes his candidate

cHar. vit =MWHY GREAT MEN ARE NOT CHOSEN 103

to be sensible, vigorous, and, above all, what he calls
“magnetic,” and does not value, because he sees no
neéd for, originality or profundity, a fine culture
or a wide knowledge. Candidates are selected to be
run for nomination by knots of persons who, however
expert as party tacticians, are usually commonplace
men; and the choice between those selected for
nomination is made by a very large body, an assembly
of over eight hundred delegates from the local party
organizations over the country, who are certainly
no better than ordinary citizens. How this process
works will be seen more fully when I come to speak of
those Nominating Conventions which are so notable a
feature in American politics.

It must also be remembered that the merits of a
President are one thing and those of a candidate another
thing. An eminent American is reported ‘to have said
to friends who wished to put him forward, “Gentle-
men, let there be no mistake. I should make a
good President, but a very bad candidate.” Now toa
party it is more important that its nominee should be
a good candidate than that he should turn out a good
President. A nearer danger is a greater danger. As
Saladin says in The Talisman, “ A wild cat in a chamber
is more dangerous than a lion in a distant desert.”
It will be a misfortune to the party, as well as to the
country, if the candidate elected should prove a bad
President. But it is a greater misfortune to the party
that it should be beaten in the impending election,
for the evil of losing national patronage will have come
four years sooner. “ B” (so reason the leaders), ‘ who
is one’ of our possible candidates, may be an abler man
than A, who is the other. But we have a better chance
of winning with A than with B, while X, the candidate of

104 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

our opponents, is anyhow no better than A. We must
therefore run A.” * This reasoning is all the more
forcible because the ‘previous career of the possible
candidates has’ generally made it easier to say who will
succeed as a candidate than who will succeed as a Pre-
sident ; and because the wire-pullers with whom the
choice rests are ‘better judges of the former question
than of the latter.

After all, too, and this isa point much less obvious to
Europeans than to Americans, a President need not bea
man of brilliant intellectual gifts. Englishmen, imagin-
ing him as something like their prime minister, assume
that he ought to be a dazzling orator, able to sway
legislatures or multitudes, possessed also of the con-
structive powers that can devise a great policy or frame:
a comprehensive piece of legislation. They forget that
the President does not sit in Congress, that he ought not
to address meetings, except on ornamental and (usually)
non-political occasions, that he cannot submit bills nor
otherwise influence the action of the legislature. His
main duties are to be prompt and firm in securing the
due execution of the laws and maintaining the public
peace, careful and upright in the choice of the executive
officials of the country. Eloquence, whose value is apt
to be overrated in all free countries, imagination, pro-
fundity of thought or extent of knowledge, are all in so
far a gain to him that they make him a.bigger man, and
help him to gain a greater influence over the nation, an
influence which, if he be a true patriot, he may use for
its good. But they are not necessary for the due dis-
charge in ordinary times of the duties of his post. A
man may lack them and yet make an excellent President.
Four-fifths of his work is the same in kind as that which
devolves on the chairman of a commercial company or

cnar,vin WHY GREAT MEN ARE NOT CHOSEN | 105

the manager of a railway, the work of choosing good
subordinates, seeing that they attend to their Gusiness:
and taking a sean practical view of sach administrative
questions as require his decision. ‘Firmness, common
sense, and most of all, honesty, an honesty above all
suspicion of personal interest, are the qualities which the
country chiefly needs in its chief magistrate.

So far we have been considering personal merits.
But in the selection of a candidate many considerations
have to be regarded besides personal merits, whether
they be the merits of a candidate, or of a possible Presi-
dent. The chief of these considerations is the amount
of support which can be secured from different States
or from different regions, or, as the Americans say, “ sec-
tions,” of the Union. State feeling and sectional feel-
ing are powerful factors in a presidential election. The
North-west, including the States from Indiana to.
Minnesota, is now the most populous region of the
Union, and therefore counts for most in an election.
It naturally conceives that its interests will be best pro-
tected by one who knows them from birth or residence.
Hence prima facie a North-western man makes the best
candidate. A large State casts a heavier vote in the
election ; and every State is of course more likely to be
carried by one of its own children than by a stranger,
because his fellow-citizens, while they feel honoured by
the choice, gain also a substantial advantage, having a
better prospect of such favours as the administration
can bestow. Hence, ceteris paribus, a man from a
large State is preferable as a candidate. New York
casts thirty-six votes in the presidential election,
Pennsylvania thirty, Ohio twenty-three, Illinois twenty-
two, while Vermont and Rhode Island have but four,
Delaware, Nevada, and Oregon only three votes each. It

106 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

is therefpre, parties being usually very evenly balanced,
better worth while to have an inferior candidate
from one of the larger States, who may carry the
whole weight of his State with him, than a somewhat
superior candidate from one of the smaller States, who
will carry only three or four votes. The problem is
further complicated by the fact that some States are
already safe for one or other party, while others are
doubtful. The North-western and New England States
are most of them certain to go Republican : the Soutliern
States are (at present) all of them certain to go Demo-
cratic. It is more important to gratify a doubtful State
than one you have got already; and hence, ceteris
paribus, a candidate from a doubtful State, such as New
York or Indiana, is to be preferred.

Other minor disqualifying circumstances require less
explanation. A Roman Catholic, or an avowed dis-
believer in Christianity, would be an impossible candi-
date. Since the close of the Civil War, any one who
fought, especially if he fought with distinction, in
the Northern army, has enjoyed great advantages, for
the soldiers of that army, still numerous, rally to
his name. The two elections of General Grant, who
knew nothing of politics, and the fact that his influence
survived the faults of his long administration, are the
best evidence of the weight of this consideration, It told
heavily in favour of both Hayes and Garfield. Similarly
a person who fought in the Southern army would be a
bad candidate, for he might alienate the North.

On a railway journey in the Far West in 1883 I
fell in with two newspaper men from the State of
Indiana, who were taking their holiday. The conversa-
tion turned on the next presidential election. They
spoke hopefully of the chances for nomination by their

cuar. vin WHY GREAT MEN ARE NOT CHOSEN 107

party of an Indiana man, a comparatively obscure
person, whose name I had never heard. I expressed
some surprise that he should be thought of. They
observed that he had done well in State politics, that
there was nothing against him, that Indiana would work
for him. “But,” I rejoined, “ ought you not to have a
man of. more commanding character. There is Senator
A. Everybody tells me that he is the shrewdest and
most experienced man in your party, and that he has
a perfectly clean record. Why not run him?” “ Why,
yes,” they answered, “that is all true. But you see he
comes from a small State, and we have got that State
already. Besides, he wasn’t in the war. Our man was.
Indiana’s vote is worth having, and if our man is run,
we can carry Indiana.”

“Surely the race is not to the swift, nor the battle
to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet
riches to men of understanding, nor yet favour to men
of skill, but time and chance happeneth to them all.”

These secondary considerations do not always
prevail. Intellectual ability and force of character
must influence the choice of a candidate, and their
influence is sometimes decisive. They count for more
when times are so critical that the need for a strong
man is felt. Reformers declare that their weight will
go on increasing as the disgust of good: citizens with
the methods of professional politicians increases. But
for many generations past it is not the greatest men
in the Roman Church that have been chosen Popes,
nor the most brilliant men in the Anglican Church
that have been appointed Archbishops of Canterbury.

Although. several Presidents have survived their
departure from office by many years, only one, John
Quincy Adams, has played a part in politics after quit-

108 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

ting the, White House.’ It may he that the ex-President
has not been a great leader before his accession to
office; it may be that he does not care to exert
himself after he has held and dropped the great
prize, and found (one may safely add) how’ little of
a prize it is, Something, however, must also be
ascribed to other features of the political system of
the country. It is often hard to find a vacancy in
the representation of a given State through which to
re-enter Congress ; it is disagreeable to recur to the arts
by which seats are secured, Past greatness is rather an
encumbrance than a help to resuming a political career.
Exalted power, on which the unsleeping eye of. hostile
critics was fixed, has probably disclosed all a President's
weaknesses, and has either forced him to make enemies
by disobliging adherents, or exposed him to censure for
subservience to party interests. He is regarded as
having had his day ; he belongs already to the past, and
unless, like Grant, he is endeared to the people by the
memory of some splendid service, he soon sinks into the
crowd or avoids neglect by retirement. Possibly he
may deserve to be forgotten; but more frequently he is
a man of sufficient ability and character to make the
experience he.has gained valuable to the country, could
it be retained in a place where he might turn it to
account. They managed things better at Rome,in the
days of the republic, gathering into their Senate all the
fame and experience, all the wisdom and skill, of those
who had ruled and fought as consuls and pretors at
home and abroad.

“What shall we do with our ex-Presidents?” is a

1 J. Q. Adams was elected to the House of Representatives within
three years from his presidency, and there became for seventeen years
the fearless and formidable advocate of what may be called the national
theory of the Constitution against the slaveholders.

cHap. vil WHY GREAT MEN ARE NOT CHOSEN 109

question often put in America, but never yet answered.
The position of a past chief magistrate is not a happy
oné. He has been a species of sovereign at home. He
is received —General Grant was— with almost royal.
honours abroad. His private income may be insufficient
to enable him to live in ease, yet he cannot without loss
of dignity, the country’s dignity as well as his own, go
back to practice at the bar or become partner in a
mercantile firm. If he tries to enter the Senate, it may
happen that there is no seat vacant for his own State,
or that the majority in the State legislature is against
him. It has been suggested that he might be given a
seat in that chamber as an extra member; but to this
plan there is the objection that it would give to the
State from which he comes a third senator, and thus put
other States at a disadvantage. In any case, however,
it would seem only right to bestow such a pension as
would relieve him from the necessity of re-entering
business or a profession.

We may now answer the question from which we
started. Great men are not chosen Presidents, firstly,
because great men are rare in politics; secondly, because
the method of choice does not bring them to the top;
thirdly, because they are not, in quiet times, absolutely
needed. Subsequent chapters will, I hope, further
elucidate the matter. Meantime, I may observe that.
the Presidents, regarded historically, fall into three
periods, the second inferior to the first, the third rather
better than the second.

Down till the election of Anarew Jackson in 1828,
all the Presidents had been statesmen in the European
sense of the word, men of education, of administrative
experience, of a certain largeness of view and dignity of
character. All except the first two had served in the

110 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PARTI

great office of secretary of state; all were well known
to the nation from ‘the part they had played. In the
second period, from Jackson till the outbreak of the Civil
War in 1861, the Presidents were either mere politicians,
such as Van Buren, Polk, or Buchanan, or else successful
soldiers,’ such as Harrison or Taylor, whom their party
found useful as figure-heads. They were intellectual pig-
mies beside the real leaders of that generation—Clay, Cal-
houn, and Webster. A new series begins with Lincoln in
1861. He and General Grant his successor, who cover
sixteen years between them, belong to the history of the
world. The other less distinguished Presidents of this
period contrast favourably with the Polks and Pierces
of the days before the war, but they are not, like the
early Presidents, the first men of the country. If we
compare the eighteen Presidents who have been elected
to office since 1789 with the nineteen English prime
ministers of the same hundred years, there are but six
of the latter, and at least eight of the former whom
history calls personally insignificant, while only Wash-
ington,: Jefferson, Lincoln, and Grant can claim to
belong to a front rank represented in the English list
by seven or possibly eight names.” It would seem
that the natural selection of the English parliamentary
system, even as modified by the aristocratic habits of
that country, has more tendency to bring the highest
gifts to the highest place than the more artificial selec-
tion of America.

1 Jackson himself was something of both politician and soldier, a
strong character, but a narrow and uncultivated intellect.

2 The American average would be further lowered were we to reckon
-in the four Vice-Presidents who have succeeded on the death of the
President, Yet the English system does not always secure men personally

eminent, Addington, Perceval, and Lord Goderich are no bigger than
Tyler or Fillmore, which is saying little enough.

CHAPTER Ix
THE CABINET

THERE is in the government of the United States no
such thing as a Cabinet in the English sense of the
term. But I use the term, not only because it is current
in America to describe the chief ministers of the Presi-
dent, but also because it calls attention to the remark-
able difference which exists between the great officers of
State in America and the similar officers in the free
countries of Europe.

Almost the only reference in the Constitution to the
ministers of the President is that contained in the power
given him to “require the opinion in writing of the
principal officer in each of the executive departments
upon any subject relating to the duties of their respec-
tive offices.” All these departments have been created
by Acts of Congress. Washington began in 1789 with
four only, at the head of whom were the following four
officials :—

Secretary of State.
Secretary of the Treasury. .
Secretary of War.
Attorney-General.

In 1798 there was added a Secretary of the Navy,

112 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT . PART I

in 1829 a Postmaster-General,’ and in 1849 a Secretary
of the Interior.

These seven now make up what is called the Cabinet.’
Each receives a salary of $8000 (£1600). All are
appointed by the President, subject to the consent of
the Senate (which is practically never refused), and
may be removed by the President alone. Nothing
marks them off from any other officials who might be
placed in charge of a department, except that they are
summoned by the President to his private council.

None of them can vote in Congress, Art. xi. § 6 of
the Oonstitution providing that “ no person holding any
office under the United States shall be a member of
either House during his continuance in office.”

This restriction was intended to prevent the Presi-
dent not merely from winning over individual members
of Congress by the allurements of office, but also from
making his ministers agents in corrupting or unduly
influencing the representatives of the people, as George
IIL. and his ministers.corrupted the English Parliament.
There is a passage in the Federalist (Letter xl.) which
speaks of ‘‘ Great Britain, where so great a proportion of
the members are elected by so small a proportion of the
people, where the electors are so corrupted by the
representatives, and the representatives so corrupted by
the Crown.” The Fathers of the Constitution were so
resolved to avert this latter form of corruption that they

1 The postmaster-general had been previously deemed a subordinate
in the Treasury department, although the office was organized by Act of
Congress in 1794; he has been held to belong to the cabinet since Jackson
in 1829 invited him to cabinet meetings.

2 There is also a commissioner of agriculture with a salary of $3000
a year,~but his duties are confined to the collection and publication of
information, and to the “ procuring and distributing of new and valuable
seeds and plants.” And an Interstate Commerce Commission, with powers
over railways, was created in February 1887 by Act of Congress.

CHAP, IX THE CABINET 113.

included in the Constitution the provision just mentioned.
Its wisdom has sometimes been questioned. But it
deserves to be noticed that the Constitution contains
nothing to prevent ministers from being present in
either House of Congress and addressing it,’ as the
ministers of the King of Italy or of the French President
may do_in either chamber of Italy or France. It is
entirely silent on the subject of communications between
officials (other than the President) and the representatives
of the people. In Washington’s days ministers did occa-
sionally speak to Congress, but they soon ceased to do
so, and now never appear before any body larger than a
committee. We shall presently see how this arrange-
ment, while seeming to defend Congress against presi-
dential intrigue, tends to weaken its legislative efficiency
and to embarrass its relations with the executive.

The President has the amplest range of choice for his
ministers. He usually forms an entirelynew cabinet when
he enters office, even if he belongs to the same party as
his predecessor. ‘ He may take, he sometimes does take,
men who not only have never sat in Congress, but have
not figured in politics at all, who may never have sat
in a State legislature nor held the humblest office. For
instance, in 1869 President Grant offered the post of
secretary of the treasury to Mr. A: T. Stewart, the owner
of a gigantic dry goods warehouse in New York, who

1 In February 1881 8 committee of eight senators unanimously
reported in favour of a plan to give seats (of course without the right to
vote) in both Houses of Congress to cabinet ministers, they to attend on
alternate days in the Senate and in the House. The committee recom-
mended that the necessary modification in the rules should be made, add-
ing that they had no doubt of the constitutionality of the proposal.
Nothing has so far been done to carry out this report. ‘

2 The Italian ministers usually are members of one or other House.
Of course they cannot vote except in the House to which they have been
chosen,

VOL. I I

114 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PARTI

had neyer so much as made a political speech.’ Gene-
rally of course the persons chosen have already made
for themselves a position of at least local importance.
Often they are those to whom the new President owes
his election, or to whose influence with the party he
looks for support in his policy.? Sometimes they have
been his most prominent competitors for the party
nominations. ‘Chus Mr. Lincoln in 1860 appointed Mr.
Seward and Mr. Chase to be his secretary of state and
secretary of the treasury respectively, they being the
two men who had come next after him in the selection
by the Republican party of a presidential candidate.
The most dignified place in the cabinet is that of the
Secretary of State. It is the great prize often bestowed
on the man to whom the President is chiefly indebted
for his election, or at any rate on one of the leaders of
the party. In early days, it was regarded as the
stepping-stone to the presidency. Jefferson, Madison,
Monroe, and J. Q. Adams had all served as secretaries
to preceding presidents. The conduct of foreign affairs
is the chief duty of the State department: its head
has therefore a larger stage to play on than any other
minister, and more chances of fame. [Ilis personal
importance is all the ¢ ater because the President is

1 The nomination was withdrawn because it was discovered that Mr.
Stewart, being engaged in business, was ineligible by statute.

2 In Mr. Cleveland’s cabinet, formed in 188%, the secretary of state
had been for sixteen years a senator, and recognized as one of the leaders
of his party; the secretary of the treasury was a leading politician in
New York State who had never sat in Congress ; the secretary of war had
been a judge of the supreme court of Massachusetts, and candidate for
the governorship of ‘that State; the secretary of the navy was a lawyer,
and a prominent politician in New York; the secretary of the interior
had sat in the House of Representatives, and had been for nine years a
senator ; the postmaster-general was a lawyer practising in Wisconsin,
and a political leader there; the attorney-general had been governor of
his State, and (for eight years) a senator.

CHAP, IX THE CABINET 115

usually so much absorbed by questions of patronage as
to be forced to leave the secretary to his own devices.
Hence the foreign policy of -the administration is
practically that of the secretary, except so far as the
latter is controlled by the Senate, and especially by the
chairman of its committee on Foreign Relations. The
State department has also the charge of the great seal
of the United States, keeps the archives, publishes the
statutes, and of course instructs and controls the
diplomatic and consular services. It is often said of
the President that he is ruled, or as the Americans
express it, “run,” by his secretary; but naturally this
happens only when the secretary is the stronger or more
experienced man, and in the same way it has been said
of Presidents before now that they were, like sultans,
ruled by their wives, or by their boon companions.

The Secretary of the Treasury is minister of finance.
His function was of the utmost importance at the
beginning of the government, when a national system
of finance had to be built up and the Federal
Government rescued from its grave embarrassments.
Hamilton, who then held the office, effected both.
During the War of Secession, it became again powerful,
owing to the enormous loans contracted and the quanti-
ties of paper money issued, and it remains so now,
because it has the management (so far as Congress
permits) of the currency and the national debt. The
secretary has, however, by no means the same range of
action as a finance minister in European countries, for
as he is excluded from Congress, although he regularly
reports to it, he has nothing directly to do with the
imposition of taxes, and very little with the appropria-
tion of revenue to the various burdens of the State.’

1 See post, chapter on Congressional Finance, where it will be shown

116 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

The, Secretary of the Interior is far from being the
omnipresent power which a minister of the interior is in
France or Italy, or even a Home Secretary in England,
since nearly all the functions which these officials dis-
charge belong in America to the State governments or
to the organs of local government. He is chiefly
occupied in the management of the public lands, still of
immense value, despite the lavish grants made ‘to
railway companies, and with the conduct of Indian
affairs, a troublesome and unsatisfactory department,
which has always been a reproach to the United States,
and will apparently continue so till the Indians them-
selves disappear or become civilized. Patents and
pensions, the latter a source of great expense and
abuse, also belong to his province.

The duties of the Secretary of War, the Secretary of
the Navy, and the Postmaster-General may be gathered
from their names. But the Attorney-General is sufli-
ciently different from his English prototype to need ‘a
word of explanation. He is not only public prosecutor
and standing counsel for the United States, but also to
some extent what is called on the European continent a
minister of justice. He has a general oversight—it can
hardly be described as a control—of the Federal judicial
departments, and especially of the prosecuting officers
called district attorneys, and executive court officers,
called United States marshals. He-ts the legal adviser
of the President in those delicate questions, necessarily
frequent under the Constitution of the United States,
which arise as to the limits of the executive power and
the relations of Federal to State authority, and generally
in all legal matters. His opinions are frequently pub-

that the chairmen of the committees of Ways and Means and of Appro-
_priations are practically additional ministers of finance.

CHAP, IX THE CABINET 117

lished officially, as a justification of the President's con-
duct, and an indication of the view which the executive
takes of its legal position and duties in, a pending
matter. The attorney-general is always a lawyer of
some position, but not necessarily in the front rank of
the profession, for political considerations have much to
do with determining the President’s choice.”

It will be observed that from this list of ministerial
offices several are wanting which exist in Europe. Thus
there is no colonial minister, because no colonies; no
minister of education, because that department of busi-
ness belongs to the several States;* no minister of
public worship, beeause the United States Government
has nothing to do with any particular form of religion ;
no minister of commerce, because the activity of the
Federal Government in that direction, although increas-
ing, is still limited ; no minister of public works, because
grants made for this purpose come direct from Congress
without the intervention of the executive, and are
applied as Congress directs.* Much of the work which in
Europe would devolve on members of the administration
falls in America to committees of Congress, especially

1 Another variance from the practice of England, where the opinions
of the law officers of the Crown are always treated as confidential.

2 The solicitor-general is a sort of assistant to the attorney, and not
(as in England) a colleague,

8 There was established twenty years ago a Bureau of Education,
attached to the department of the Interior, but its function is only to
collect and diffuse information on educational subjects. This it does with
assiduity and success,

4 Money voted for river and harbour improvements is voted in sums
appropriated to each particular piece of work. . The work is supervised
by officers of the Engineer corps of the United States army, under the
general direction of the war department. Public buildings are erected
under the direction of an official called the supervising architect, who is
attached to the treasury department. The signal service weather
bureau is a branch of the war department, the coast survey of the navy
department.

118 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

to committees of the House of Representatives. This
happens particularly as regards taxation, public works,

and the management of the Territoyies, for each of which
matters there exists a committee in both Houses. The
well-meant attempt of the founders of the Constitution
to keep the legislative and executive departments dis-
tinct has resulted in leading the legislature to interfere
with ordinary administration more directly and fre-
quently than European legislatures are wont to do. It
interferes by legislation because it is debarred from
interfering by interpellation.

The respecti¥Ve positions of the President and tid
ministers are, as has been already explained, the reverse
of those which exist in the constitutional monarchies of
Europe. There the sovereign is irresponsible and the'
minister responsible for the acts which he does in the
sovereign’s name. In America the President is respon-
sible because the minister is nothing more than his
servant, bound to obey him, and independent of Con-
gress. The minister’s acts are therefore legally the acts
of the President. Nevertheless the minister is also
responsible and liable to impeachment for offences com-
mitted in the discharge of his duties. The question
whether he is, as in England, impeachable for giving bad,
advice to the head of the State has never arisen, but
upon the general theory of the Constitution it would
rather seem that he is not, unless of course his bad
counsel should amount to a conspiracy with the Presi-
dent to commit an impeachable offence. In France
the responsibility of the President’s ministers does not in
theory exclude the responsibility of the President him-

1 Only once has a minister been impeached. He resigned just before

the resolution of the House to impeach him was passed; and so was
acquitted on the ground of want of jurisdiction.

CHAP, 1X THE CABINET 119

self, although practically of course it makes a great
difference, because he, like the English Crown, chooses
mitisters supported by a majority in the chambers.

The position of a cabinet minister appears to carry
with it rather less distinction than in England. For-
merly he took precedence of the senators, but now they
have established their claim to walk before him on
public occasions. The point is naturally of more im-
portance as regards the wives of the claimants than as
regards the élnimants themselves.

So much for the ministers taken separately. It
remains to consider how an American Administration
works as a whole, this being in Europe, and particularly
in England, the most peculiar and significant feature of
the parliamentary or so-called “ éabinet” system.

. In America the administration does not work as a
whole. It is not a whole. It is a group of persons,
each individually dependent on and answerable to the
President, but with no joint policy, no collective re-
sponsibility.’

When the Constitution was established, and George
Washington chosen first President under it, it was in-
tended that the President should be outside and above
party, and the method of choosing him by electors was
contrived with this very view. Washington belonged
to no party, nor indeed, though diverging tendencies
were already manifest, had parties yet begun to exisf.
There was therefore no reason why he should not select
his ministers from all sections of opinion. He was the

1 In America people usually speak of the President and his min-
isters as the “ administration,” not as the “ government,” apparently because
he and they are not deemed to govern in the European sense. The latter
expression does not seem to be very old in England. Thirty years ago

people usually said “the me, ” when they now say “the govern-
ment.”

120 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

executive magistrate, who had to conduct the adminis-
tration of the country. As he was responsible to the
nation and not to a majority in Congress, he was not
bound to choose persons who agreed with the majority
in Congress. As he, and not as in England, the ministry,
was responsible for executive acts done, he had to con-
sider, not: the opinions or associations of his servants,
but their capacity and integrity only. Washington
chose as secretary of state Thomas Jefferson, already
famous as the chief draftsman of the Declaration of In-
dependence, and as attorney-general another Virginian,
Edmund Randolph, both men of extreme democratic
leanings, disposed to restrict the action of the Federal
Government within narrow limits. For. secretary of the
treasury he selected Alexander Hamilton of New York,
and for secretary of war Henry Knox of Massachusetts.
Hamilton was by far the ablest man among those
who soon came to form the Federalist party, the party
which called for a strong executive, and desired to
subordinate the States to the central authority. He
soon became recognized as its leader. Knox was of the
same way of thinking. Dissensions presently arose
between Jefferson and Hamilton, ending in open hostility,
but Washington retained them both as ministers till
Jefferson retired in 1794 and Hamilton in 1795. The
second President, John Adams, kept on the ministers of
his predecessor, being in accord with their opinions, for
they and he belonged to the now full-grown Federalist
party. But before he quitted office he had quarrelled
with most of them, having taken important steps with-
‘out their knowledge and against their wishes, Jeffer-
son, the third President, was a thorough-going party
leader, who. naturally chose his ministers from his own
political adherents. As all subsequent Presidents have

CHAP, IX . THE CABINET 121

heen seated by one or other party; all have felt bound
to appoint a party cabinet. Their party expects it from
them ; and they naturally prefer to be surrdunded and
advised by their own friends. ;

So far, an American cabinet resembles an English
one. It is composed exclusively of members of one
party. . But now mark the differences. The parlia-
mentary system of England and of those countries
which like Belgium, Italy, and the self-governing British
colonies, have more or less modelled themselves upon
England, rests on four principles.

The head of the executive (be he king or gover-
nor) is irresponsible. Responsibility attaches to the
cabinet, 2.¢. to the body of ministers who advise him,
so that if he errs, it is through their fault; they suffer
and he escapes. The ministers cannot allege, as a de-
fence for any act of theirs, the command of the Crown.
If the Crown gives them an order of which they dis-
approve, they ought to resign.

The ministers sit in the legislature, practically form-
ing in England, as has been observed by the most acute
of English constitutional writers, a committee of the
legislature, chosen by the majority for the time being.

The ministers are accountable to the legislature, and
must resign office’ as soon as they lose its confidence.

The ministers are jointly as well as severally liable
for their acts: z.e. the blame of an act done by any of
them falls on the whole cabinet, unless one of them
chooses to take it entirely on himself and retire from
office. Their responsibility is collective.

None of these principles holds true in America. The
President is personally responsible for his acts, not

1 In England and some other countries (eg. the self-governing
British colonies) they have the alternative of dissolving. Parliament.

122 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1

indeed to Congress, but to the people, by whom he is
chosen. No means exist of enforcing this responsibility,
except by impeachment, but as his power lasts for four
years only, and is much restricted, this is no serious
evil. He cannot avoid responsibility by alleging the
advice of his ministers, for he is not bound to follow it, and
they are bound to obey him or retire. The ministers
do not sit in Congress. They are not accountable to it,
but to the President, their master. It may request
their attendance before a committee, as it may require
the attendance of any other witness, but they have no
opportunity of expounding and justifying to Congress
as a whole their own, or rather their master’s, policy.
Hence an adverse vote of Congress does not affect their
or his position. If they propose to take a step which
requires money, and Congress refuses the requisite
appropriation, the step cannot be taken. But a dozen
votes of censure will neither compel them to resign nor
oblige the President to pause in any line of conduct
which is within his constitutional rights. This, however
strange it may seem to a European, is a necessary con-
sequence of the fact that the President, and by conse-
quence his cabinet, do not derive their authority from
Congress. Suppose (as befell in 1878-9) a Republican
President, with a Democratic majority in both Houses
of Congress. The President, unless of course he is
convinced that the nation has changed-its mind since it
elected him, is morally bound to follow out the policy
which he professed as a candidate, and which the
majority of the nation must be held in electing him to
have approved. That policy is, however, opposed to the
views of the present majority of Congress. They are
quite right to check him as far as they can. He is
quite right to follow out his own views and principles in

CHAP, IX THE CABINET 123

spite of them so far as the Constitution and the
funds at his disposal permit. A deadlock may follow.
But deadlocks may happen under any system, except
that of an omnipotent sovereign, be he a man or an
assembly, the risk of deadlocks being indeed the price
which a nation pays for the safeguard of constitutional
checks. _. |

In this state of things one cannot properly talk of
the cabinet apart from the President. An American
administration resembles not so much the cabinets of
England and France as the group of ministers who
surround the Czar or the Sultan, or who executed the
bidding of a Roman emperor like Constantine or
Justinian. Such ministers are severally responsible to
their master, and are severally called in to counsel him,
but they have not necessarily any relations with one
another, nor any duty of collective action. ‘So while
the President commits each department to the minister
whom the law: provides, and may if he chooses leave it
altogether to that minister, the executive acts done are
his own acts, by which the country will judge him; and
still more is his policy as a whole his own policy, and
not the policy of his ministers taken together. The
ministers seldom meet in council, and have comparatively
little to settle when they do meet, since they have no
parliamentary tactics to contrive, no bills to prepare,
few questions of foreign policy to discuss. They are
not a government, as Europeans understand the term ;
they are a group of heads of departments, whose chief,
though he usually consults them separately, is some-
times glad to bring them together in one room for a talk
akout politics. A significant illustration of the contrast
between the English'and American systems may be found
in the fact that whereas an English king never now sits in

124 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

his own cabinet,’ because if he did he would be deemed
accountable for its decisions, an American President
always does, because he is accountable, and really needs
advice to help him, not to shield him.*

The so-called cabinet is unknown to the statutes as
well as to the Constitution of the United States. So is
the English cabinet unknown to the law of England.
But then the English cabinet is a part, is, in fact, a
committee, though no doubt an informal committee, of
a body as old as Parliament itself, the Privy Council, or
Curia Regis. Ofthe ancient institutions of England which
reappearin the Constitution of the United States, the Privy
Council is not one. It may have seemed to theConvention
of 1787 to be already obsolete. Even in England it was
then already a belated survival from an earlier order of"
things, and now it lives on only in its committees, three
of which, the Board of Trade, the Education department,
and the Agricultural department, serve as branches of
the administration, one, the Judicial Committee, is a law
court, and one, the Cabinet, is the virtual executive of the
nation. .The framers of the American Constitution saw
its unsuitability to their conditions. It was nominated,
while with them a council. must have been elective. Its
only effect would have been to control the President,
but for domestic administration control is scarcely
needed, because the President has only to execute the
laws, while in foreign affairs and appointments the

1 Queen Anne ‘was the last English sovereign who sat in her own
cabinet council, though indeed the cabinet had not yet then’ become the
close body it is now.

2 Another illustration of the contrast may be found in the fact that
when the head of one of the seven departments is absent from Washington
the under secretary of the department is often asked to replace him in the
cabinet council.

8 A privy council however appears in the original Constitution of
Delaware. (See post, Chapter XXXVII.)

CHAP. IX THE CABINET 125

Senate controls him already. A third body, over and
above the two Houses of Congress, was in fact superflu-
ous. The Senate may appear in some points to resemble
the English Privy Council of the seventeenth century,
because it advises the executive; but there is all the
difference in the world between being advised by those
whom you have yourself chosen and those whom election
by others forces upon you. So it happens that the
relations. of the Senate and the President are seldom
cordial, much less confidential, even when he and the
majority of the Senate belong to the same party, because
the Senate and the President are rival powers jealous
of one another.

CHAPTER x
THE SENATE

Tue National Legislature of the United States, called
Congress, consists of two bodies, sufficiently dissimilar in
composition, powers, and character to require a separate
description. Their respective functions bear some re-
semblance to those of the two Houses of the English
Parliament, which had before 1787 suggested the creation
of a double-chambered legislature in all but three of the
original thirteen States of the Confederation. Yet the
differences between the Senate and the British House
of Lords, and in a less degree between the House of
Representatives and the British House of Commons,
are so considerable that the English reader must be
cautioned against applying his English standards to the
examination of the American system.'

The Senate consists of two persons from each State,
who must be inhabitants of that State, and at least thirty
years of age. They are elected by the legislature of
their State for six years, and are re-eligible. One-third
retire every two years, so that the whole body is re-
newed in a period of six years, the old members being
thus at any given moment twice as numerous as the new

1 “ How many bishops have you got in your Upper House?” is the
question which an eminent Englishman is reported to have asked soon
after his arrival in America.

CHAP, X THE SENATE 127

members elected within the last two years. As there are
now thirty-eight States, the number of senators, origin-
ally twenty-six, is now seventy-six. This: great and
unforeseen augmentation must be borne in mind when
considering the purposes for which the Senate was
created, for some of which a small body is fitter than a
large one. As there remain only eight Territories? which
can be formed into States, the number of senators will not
(unless, indeed, existing States are divided, or more than
one State created out of some of the Territories) rise
beyond ninety-two. This is of course much below the
present nominal strength of the English House of Lords?
(about 560), and below that of the French Senate (300),
and the Prussian Herrenhaus (432). No senator can
hold any office under the United States, The Vice-Pre-
sident of the Union is ex officio president of the Senate,
but has no vote, except a casting vote when the numbers
are equally divided. Failing him (if, for instance, he
dies, or falls sick, or succeeds to the presidency), the
Senate chooses one of its number to be president pro
tempore. His authority in questions of order is very
limited, the decision of such questions being held to
belong to the Senate itself.
The functions of the Senate fall into three classes—

1 IT reckon in neither the Indian territory, which lies west of Arkansas,
nor Alaska, because these districts are not likely within an assignable
time to contain a civilized population such as would entitle them to be
tormed into States.

2 At the accession of George III. the House of Lords numbered only
174 members.

3 The powers of the Lord Chancellor as Speaker of the English House
of Lords are much narrower than those of the Speaker in the House of
Commons. It is worth notice that as the Vice-President is not chosen by
the Senate, but by the people, and is not strictly speaking a member of
the Senate, so the Lord Chancellor is not chosen to preside by the House

of Lords, but by the sovereign, and is not necessarily a peer. This, how-
ever, seems to be merely a coincidence, and not the result of a wish to
imitate England.

128 THE NATIONAL GOVERNYUENT PART I

legislative, executive, and judicial.’ Its legislative func-
tion is to pass, along with the House of Representatives,
bills which become Acts of Congress on the assent of the
President, or even without his consent if passed a second
time by a two-thirds majority of each House, after he
has returned them for reconsideration. Its executive
functions are:—(a) To approve or disapprove the
President’s nominations of Federal officers, includ-
ing judges, ministers of state, and ambassadors. (b)
To approve, by a majority of two-thirds of those pre-
sent, of treaties made by the President—~e. if less than
two-thirds approve, the treaty falls to the ground. Its
judicial function is to sit as a court for the trial of im-
peachments preferred by the House of Representatives,
The most conspicuous, and what was at one time
deemed the most important feature of the Senate, is that
it represents the several States of the Union as separate
commonwealths, and is thus an essential part of the
Federal scheme. Every State, be it as great as New
York or as small as Delaware, sends two senators, no
more and no less.?- This arrangement was long resisted
by the delegates of the larger States in the Convention
of 1787, and ultimately adopted because nothing less
would reassure the smaller States, who feared to be

1 To avoid prolixity, I do not give in the text all the details of the
constitutional powers and duties of the Houses of Congress: these will
be found in the text of the Constitution printed in the Appendix.

2 New York is twice as large as Scotland, and as populous as Scotland,
Northumberland, and Durham taken together. Delaware is a little smaller
than Norfolk, with about the population of Bedfordshire, It is therefore
as if Bedfordshire had in one House of a British legislature as much
weight as all Scotland together with Northumberland and Durham, a state
of things not very conformable to democratic theory. Nevada has now a
population about equal to that of Caithness (40,000), but isas powerful in
the Senate as New York. This State, which consists of burnt-out mining
camps, is really a sort of rotten borough for and controlled by the great
‘silver men.”

CHAP, X THE SENATE 129

overborne by the larger. It is now the provision of the
Constitution most difficult to change, for “no State can
be ‘deprived of its equal suffrage in the Senate without
its consent,” a consent most unlikely to be given. There
has never, in point of fact, been any division of interests
or consequent contest between the great States and the
small ones.’ But the provision for the equal representa-
tion of all States had the important result of making the
slave-holding party, during the thirty years which pre-
ceded the Civil War, eager to extend the area of slavery
in order that by creating new Slave States they might
maintain at least an equality in the Senate, and thereby
prevent any legislation hostile to slavery.

The plan of giving representatives to the States as
commonwealths has had several useful results. It has
provided a basis for the Senate unlike that on which the
other House of Congress is chosen. Every nation which
has formed a legislature with two houses has experienced
the difficulty of devising methods of choice sufficiently
different to give a distinct character to each house.
Italy has a Senate composed of persons nominated by
the Crown. The Prussian House of Lords is partly
nominated, partly hereditary, partly elective. The
Spanish senators are partly hereditary, partly official,
partly elective. In the Germanic Empire, the Federal
Council consists of delegates of the several kingdoms .
and principalities. France appoints her senators by
indirect election. In England the members of the
House of Lords now sit by hereditary right ; and those
who propose to reconstruct that ancient body are at
their wits’ end to discover some plan by which it may
be strengthened, and made practically useful, without

1 Hamilton perceived that this would be so; see his remarks in the
Constitutional Convention of New York in 1788.—Elliot’s Debates, p. 213.
VOL. I K

130 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

such a djrect election as that by which members are
chosen to the House of Commons.' The American plan,
which is older than any of those in use on the European
continent, is also better, because it is not only simple,
but natural, z.e. grounded on and consonant with the
political conditions of America. It produces a body
which is both strong in itself and different in its collec-
tive character from the more popular house.

It also constitutes, as Hamilton anticipated, a link
between the State Governments and the National Gov-
ernment. It is a part of the latter, but its members
derive their title to sit in it from their choice by State
legislatures. In one respect this connection is no un-
mixed benefit, for it has helped to make the national
parties powerful, and their strife intense, in these last-
named bodies. Every vote in the Senate is so important
to the great parties that they are forced to struggle for
ascendency in each of the State legislatures by whom
the senators are elected. The method of choice in these
bodies was formerly left to be fixed by the laws of each
State, but as this gave rise to much uncertainty and in-
trigue, a Federal statute was passed in 1866 providing
that each House of a State legislature shall first vote
separately for the election of a Federal senator, and that
if the choice of both Houses shall not fall on the same
person, both Houses in joint meeting shall proceed to a
joint vote, a majority of each House- being present.
Even under this arrangement, a senatorial election often
leads to long and bitter struggles; the minority en-
deavouring to prevent a choice, and so keep the seat

1 Under a recent statute, two persons may he appointed by the
Crown to sit in the House of Lords as Lords of Appeal, with the
dignity of baron for life. The Scotch and Irish peers enjoy hereditary

peerages, but are elected to sit in the House of Lords, the latter for life,
the former for each parliament.

CHAP. X THE SENATE 131

vacant. Quite recently in Illinois, Indiana, and New
Jersey, the legislatures fought for months together over
the election of a senator.

The method of choosing the Senate by indirect elec-
tion has excited the admiration of foreign critics, who
have found in it a sole and sufficient cause of the ex-
cellence of the Senate as a legislative and executive
authority. I shall presently inquire whether the critics
are right. Meantime it is worth observing that the
election of senators has in substance almost ceased to be
indirect. They are still nominally chosen, as under the
letter of the Constitution they must be chosen, by the
State legislatures. The State legislature means, of course,
the party for the time dominant, which holds a party
meeting (caucus) and decides on the candidate, who is
thereupon elected, the party going solid for whomsoever
the majority has approved. Now the determination of
the caucus has almost always been arranged beforehand
by the party managers. Sometimes when a vacancy in a
senatorship approaches, the aspirants for it put themselves
before the people of the State. Their names are dis-
cussed at the State party convention held for the
nomination of party candidates for State offices, and a
vote in that convention decides who shall be the party
nominee for the senatorship. This vote binds the party
within and without the State legislature, and at the
election of members for the State legislature, which
immediately precedes the occurrence of the senatorial
vacancy, candidates for seats in that legislature are
generally expected to declare for which aspirant to the
senatorship they will, if elected, give their votes.’

1 The Constitution of the State of Nebraska (1875) allows the electors
in voting for members of the State legislature to “express by ballot their
preference for some person for the office of U.S. senator. The votes cast
for such candidates shall be canvassed and returned in the same manner

1320 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

Sometimes the aspirant, who is of course a leading
State politician, goes on the stump in the interest of
those candidates for the legislature who are prepared to
support him, and urges his own claims while urging
theirs.1 I do not say that things have, in all States,
gone so far as to make the choice by the legislature
of some particular person as senator a foregone con-
clusion when the legislature has been elected. Circum-
stances may change; compromises may be necessary ;
still, it is now generally true that in most States little
freedom of choice remains with the legislature. The
people, or rather those wire-pullers who manage the
people and act in their name, have practically settled
the matter at the election of the State legislature. So
hard is it to make any scheme of indirect election work:
according to its original design; so hard is it to keep
even a written and rigid constitution from bending and
warping under the actual forces of politics.’

as for State officers.” This is an attempt to evade and by aside wind defeat
the provision of the Federal Constitution which vests the choice in the
legislature.

1 This ‘happened recently in Nebraska, and seems to be not uncom-
mon. The famous struggle of Mr. Douglas and Mr. Lincoln for the Illinois
senatorship in 1858 was conducted in a stump campaign.

2 A proposal recently made to amend: the Federal Constitution
by taking the election of senators away from the legislatures in order to
vest it in the people of each State is approved by some judicious publi-
cists, who think that bad candidates will have less chance with the party
at large and the people than they now have in bodies apt to be controlled
by a knot of party managers. A nomination made for a popular @lection
will at least be made publicly, whereas now a nomination for an election
by a legislature may be made secretly. I subjoin the form which this

proposal took in 1881 as a specimen of the form in which amendments
to the Constitution may be submitted to Congress.

46th Congress, In tHE House oF REPRESENTATIVES,
pie 81st January 1881.
Read twice, referred to the Committee on the Judiciary, and ordered.
to be printed. ;
Mr. Weaver introduced the following joint resolution :—

CHAP. X THE SENATE 133

Members of the Senate vote as individuals, that is to
say, the vote a senator gives is his own and not that
of his State. It was otherwise in the Congress of the
old Confederation before 1789; it is otherwise in the
present Federal Council of the German Empire, in which
each State votes as a whole, though the number of
her votes is proportioned to hér population. Accord-
ingly, in the American Senate, the two senators from
a State may belong to opposite parties; and this often
happens in the case of senators from States in which
the two great parties are pretty equally balanced, and the
majority oscillates between them.’ Suppose Ohio to
have to elect a senator in 1886. The Democrats have
a majority in the State legislature ; and a Democrat is
therefore chosen senator. In 1888 the other Ohio
senatorship falls vacant. But by this time the balance
of parties in Ohio has shifted. The Republicans control

Joint RESOLUTION
Proposing an amendment to the Constitution of the United States, provid-
ing for the election of Senators by vote of the people.

Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of
America in Congress assembled (trvo-thirds of each House concurring therein),
That the following is hereby proposed as an amendment to the Constitu-
tion of the United States, and when ratified by the Legislatures of three-
fourths of the several States, shall be valid to all intents and purposes as
a part of the Constitution, to wit :-—

Article—

That so much of section third, article first, of the Constitution of the
United States as provides that the Senators of the United States shall
be chésen by the Legislatures thereof shall be amended so that the same
shall read as follows :-—

“ The Senate of the United States shall be composed of two Senators
from each State, to be chosen by the vote of the qualified electors in said
States respectively, and at such time as shall be determined by Act of
Congress.”

Similar proposals have been repeatedly made in subsequent Con-
gresses, but never accepted by either House.

1 Tt was arranged from the beginning of the Federal Government that
the two senatorships from the same State should never be vacant at the
same time.

134 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1

the legislature ; ; a Republican senator is therefore
chosen, and goes to Washington to vote against his
Democratic colleague. This fact has largely contributed
to render the senators independent of the State legis-
latures, for as these latter bodies sit for short terms (the
larger of the two Houses usually for two years only), a
senator has during the greater part of his six years’ term
to look for re-election not to the present but to a future
State legislature.’

The length of the senatorial term was one of the
provisions of the Constitution which were most warmly
attacked and defended in 1788. A six years’ tenure, it
was urged, would turn the senators into dangerous
aristocrats, forgetful of the legislature which had ap-
pointed them; and some went so far as to demand that
the legislature of a State should have the right to recall
its senators.” Experience has shown that the term is
by no means too long; and its length is one among the
causes which have made it easier for senators than for

members of the House to procure re-election, a result,

which, though it offends the doctrinaires of democracy,
has worked well for the country. Senators from the
smaller States are more frequently re-elected than those

from the larger, because in the small States the com-.

petition of ambitious men is less keen, politics less
changeful, the people perhaps more steadily attached to

1 If a vacancy occurs in a senatorship at a time when the State
legislature is not sitting, the executive of the State is empowered to fill
it up until the next meeting of the State legislature. This is sometimes an
important power, especially if the vacancy occurs at a time when parties
are equally divided in the Senate.

2 This was recommended by a Pennsylvanian Convention, which met
after the adoption of the Constitution to suggest amendments. See Elliot's
‘Debates, ii. p. 545. It was also much pressed by some members of the
New York Convention. A State legislature sometimes passes resolutions
instructing its senators to vote in a particular way, but the senators are
of course in no way,,bound to regard such instructions.

CHAP, X THE SENATE 135

a man whom they have once honoured with their con-
fidence. The senator from such a State generally finds
it more easy to maintain his influence over his own
legislature ; not to add that if the State should be
amenable to the power of wealth, his wealth will tell for
more than it could in a large State. Yet no small
State was ever more controlled by one man than the
great State of Pennsylvania by Mr. Simon Cameron,
who represented it for eighteen years. In recent times
it is the senators from the small States, such as Rhode
Island, Vermont, and Delaware, who have been most fre-
quently re-elected. The average age of the Senate is
less than might be expected. Three-fourths of its
members are under sixty. The importance of the State
he represents makes no great difference to the influence
which a senator enjoys; this depends on his talents,
experience, and character ; and as the small State sena-
tors have often the advantage of long service and a safe
seat, they are often among the most influential.

The Senate resembles the Upper Houses of Europe,
and differs from those of the British colonies, and of
most of the States of the Union, in being a permanent
body. It does not change all at once, as do bodies
created by a single popular election, but undergoes an
unceasing process of gradual change and renewal, like a
lake into which streams bring fresh water to replace
that which the issuing river carries out. This provision
was designed to give the Senate that permanency of
composition which might qualify it to conduct or con-
trol the foreign policy of the nation. An incidental
and more valuable result has been the creation of a set
of traditions and a corporate spirit which have tended

1 See Federalist, No. lxi,, and Hamilton’s argument in the New
York State Convention, Elliot’s Debates, vol. ii. p. 307.

136 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1

to form habits of dignity and self-respect. The new
senators, being always in a minority, are readily assimi-
lated; and though the balance of power shifts from
one party to another according to the predominance in
the State legislatures of one or other party, it shifts
more slowly than in bodies directly chosen all at once,
and a policy is therefore less apt to he suddenly
reversed.

The legislative powers of the Senate being, except
in one point, the same as those of the House of Repre-
sentatives, will be described later. That one point is a
restriction as regards money bills. On the ground that
it is only by the direct representatives of the people
that taxes ought to be levied, and in obvious imitation
of the venerable English doctyine, which had already
found a place in several State constitutions, the Constitu-
tion (Art. i.§ 7) provides that “All bills for raising revenue
shall originate in the House of Representatives, but the
Senate may propose or concur with amendments, as ‘on
‘other bills.” In practice, while the House strictly
guards its right of origination, the Senate largely
exerts its power of amendment, and wrangles with’ the
House over taxes, and still more keenly over appropria-
tions. Almost every session ends with a dispute, a
conference, a compromise. The system of committees,
which is the most remarkable feature of the Senate’s
legislative procedure, will be considered.in a subsequent
chapter, while a note to the present chapter? presents
an abstract of some of the more noteworthy of its
rules. Among those rules there is none providing
for a closure of debate, or limiting the length’ either
of a debate or of a speech. The Senate is proud of
‘having conducted its business without the aid of such

1 This note will be found at the end of this volume.

CHAP. X THE SENATE 137

regulations, and this has: been due, not merely to the
small size of the assembly, but to the sense of its
dignity which has usually pervaded its members, and
to the power which the opinion of the whole body
has exercised on each. Where every man knows his
colleagues intimately, each, if he has a character to
lose, stands in awe of the others, and has so strong
a sense of his own interest in maintaining the
moral authority of the Chamber, that he is slow to
resort to extreme methods which might lower it in
public estimation, Till recently, systematic obstruction,
or, as it is called in America, “ filibustering,” familiar to
‘the House, was almost unknown in the calmer air of
the Senate. When it was applied some years ago by
the Democratic senators to stop a bill to which they
strongly objected, their conduct was not disapproved
by the country, because the whole party, a minority
very little smaller than the Republican majority,
supported it, and people believed that nothing
but some strong reason would have induced the
whole party so to act. Accordingly the majority
yielded. Although the increased size of ‘the body
makes the despatch of business more difficult than
formerly, it is hardly likely that the Senate will adopt
any regulation limiting debate, for it prides itself on
its traditions, and likes to mark the contrast between
its own good manners and the turbulence of the more
‘numerous House. In the winter session of 1883, the
rules of procedure were subjected to a thorough re-
vision, but no proposal of this nature was made.
Divisions are taken, not by separating the senators
into lobbies and counting them, as in the British Parlia-
ment, but by calling the names of senators alphabetic-
ally. The Constitution provides that one-fifth of those

138 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

present may demand that the Yeas and Nays be entered
in the journal. Every senator answers to his name
with Aye or No. He may, however, ask the leave of
the Senate to abstain from voting; and if he is paired,
he states, when his name is called, that he has paired
with such and such another senator, and is therefore
excused. No one is permitted to speak more than twice
to the same question on the same day.

When the Senate goes into executive session, the
galleries are cleared and the doors closed, and the obliga-
tion of secrecy is supposed to be enforced by the penalty
of expulsion to which a senator, disclosing confidential
proceedings, makes himself liable. Practically, how-
ever, newspaper men find little difficulty in ascertain-
ing what passes in secret session.’ The threatened
punishment has never been inflicted, and occasions often
arise when senators feel it to be desirable that the
public should know what their colleagues have been
doing. There has been for some time past a movement
within the Senate against maintaining secrecy, particu-
larly with regard to the confirming of nominations to
office; and there is also a belief in the country that
publicity would make for purity. But while some of
the black sheep of the Senate love darkness because
their works are evil, other members of undoubted re-
spectability defend the present system because they
think it supports the power and dignity .of their body.

1 Secrecy is said to be better observed in the case of discussions‘ on
treaties than where appointments are in question. Some years ago a
Western newspaper published an account of what took place in a secret
session. A committee appointed to inquire into the matter questioned
every senator. Each swore that he had not divulged the proceedings, and ~
the newspaper people also swore that their information did not come from
any Senator. Nothing could be ascertained, and nobody was punished.

CHAPTER XI

THE SENATE AS AN EXECUTIVE AND JUDICIAL BODY

THE Senate is not only a legislative but also an execu-
tive Chamber ; in fact in its early days the executive
functions seem to have been thought the more im-
portant ; and Hamilton went so far as to speak of the
national executive authority as divided between two
branches, the President and the Senate. These execu-
tive functions are two, the power of approving treaties,
and that of confirming nominations to office submitted
by the President.

To what has already been said regarding the func-
tions of the President and Senate as regards treaties
(see above, Chapter VI.) I need only add that the Senate
through its right of confirming or rejecting engagements
with foreign powers, secures a general control over
foreign policy. It is in the discretion of the President
whether he will communicate current negotiations to it
and take.its advice upon them, or will say nothing till
he lays a completed treaty before it. One or other
course is from time to time followed, according to the
nature of the case, or the degree of friendliness exist-
ing between the President and the majority of the
Senate. But in general, the President’s best policy
is to keep the leaders of the senatorial majority,

140 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

and in particular the committee on Foreign Relations,
informed of the progress of any pending negotiation.
He thus feels the pulse of the Senate, and foresees
what kind of arrangement he can induce it to sanc-
tion, while at the same time a good understand-
ing between himself and his coadjutors is promoted.
It is well worth his while to keep the Senate in good
humour, for, like other assemblies, it has a collective
self-esteem which makes it seek to gain all the informa-
tion and power it can draw in. The right of going
into secret session enables the whole Senate to
consider despatches communicated by the President:
and the more important ones, having first been sub-
mitted to the Foreign Relations committee, are thus
occasionally discussed without the disadvantage of
publicity. Of course no momentous secret can be long
kept, even by the committee, according to the proverb
in the Elder Edda—“ Tell one man thy secret, but not
two; if three know, the world knows.”

This control of foreign policy by the Senate goes
far to meet that terrible difficulty which a democracy,
or indeed any free government, finds in dealing with
foreign Powers. If every step to be taken must be
previously submitted to the governing assembly, the
nation is forced to show its whole hand, and precious
opportunities of winning an ally or striking a bargain
may be lost. If on the other hand the executive is
permitted to conduct negotiations in secret, there is
always the risk, either that the governing assembly
may disavow what has been done, a risk which makes
foreign states legitimately suspicious and unwilling to
negotiate, or that the nation may have to ratify, be-
eause it feels bound in honour by the act of its executive
agents, arrangements which its judgment condemns.

cnuar.xt SENATE: EXECUTIVE AND JUDICIAL BODY 141

The frequent participation of the Senate in negotiations
diminishes these ditticulties, because it apprises the
executive of what the judgment of the ratifying body
is likely to be, and it commits that body by advance.
The necessity of ratification by the Senate in order to
give effect to a treaty, enables the country to retire
from a doubtful bargain, though in a way which other
Powers find aistereeable: as “Buglond did when the
Senate rejected the Reverdy Johnson treaty of 1869.
Kuropean statesmen may ask what becomes under such
a system of the boldness and promptitude so often
needed to effect a successful coup in foreign policy, or
‘how a consistent attitude can be maintained if there is
in the chairman of the Foreign Relations committee a
sort of second foreign secretary. The answer is that
America is not Europe. The problems which the Foreign
Office of the United States has to deal with are far
fewer and usually far simpler than those of the Old
World. The republic keeps consistently to her own
side of the Atlantic; nor is it the least of the merits of
the system of senatorial control that it has tended, by
discouraging the executive from schemes which may
prove resultless, to diminish the taste for foreign enter-
prises, and to save the country from being entangled
with alliances, protectorates, responsibilities of all sorts
beyond its own frontiers. It is the easier for the
Americans to practise this reserve because they need no
alliances, standing unassailable in their own hemisphere.
The circumstances of England, with her powerful Euro-
pean neighbours, her Indian Empire, and her colonies
scattered over the world, are widely different. Yet
different as the circumstances of England are, the day
may come when in England the question of limiting
the at. present all but unlimited discretion of the

142 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

executive in foreign affairs will have to be dealt with ;'
and the example of the American Senate will then de-
serve and receive careful study. Yet it must be remem-
bered that many of the most important acts done in the
sphere of foreign relations are purely executive acts
(as for instance, the movement of troops and ships)
which the Senate cannot control.

The Senate may and occasionally does amend a
treaty, and return it amended to the President. There
is nothing to prevent it from proposing a draft treaty
to him, or asking him to prepare one, but this is not
the practice. For ratification a vote of two-thirds of
the senators present is required. This gives great power
to a vexatious minority, and increases the danger,
evidenced by several incidents in the history of the.
Union, that the Senate or a faction in it may deal with
foreign policy in a narrow, sectional, electioneering
spirit. When the interest of any group of States is, or
is supposed to be, opposed to the making of a given
treaty, that treaty may be defeated by the senators
from those States. They tell the other senators of
their own party that the prospects of the party in
the district of the country whence they come will be
improved if the treaty is rejected and a bold aggressive
line is taken in further negotiations. Some of these
senators, who care more for the party than for justice
or the common interests of the country, rally to the ery,
and all the more gladly if their party is opposed to the

1 Parliament may of course interfere, and sometimes does interfere ;
but the parliamentary majority which supports the ministry of the day
usually (and probably wisely) forbears to press the Foreign Office for in-
formation which it is declared to be undesirable to furnish.

In 1886 a resolution was all but carried in the House of Commons,
desiring all treaties to be laid before Parliament for its approval before
being finally concluded.

cuar.xt SENATE: EXECUTIVE AND JUDICIAL BODY 143

President in power, because in defeating the treaty they
humiliate his administration. Supposing their party to
command a majority, the treaty is probably rejected,
and the settlement of the question at issue perhaps in-
definitely postponed. It may be thought that the party
acting so vexatiously will suffer in public esteem. This
happens in extreme cases; but the public are usually
so indifferent to foreign affairs, and so little skilled in
judging of them, that offences of the kind I have de-
scribed may be committed with practical impunity. It
is harder to fix responsibility on a body of senators
than on the executive ; and whereas the executive has
usually an interest in settling diplomatic troubles, whose
continuance it finds annoying, the Senate has no such
interest, but is willing to keep them open so long as
there is a prospect of sucking some political advantage
out of them. The habit of using foreign policy for
electioneering purposes is not confined to America.
We have seen it in England, we have seen it in
France, we have seen it even in monarchical Germany.
But in America the treaty-confirming power of the
Senate opens a particularly easy and tempting door to
such practices.

The other executive function of the Senate, that of
confirming nominations submitted by the President, has
been discussed in the chapter on the powers of that
officer. It is there explained how senators have used
their right of confirmation to secure for themselves a
huge mass of Federal patronage, and how by means of
this right, a majority hostile to the President can thwart
and annoy him. Quite recently a patronage dispute
arose between President Cleveland and the Republican
majority in the Senate. They required the President, to
send to the Senate along with each nomination to a

144 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

place vacant by the removal of the previous holder, not
only a statement of reasons for the removal, but all the
papers in the possession of the executive relating to the
matter. The President seems to have been willing to
state his reasons, while denying the legal right of the
Senate to require them, but he refused to transmit such
documents as he deemed confidential. The Senate com-
plained and passed resolutions, but had of course no
power to compel the President’s compliance. It was
suggested by some senators that the true remedy for
improper removals from partisan motives would be that
the Senate should discuss nominations publicly, instead
of, as now, in secret executive session. This would be
the best way of putting the President in the wrong, if
he made bad nominations, and of putting the Senate in,
the right if it refused to confirm nominations where no
adequate ground for the removal of the prior incumbent
had been shown. Public discussion certainly seems the
plan most conformable to a democratic government ;
and a European observer is surprised that American
opinion allows such important business to be transacted
with closed doors.

Does the control of the Senate operate to prevent
abuses of patronage by: the President? To some extent
it does, yet less completely. than could be wished.
When the majority belongs to the same party as the
President, appointments are usually arranged, or to use
a familiar expression, “squared,” between them, with a
view primarily to party interests. When the majority
is opposed to the President, they are tempted to agree
to his worst appointments, because such appointments
discredit him and his party with the country, and be-
come a theme of hostile comment in the next election-
eering campaign. As the initiative is his, it is the

cuap,.x1 SENATE: EXECUTIVE AND JUDICIAL BODY 145

nominating President, and not the confirming Senate,
whom public opinion will condemn. These things being
so, it may be doubted whether this executive function
of the Senate is now a valuable part of the Constitution.
It was designed to prevent the President from making
himself a tyrant by filling the great offices with his
accomplices or tools. That danger has passed away, if
it ever existed ; and Congress has other means of muzz-
ling an ambitious chief magistrate. The more fully
responsibility for appointments can be concentrated
upon him, and the fewer the secret influences to which
he is exposed, the better will his appointments be. On
the other hand, it must be admitted that the participa-
tion of the Senate causes in practice less friction and
delay than might have been expected from a dual
control. The appointments to the cabinet offices are
confirmed as a matter of course. Those of diplomatic
officers are seldom rejected. “Little tiffs” are frequent
when the senatorial majority is in opposition to the exe-
cutive, but the machinery, if it does not work smoothly,
works well enough to carry on the ordinary business
of the country. .

The judicial function of the Senate is to sit as a
High Court for the trial of persons impeached by the
House of ‘Representatives. The chief justice of the
United States presides, and a vote of two-thirds of the
senators voting is needed for a conviction. Of the
process, as affecting the President, I have spoken in
Chapter V. It is applicable to other officials, including
Federal judges. Besides President Johnson, six persons
in all have been impeached, viz. :—

Four Federal judges, of whom two were acquitted,
and two convicted, one for habitual drunkenness, and
the other for having joined the Secessionists of 1861.

VOL. I L

146 ‘ THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1

We shall see presently that impeachment is the only
means by which a Federal judge can be got rid of.

One senator, who was acquitted for want of jurisdic-
tion, the Senate deciding that a senatorship is not a
“civil office” within the meaning of Art. iii. § 4 of
the Constitution. .

One minister, a secretary of war, who resigned be-
fore the impeachment was actually preferred, and escaped
on the ground that being a private person he was not
impeachable.

Rare as this method of proceeding is, it could not
be dispensed with, and it is better that the Senate
should try cases in which a political element is usually
present, than that the impartiality of the Supreme
court should be exposed to the criticism it would have |
to bear, did political questions come before it. Most
senators are or have been lawyers of eminence, so that
so far as legal knowledge goes they are competent mem-
bers of a court.

CHAPTER XII
THE SENATE: ITS WORKING AND INFLUENCE

THE. Americans consider the Senate one of the suc-
cesses of their Constitution, a worthy monument of the
wisdom and foresight of its founders, Foreign observers
have repeated this praise, and have perhaps, in their
less perfect knowledge, sounded it even more loudly.

The aims with which the Senate was created, the
purposes it was to fulfil, are set forth, under the form
of answers to objections, in five letters (1xi-lxv.), all.
by Alexander Hamilton, in the Federalist! These aims
were the five following :—

To conciliate the spirit of independence in the
several States, by giving each, however small, equal
representation with every other, however large, in one
branch of the national government.

To create a council qualified, by its moderate size
and the experience of its members, to advise and check
the President in the exercise of his powers of appoint-
ing to office and concluding treaties.

To restrain the impetuosity and fickleness of the
popular House, and so guard against the effects of gusts
of passion or sudden changes of opinion in the people.

1 See also Hamilton’s speeches in the New York Convention.—Elliot’s
Debates, ii. p. 301 sqq.

148 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

To provide a body of men whose’ greater experience,
longer term of membership, and comparative independ-
ence of popular election, would make them an element of
stability.in the government of the nation, enabling it to
maintain its character in the eyes of foreign States, and
to preserve a continuity of policy at home and abroad.

To establish a Court proper for the trial of impeach-
ments, a remedy deemed necessary to prevent abuse of
power-by the executive.

All of these five objects have been more or less
perfectly seni) and the Senate has acquired a
position in the government of the nation which Hamil-
ton scarcely Nentured to hope for. In 1788 he wrote:
“ Against the’ force of the immediate representatives
of the people nothing will be able to maintain even the
constitutional authority of the Senate, but such a display
of enlightened policy, and attachment {to the public
good, as will divide with the House of Representatives

.the affections and support of the entire body of the
people themselves.” :

It may be doubted whether the Senate has excelled
the House in attachment to the public good; but it has
certainly shown greater capacity for managing the public
business, and has won the respect, if not the affections,

‘of the people, by its sustained intellectual power,

The Federalist did not think it necessary to state,
nor have Americans generally realized, that this master-
piece of the Constitution-makers was in fact a happy
accident. No one in the Convention of 1787 set' out
with the idea of such a Senate as ultimately emerged
from their deliberations. It grew up under the hands
of the Convention, as the result of the necessity for
reconciling the conflicting demands of the large
and the small States. The concession of equal repre-

cuap.xir. SENATE: WORKING.AND INFLUENCE 149

sentation in the Senate induced the small States to
accept the principle of representation according to popu-
lation in the House of Representatives ; and a series of
compromises between the advocates of popular power,
as embodied in the House, and those of monarchical
power, as embodied in the President, led to the allot-
ment of attributes and functions which have made the
Senate what it is. When the work which they had
almost unconsciously perfected was finished, the leaders
of the Convention perceived its excellence, and defended
it by arguments in which we feel the note of sincere
conviction. Yet the conception they formed of it differed
from the reality which has been evolved. Although they
had created it as a branch of the levislature, they
thought of it as being first and foremost a body with
executive functions. And this, at first, it was. The
traditions of the old Congress of the Confederation, in
which the delegates of the States voted by States, the
still earlier traditions of the executive councils, which
advised the governors of the colonies while still subject
to the British Crown, clung about the Senate and affected
the minds of the senators It was a small body,
originally of twenty-six, even in 1810 of thirty-four
members only, a body not ill fitted for executive work.
Its members, regarding themselves as a sort of congress
of ambassadors from their respective States, were accus-
tomed to refer for advice and instructions each to his
State legislature. So late as 1828, a senator after
arguing strongly against a measure declared that he
would nevertheless vote for it, because he believed his
State to be in its favour. For the first five years
of its existence, the Senate sat with closed doors,

1 See upon this point the acute remarks of M. Boutmy, Etudes de
Droit Constituttonel (Paris 1885), p. 118 sqq.

150 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

occupying itself chiefly with the confidential business of
appointments and treaties, and conferring in private
with the ministers of the President. Not till 1816 did
it create, in imitation of the House, those Standing
Committees which the experience of the House had
shown to be, in bodies where the executive ministers do
not sit, the necessary organs for dealing with legislative
business. Its present character as a legislative body,
not less active and powerful than the other branch
of Congress, is the result of a long process of
evolution, a process possible (as will be more fully
explained hereafter) even under the rigid Constitution
of the United States, because the language of the
sections which define the competence of the Senate
is very wide and general. But in gaining legislative
authority, it has not lost its executive functions,
although those which relate to treaties are largely
exercised on the advice of the standing Committee on
Foreign Relations. And as respects these executive
functions it stands alone in the world. No European
state, no British colony, entrusts to an elective assembly
that direct participation in executive business which
the Senate enjoys.

What is meant by saying that the Senate has proved
a success ? |

It has succeeded by effecting that chief object of the
Fathers of the Constitution, the creation. of a centre of
gravity in the government, an authority able to correct
and check on the one hand the ‘‘ democratic reckless-
ness” of the House, on the other the “monarchical
ambition” of the President. Placed between the two,
it is necessarily the rival and generally the opponent of
both. The House can accomplish nothing without its
concurrence. The President can be checkmated by its

cHAPR.x11 §=SENATE: IVORKING AND INFLUENCE 151

resistance. These are, so to speak, negative or pro-
hibitive successes. It has achieved less in the way of
positive work, whether of initiating good legislation or
of improving the measures which the House sends it.
But the whole scheme of the American Constitution
tends to put stability above activity, to sacrifice the
productive energies of the bodies it creates to their
power of resisting changes in the general fabric of the
government. The Senate has succeeded in making
itself eminent and respected. It has drawn the best
talent of the nation, so far as that talent flows to
politics, into its body, has established an intellectual
supremacy, has furnished a vantage ground from which
men of ability may speak with authority to their fellow-
citizens.

_ To what causes are these successes to be ascribed ?
Hamilton assumed that the Senate would be weaker
than the House of Representatives, because it would
not so directly spring from, speak for, be looked to by,
the people. This was a natural view, especially as the
analogy between the position of the Senate towards the
House of Representatives in America, and that of the
House of Lords towards the House of Commons in
Great Britain, an analogy constantly present to the
men of 1787, seemed to suggest that the larger and
more popular chamber must dwarf and overpower the
smaller one. But the Senate has proved no less strong,
and morally more influential, than its sister House of
Congress. The analogy was unsound, because the
British House of Lords is hereditary and ‘the Senate
representative. In these days no hereditary assembly,
be its members ever so able, ever so wealthy, ever so
socially influential, can speak with the authority which
belongs to those who speak for the people. Mirabeau’s

152 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

famous words in the Salle des Menus at Versailles,
“We are here by the will of the people, and nothing
but bayonets shall send us hence,” express the whole
current of modern feeling; though it is only to-day
that the belated political philosophers of England are
awakening to perceive that the fault of their House of
Lords is not that it is too strong, but that it is too
weak, and that no assembly can now be strong unless it
is representative. Now the Senate, albeit not chosen by
direct popular election, does represent the people; and
what it may lose through not standing in immediate
contact with the masses, it gains in representing such
ancient and powerful commonwealths as the States. A
senator from New York or Pennsylvania speaks for, and
is responsible to, millions of men. No wonder he has
an authority beyond that of the long-descended nobles
of Prussia, or the peers of England whose possessions
stretch over whole counties.

This. is the first reason for the strength of the
Senate, as compared with the upper chambers of other
countries, It is built on a wide and solid foundation of
choice by ‘the people and consequent responsibility to
them. A second cause is to be found in its smal] size.
A small body educates its members better than a large
one, because each member is of more consequence, has
more to do, sooner masters the business not only of his
committee but of the whole body, feels a livelier sense
of the significance of his own action in bringing about
collective action. There is less disposition to abuse the
freedom of debate. Party spirit may be as intense as
in great assemblies, yet it is mitigated by the disposition
to keep on friendly terms with those whom, however
much you may dislike them, you have constantly to
meet, and by the feeling of a common interest in

CHAP, XII SENATE: WORKING AND INFLUENCE 153

‘sustaining the authority of the body. A senator
soon gets to know each of his colleagues—they were
originally only twenty-five—and what each of them
thinks of him; he becomes sensitive to their opinion ;
he is less inclined to pose before them, however he

may pose before the public. Thus the Senate formed,
in its childhood, better habits in discussing and trans-
acting its business than could have been looked for in
a large assembly ; and these habits its maturer age
retains. Its comparative permanence has also worked
for good. Six years, which seem a short term in
Europe,! are in America a long term when compared with
the two years for which the House of Representatives
and the Assemblies of nearly all the States are elected,
long also when compared with the swiftness of change
in American polities. A senator has the opportunity
of thoroughly learning his work, and of proving
that he has learnt it. He becomes slightly more
independent of his constituency,? which in America,
where politicians catch at every passing breeze of
opinion, is a clear gain. He is relieved a little, though
only a little, of the duty of going on the stump in
his State, and maintaining his influence among local
politicians there. .

The smallness and the permanence of the Senate
have however another important influence on its charac-
ter. They contribute to one main cause of its success,
the superior intellectual quality of its members.
Every European who has described it, has dwelt upon

1 Seven years are the full legal, and four to five years in practice the
average, duration of a British House of Commons, .

2 A few years ago, for instance, Mr. Justice Lamar, then senator for
Mississippi, having incurred the displeasure of some leading local politicians,

took the field in hig State, and succeeded in convincing the people that
he was right, and in securing his re-election,

154 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT - PARTI

the capacity of those who compose it, and most have’
followed'De Tocqueville in attributing this capacity to
the method of double election. The choice of senators
by the State legislatures is supposed to have proved a
better means than direct choice by the people of
discovering and selecting the fittest men. I have
already remarked that practically the election of senators
has become a popular ‘election, the function of the
legislatures being now little more than to register and
formally complete a choice already made by the party
managers, and perhaps ratified in the party convention.
But apart altogether from this recent development, and
reviewing the whole hundred years’ history of the
Senate, the true explanation of its- intellectual capacity
is to be found in the superior attraction which it has
for the ablest and most ambitious men. A senator has
more power than a member of the House, more dignity,
a longer term of service, a more independent posi-
tion. Hence every Federal politician aims at a senator-
ship, and looks on the place of representative as a
stepping-stone to what is in this sense an Upper
House, that it is the House to which representatives
seek to mount. It is no more surprising that the average
capacity of the Senate should surpass that of the House,
than that the average cabinet minister of Europe should
be abler than the average member of the legislature.
What is more, the Senate so trains_its members as’
to improve their political efficiency. Several years of
service in a small body, with important and delicate
executive work, are worth twice as many years of
jostling in the crowd of representatives at the other
end of the Capitol. If the Senate does not find the
man who enters it already superior to the average of
Federal politicians, it makes him superior. But natural

CHAP. xIr = SENATE: WORKING AND INFLUENCE 135

selection, as has been said, usually seats upon its
benches the best ability of the country that has flowed
intd political life, and would do so no less were the
election in form a d rect one by the people at the polls.

Most of the leading men of the last sixty years
have sat in the Senate, and in it were delivered most of
the famous speeches which ilumine, though too rarely,
the wearisome debates over State rights and slavery
from 1825 till 1860. One of these debates, that in the
beginning of 1830, which called forth Daniel Webster’s
majestic defence of the Constitution, was long called
par excellence ‘the great debate in the Senate.” ?

Of the seventy-six senators who sat in the forty-
eighth Congress (in 1884) 31 had sat in the other
House of Congress, and 49 had served in State legisla-
tures.? In the fiftieth Congress (1888) 29 had sat in
the House of Representatives, and 49 in State legisla-
tures. Many had been judges or State governors ;
many had sat in State conventions. Nearly all had
held some public function. A man must have had
considerable experience of affairs, and of human
nature in its less engaging aspects, beforé he enters
this august conclave. But experience is not all gain.
Practice makes perfect in evil-doing no less than in
well-doing. The habits of local politics and of work
in the House of Representatives by which the senators
have been trained, while they develop shrewdness and
quickness in all characters, tell injuriously on characters

1 In those days the Senate sat in that smaller chamber which is now
occupied by the Supreme Federal Court.

2 I cannot be sure of the absolute actual accuracy of these figures, which
I have compiled from the Congressional Directory, because some senators do
not set forth the whole of their political career. It is worth remarking
that the proportion of senators who have previously been members of the
House of Representatives is larger among the senators from the older
States than it is in the south and west.

156 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PARTI

of the meaner sort, leaving men’s views narrow, and
giving them a taste as well as a talent for intrigue.

The chamber in which the Senate meets is semi-
circular in form, the Vice-President of the United States,
who acts as presiding officer, having his chair on a
marble dais, slightly raised, in the centre of the chord,
with the senators all turned towards him as they sit in
concentric semicircles, each in a morocco leather covered
arm-chair, with a desk in front of it. The floor is about
as large as the whole superficial area of the British
House of Commons, but as there are great galleries on
all four sides, running back over the lobbies, the upper
part of the chamber and its total air-space much exceeds
that of the English house. One of these galleries is
appropriated to the President of the United States;,
the others to ladies, the press, and the public. Be-
hind the senatorial chairs and desks there is an
open space into which strangers can be brought by
the senators, who sit and talk on the sofas there placed.
Members of foreign legislatures are allowed access to
this outer ‘floor of the Senate.”! There is, especially
when the galleries are empty, a slight echo in the room,
which obliges most speakers to strain their voices. Two
or three pictures on the walls somewhat relieve the
cold tone of the chamber, with its marble platform
and sides unpierced by windows, for the light enters
through glass compartments in the ceiling.

A senator always addresses the Chair “Mr. Presi-
dent,” and refers to other senators by their States,
“The senator from Ohio,” ‘The senator from Tennessee.”
When two senators rise at the same moment, the Chair

1 A graceful courtesy has extended the privilege to the distinguished
historian of the United States, Mr. George Bancroft, who still pursues in
extreme old age his patriotic labours.

cHar. xin = =SENATE: WORKING AND INFLUENCE 157

calls on one, indicating him by his State, ‘‘The senator
from Minnesota has the floor.”’ Senators of the
Democratic party sit, and apparently always have sat,
on the right of the chair, Republican senators on the
left; but, as already explained, the parties do not face
one another. The impression which the place makes
on a visitor is one of business-like gravity, a gravity
which though plain is dignified. It has the air not
so much of a popular assembly as of a diplomatic
congress. The English House of Lords, with its fretted
roof and windows rich with the figures of departed
kings, its majestic throne, its Lord Chancellor in his
wig on the woolsack, its benches of lawn-sleeved -
bishops, its bar where the Commons throng at a
great debate, is not only more gorgeous and pic-
turesque in externals, but appeals far more powerfully
to the historical imagination, for it seems to carry
the middle ages down into the modern world. The
Senate is modern, severe, and practical. So, too, few
debates in the Senate rise to the level of the better
debates in the English chamber. But the Senate
seldom wears that air of listless vacuity and superannu-
ated indolence which the House of Lords presents on all
but a few nights of every session. The faces are keen
and forcible, as of men who have learned to know the
world, and have much to do in it; the place seems
consecrated to great affairs.

As might be expected from the small number of

1 A late President of the Senate was in the habit of distinguishing
the two senators from the State of Arkansas, by calling on one as the
senator for “Arkansas” (pronounced as written, with accent on the
penult), and the other as the Senator for “Arkansaw,” with accent on
the last syllable. As Europeans often ask which is the correct pronun-
ciation, I may say that both are in common use. But the legislature of
Arkansas has lately by a “ joint resolution” declared ‘ Arkansaw” to be
right.

158 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

the audience, as well as from its character, discussions in
the Sendte are apt to be sensible and practical. Speeches
are shorter and less fervid than those made in the House
of Representatives, for the larger an assembly the more
prone is it to declamation. The least useful debates are
those on show-days, when a series of set discourses are
delivered on some prominent question, because no one
expects such discourses to have any persuasive effect.
The question at issue is sure to have been already
settled, either in a committee or in a “caucus” of the
party which commands the majority, so that these long
and sonorous harangues are mere rhetorical thunder
addressed to the nation outside. The speakers, more-
over, on such field days, seldom reply to the argu-
ments of those who have preceded them, as men do in
the English Parliament. Each senator brings down
and fires off in the air, a carefully-prepared oration,
which may have little bearing on what has gone before.
In fact the speeches are made not to convince the
assembly, for that no one dreams of doing, but to keep
a man’s opinions before the public and sustain his fame.}

The Senate now contains many men of great wealth.
Some, an increasing number, are senators because they
are rich; a few are rich because they are senators, while
in the remaining cases the same talents which have
won success in law or commerce have brought. their
possessor to the top in politics also. The great majority
are or have been lawyers; some regularly practise
before'the Supreme Court. Complaints are occasionally
levelled against the aristocratic tendencies which wealth
is supposed to have bred, and sarcastic references are
made to the sumptuous residences which senators have

1 One is told in Washington that it is at present thought ‘* bad form”
for a senator to listen to a set speech ; it implies that he is a freshman,

CHAP, XU SENATE: WORKING AND INFLUENCE 159

built on the new avenues of Washington. While admit-
ting that there is more sympathy for the capitalist
class among these rich men than there would-be in a
Senate of poor men, I must add that the Senate is
far from being a class body like the upper houses of
England or Prussia or Spain or Denmark. It is sub-
stantially representative, by its composition as well as by
legal delegation, of all parts of American society ; it is far
too dependent, and far too sensible that it is dependent,
upon public opinion, to dream of legislating in the interest
of the rich. The senators, however, indulge some
social pretensions. They are the nearest approach to an
official aristocracy that has yet been seen in America.
They and their wives are allowed precedence at private
entertainments, as well’ as on public occasions, over
members of the House, and of course over private
citizens. Jefferson might turn in his grave if he knew
of such an attempt to introduce European distinctions
of rank into his democracy ; yet as the office is tempor-
ary, and the rank vanishes with the office, these preten-
sions are harmless; it is only the universal social
equality of the country that makes them noteworthy.
Apart from such petty advantages, the position of a
senator, who can count on re-election, is the most desir-
able in the political world of America. It gives as much
power and influence as a man need desire. It secures
for him the ear of the public. It is more permanent
than the presidency or any great ministerial office,
requires less labour, involves less vexation, though
still great vexation, by importunate office-seekers.
European writers on America have been too much
inclined to idealize the Senate. Admiring its structure
and function, they have assumed that the actors must
be worthy of their parts. They have been encouraged

160 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

in this tendency by the language of many Americans.
As the Romans were never tired of repeating that
the .ambassador of Pyrrhus had called the Roman
senate an assembly of kings, so Americans of refine-
ment, who are ashamed of the turbulent House of
Representatives, are wont to talk of the Senate as a sort
of Olympian dwelling-place of statesmen and sages. It
is nothing of the kind. It is a company of shrewd
and vigorous men who have fought their way to the
front by the ordinary methods of American politics,
and on many of whom the battle has left its stains.
There are abundant opportunities for intrigue in the
Senate, because its most important business is done in
the secrecy of committee rooms or of executive session ;
and many senators are intriguers. There are oppor-
tunities for misusing senatorial powers. Scandals have
sometimes arisen from the practice of employing as
counsel before ‘the Supreme Court, senators whose
influence has contributed to the appointment or con-
firmation of the judges." There are opportunities for
corruption and blackmailing, of which unscrupulous
men are well known to take advantage. Such men’
are fortunately few; but considering how demoral-
ized are the legislatures of several southern and
western States, their presence must be looked for;
and the rest of the Senate, however it may blush
for them, is obliged to work with them and to treat
them as equals.? The contagion of political vice is

1 In the session of 1886, an Act was passed forbidding members of
either House of Congress to appear in the Federal courts as counsel for
any railroad company or other corporation which might, in respect of its
having received land grants, be affected by Federal legislation, The Act
originated in the Senate, which deserves in this instance the credit of
seeking to cure its own faults, and remove temptation from the path of
its weaker members.

2 Americans now frequently accuse the Senate of timidity, and ascribe

cuaRnxu SENATE: WORKING AND INFLUENCE 161

nowhere so swiftly potent as in legislative bodies,
because you cannot taboo a man who has got a vote.
You may loathe him personally, but he is the people’s
choice. He has a right to share in the government of
the country ; you are grateful to him when he saves you
on a critical division; you discover that ‘‘ he is not such
a bad fellow when one knows him” ; people remark that
he gives good dinners, or has an agreeable wife ; and so
it goes on till falsehood and knavery are covered under
the cloak of party loyalty.

As respects ability, the Senate cannot be profitably
compared with the English House of Lords, because that
assembly consists of some twenty eminent and as many
ordinary men attending regularly, with a multitude of
undistinguished persons who, though members, are
only occasional visitors, and take no real share in the
deliberations. Setting the Senate beside the House’
of Commons, one may say that the ‘average natural

capacity of its seventy - six members is not above
that of the seventy - six best men in the English
House. There is more variety of talent in the latter,
and a greater breadth of culture. On the other hand,
the Senate excels in legal knowledge as well as in
practical shrewdness. The House of Commons contains
more men who could give a good address on a literary
this fault to the fact that many of its members, being persons of great
wealth but no great independence, are nervously alive to the fear of
being thought deficient in popularsympathies. Recently when a proposal
was made to bring the Federal army up to its nominal strength, 25,000
men, no extreme figure, the threat of one member that the working
classes would think the army was being increased in order to be used by
capital against labour, is said to have caused so much alarm that the plan
was hastily dropped. So far as a stranger can judge, there is certainly
less respect for the Senate collectively, and for most of the senators indi-
vidually, now than there was eighteen years ago, though, of course, there

are among its members men of an ability and character which would
do honour to any assembly.

VOL. I M

162 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PARTI

or historical subject, the Senate more who could either
deliver a rousing popular harangue or manage the busi-
ness of a great ‘trading company, these being the forms
of capacity commonest among congressional “politicians.
The fairest judgment I know on the Senate’s merits is
contained in the following extract from an acute American
writer, who says (writing in 1885) :

** The Senate is just what the mode of its election
and the conditions of public life in this country make
it. Its members are chosen from the ranks of active
politicians, in accordance with a law of natural selection
to which the State legislatures are commonly obedient ;
and it is probable that it contains, consequently, the best
men that our system calls into politics. If these best
men are not good, it is because our system of govern-
ment fails to attract better men by its prizes, not because
the country affords or could afford no finer material.
The Senate is in fact, of course, nothing more than a
part, though a considerable part, of the public service ;
and if the general conditions of that service be such as
to starve statesmen. and foster demagogues, the Senate
itself will be full of the latter kind, simply because there
are no others available. There cannot be a separate
breed of public men reared specially for the Senate.
It must be recruited from the lower branches of the
representative system, of which it is only the top-
most part. No stream can be purer than its sources.
The Senate can have in it no better men than the best
men of the House of Representatives; and if the
House of Representatives attracts to itself only in-
ferior talent, the Senate must put up with the same
sort. Thus the Senate, though it may not be as
good as could be wished, is as good as it can be
under the circumstances. It contains the most perfect

CHAP, XII SENATE: WORKING AND INFLUENCE 163

product of our politics, whatever that product may
be.”!

The place which the Senate holds in the'constitutional
system of America cannot be fully appreciated till the
remaining parts of that system have been described. This
much, however, may be claimed for it, that it has been
and is, on the whole, a steadying and moderating power.
One cannot say in the language of European politics thet
it has represented aristocratic principles, or anti-popular
principles, or even conservative principles. Each of the
creat historic parties has in turn commanded a majority
in it, and the difference between their strength has
during the last decade been but slight. On none of
the great issues that have divided the nation -has the
Senate been, for any long period, decidedly opposed
to the other House of Congress. It showed no
more capacity than the House for grappling with the
problems of slavery extension. It was scarcely less
ready than the House to strain the Constitution by sup-
porting Lincoln in the exercise of the so-called war
powers, or subsequently by cutting down presidential
authority in the struggle between Congress and Andrew
Johnson. All the fluctuations of public opinion tell
upon it, nor does it venture, any more than the House,
to confront a popular impulse, because it is, equally
with the House, subject to the control of the great
parties, which seek to use while they obey the dominant
sentiment of the hour.

But the fluctuations of opinion tell on it less ener-
getically than on the House of Representatives. They
reach it slowly and gradually, owing to the system which
renews it by one-third every second year, so that it
sometimes happens that before the tide has risen to the

1 Woodrow Wilson, Congressional Government, pp. 194, 195.

164 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PARTI

top of the flood in the Senate it has already becun to
ebb in the country. The Senate has been a stouter
bulwark against agitation, not merely because a majority
of the senators have always four years of membership
before them, within which period public feeling may
change, but also because the senators have been indi-
vidually stronger men than the representatives. They
are less democratic, not in opinion, but in temper,
because they have more self-confidence, because they
have more to lose, because experience has taught them
how fleeting a thing popular sentiment is, and how use-
ful a thing continuity in policy is. The Senate has
therefore usually kept its head better than the House of
Representatives. It has expressed more adequately the
judgment, as contrasted with the emotion, of the nation.
In this sense it does constitute a ‘check and balance”
in the Federal government. Of the three great functions
which the Fathers of the Constitution meant it to perform,
the first, that of sécuring the rights of the smaller States,
is no longer important, because the extent of State
rights has been now well settled ; while the second, that
of advising or controlling the Executive in appointments
as well as in treaties, has given rise to evils almost com-
mensurate with its benefits. But-the third duty is still
well discharged, for “the propensity of a single and
numerous assembly to yield to the impulse of sudden
and violent passions” is restrained.

se

CHAPTER XIII
THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THE House of Representatives, usually called for short-
ness the House, represents the nation on the ‘basis of
population, as the Senate represents the States.

But even in the composition of the House the States
play an important part. The Constitution provides?
that ‘representatives and direct taxes shall be appor-
tioned among the several States according to their
respective numbers,” and under this provision Congress
allots so many members of the House to each State in
proportion to its population at the last preceding
decennial census, leaving the State to determine the
districts within its own area for and by which the mem-
bers shall be chosen. These districts are now equal. or
“nearly equal in size; but in laying them out there is
ample scope for the process called “ gerrymandering,” *

1 Constitution, Art. i. § 2, par. 3; cf Amendment xiv. § 2.

2 So called from Elbridge Gerry, a leading Democratic politician in
Massachusetts (2 member of the Constitutional Convention of 1787, and
in 1812 elected Vice-President of the United States), who when Massa-
chusetts was being re-districted contrived a scheme which gave one of the
districts a shape like that of a lizard. A noted artist entering the room
of an editor who had a map of the new districts hanging on the wall over
his desk observed, “Why, this district looks like a salamander,” and put
in the claws and eyes of the creature with his pencil. ‘Say rather a
Gerrymander,” replied the editor ; and the name stuck. The aim of gerry-
mandering, of course, is so to lay out the one-membered districts as to

166 THE NA TIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

which the dominant party in a State rarely fails to apply
for its own advantage. Where a State legislature has
failed to tedistribute the State into congressional dis-
tricts, after the State has received an increase of repre-
sentatives, the additional member or members are elected
by the voters of the whole State on a general ticket, and
are called “representatives at large.” Very recently
one State (Maine) elected all its representatives on this
plan, while another (Kansas) elected three by districts
and four by general ticket. Each district, of course, lies
wholly within the limits of one State. When a seat
becomes vacant the governor of the State issues a writ
for 4 new election, and when a member desires to resign
his seat he does so by letter to the governor.

The original House which met in 1789 contained only
‘sixty-five members, the idea being that there should be
one member for every 30,000 persons. As population
grew and new States were added, the number of
members was increased. Originally Congress fixed the
ratio of members to population, and the House accord-
ingly grew; but latterly, fearing a too rapid increase,
it has fixed the number of members with no regard for
any precise ratio of members to population. At} present
the total number of representatives is 325, being,
according to the census of 1880, one member to 154,325
souls. Four States, Colorado, Delaware, Nevada, and

secure in the greatest possible number of them a majority for the party
which conducts the operation. This is done sometimes by throwing the
greatest possible number of hostile voters into a district which is anyhow
certain to be hostile, sometimes by adding to a district where parties
are equally divided some place in which the majority of friendly
voters is sufficient to turn the scale. There is a district in Mississippi
(the so-called Shoe String district) 500 miles long by 40 broad, and
another in Pennsylvania resembling a dumb-bell. South Carolina fur-
nishes some beautiful recent examples.) And in Missouri a district has been
contrived longer, if measured along its windings, than the State itself, into
which as large a number as possible of the negro voters have been thrown.

cHAaP.xI1 =THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 167

Oregon, have only one representative each ; four others
have two each; while New York has thirty-four, and
Pennsylvania twenty-eight. Besides these full members
there are also eight Territorial delegates, one from each
_ of the Territories, regions in the West enjoying a species
of self-government, but not yet formed into States.
These delegates sit and speak, but have no right to vote,
‘being unrecognized by the Constitution. They are, in
fact, merely persons whom the House under a statute
admits to its floor and permits to address it.

The electoral franchise on which the House is elected
is for each State the same as that by which the members
of the more numerous branch of the State legislature
are chosen. Originally electoral franchises varied very
much in different States: now a suffrage practically all
but universal prevails everywhere. A State, however,
has a right of limiting the suffrage as it pleases, and
many States do exclude persons convicted of crime,
paupers, illiterates, etc. By the fifteenth amendment to
the Constitution (passed in 1870) “the right of citizens of
the United States to vote shall not be denied or abridged *
by any State on account of race, colour, or previous con-
dition of servitude,” while by the fourteenth amendment
(passed in 1868) “the basis of representation in any State
is reduced in respect of any male citizens excluded from
the suffrage, save for participation in rebellion or other
crimes.” Each State has therefore a strong motive for ,
keeping its suffrage wide, but the fact remains that the
franchise by which the Federal legislature is chosen
may differ vastly, and does in some points actually differ
in different parts of the Union.’

1 Rhode Island still retains a certain small property qualification for
electors, and in some States payment of a poll tax is made a condition to
the exercise of electoral rights, See chapter on State Legislatures in
Vol. II.

168 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT parri

Members are elected for two years, and the election
always takes place in the even years, 1884, 1886, 1888,
and so forth. Thus the election of every second Con-
gress coincides with that of a President; and admirers
of the Constitution find in this arrangement another of
their favourite “checks,” because while it gives the in--
coming President a Congress presumably, though by no
means necessarily, of the same political complexion as *
his own, it enables the people within two years to exr
press their approval or disapproval of his conduct by
sending up another House of Representatives which may
support or oppose the policy he has followed. The
House does not in the regular course of things meet
until a year has elapsed from the time when it has been
elected, though the President may convoke it sooner, 2.¢.
a House elected in November 1888 will not meet till
December 1889, unless the President summons it in
“extraordinary session” some time after March 1889,
when the previous House expires. This summons has
been issued ten times only since 1789; and has so often
brought ill luck to the summoning President that a sort
of superstition against it has now grown up.' The ques-
tion is often mooted whether a new Congress ought not
by law to meet within six months after its election, for
there are inconveniences in keeping an elected House
unorganized and Speakerless for a twelvemonth. But
the country is not so fond of Congress as to desire more
of it. It is a singular result of the present arrangement
that the old House continues to sit for nearly four months
after the members of the new House have been elected.

1 This ill luck is supposed (says Mr. Blaine in his Twenty Years in
Congress) to attach especially to May sessions, which reminds one of thé
superstition against May marriages mentioned by John Knox apropos of
the marriage of Mary Queen of ‘Scots and Darnley.

cuar.xnt THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 169
$e
The expense of an election varies greatly from dis-
trict to district. Sometimes, especially in great cities
where illegitimate expenditure is more frequent and
less detectible than in rural] districts, it rises to a sum
of $10,000 (£2000) or more: sometimes it is trifling.
No estimate of the average can be formed, be-
cause no returns of election expenses are required
by law. I fancy that a seat costs, as a rule, less than
one for a county division does in England.’ A candi-
date, unless very wealthy, is not expected to pay
the whole expense out of his own pocket, but is
aided often by the local contributions of his friends,
sometimes by a subvention from the election funds
of the party in the State. Most of the expendi-
ture is legitimate, that is to say, it goes in paying
for meetings, in printing, in advertisements, in
agency. All the official expenses, such as for clerks,
polling booths, etc., are paid by the public. Bribery is
not rare in the urban districts, nor in some of the
country districts: but elections are seldom impeached
on that ground, for the difficulty of proof is increased
’ by the circumstance that the House, which is of course
the investigating and deciding authority, does not
meet till a year. after the election. As a member is
elected for two years only, and the investigation would
probably drag on during the whole of the first session,
it is scarcely worth while to dispute the return for the
1 In England the Act 46 and 47 Vict. c. 51, Schedule I, fixes the
maximum expenditure of a candidate, exclusive of personal expenses and
returning officer’s charges, as follows :—In a borough £380, and an addi-
tional £30 for every complete 1000 electors above 2000. In a county
£710, and an additional £60 for every complete 1000 electors above
2000. Expenses at borough elections are usually below the legal maxi-
mum, in counties not so often. The average expenditure, all kinds of

expense included, seems, in county constituencies, to be from £1100-
£1200, and in boroughs from £400-£500.

170 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

sake of turning him out for the second session.!. System-
atic treating is uncommon. Sometimes in country places
a voter who has come from a distance to vote, expects a
free dinner, and no one complains if he gets it. In some
States, drinking places are closed on the election day.
Among the members of the House there are few
young men, and still fewer old men. The immense
majority are between forty and sixty. Lawyers abound,
including in that term both those who in Great Britain
are called barristers or advocates, and those who are
called attorneys, there being in America no distinction
between these two branches of the profession. An
analysis of the House in the: fiftieth Congress, that
of 1887-89, showed that two hundred and three mem-
bers, or nearly two-thirds ‘of the whole number, had
been trained or had practised as lawyers. Of course
many of these had practically dropped law as a business,
and given themselves wholly to politics. Next in
number come the men engaged in manufactures or com-
merce, in agriculture, or banking, or journalism, but no
one of these occupations counted as many as forty
members.” No military or naval officer, and no person

1 That under these favouring conditions bribery is not common may
be due to the great size of the congressional districts (average population
of a district (1888) at least 160,000). Bribery sprang up in England when
constituencies were small—it was far more rife in boroughs than in
counties—and its disappearance of late years is probably due to the
enormous enlargement of the constituencies as well as to the severe and
searching provisions of the present law. At Rome, however, candidates
used to bribe large numbers of electors; and I have heard of city dis-
tricts in America in which thousands of electors were believed to have
received a pecuniary consideration.

2 In the fiftieth Congress the number of persons stating themselves to
be engaged in commerce was 39, in agriculture 25. In the forty-eighth
Congress there were 205 lawyers, I take these numbers from the Con-
gresstonal Directory, which I have carefully analyzed, but as some members
do not state their occupations, the analysis is not quite complete, and there
are probably more lawyers than the number I have given.

cHapnxut THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 17!

in the civil service of the United States, can sit.
Scarcely any of the great railway men go into Con-
gress, a fact of much significance when one considers
that they are really the most powerful people in the
country ; and of the numerous lawyer members very few
are leaders of the bar in their respective States. The
reason is the same in both cases.. Residence in Washing-
ton makes practice at the bar of any of the great cities
impossible, and men in lucrative practice would not
generally sacrifice their profession in order to sit in the
House, while railway managers or financiers are too
much engrossed by their business to be able to under-
take the duties of a member. The absence of railway
men by no means implies the absence of railway in-
fluence, for it is as easy for a company to influence legis-
lation from without Congress as from within.

Most members, including nearly all western men,
have received their early education in the common
schools, but one half or more of the whole number
have also graduated in a university or college. This
does not necessarily mean what it would mean in
Europe, for some of the smaller colleges are no better
than English grammar schools and not as good as Ger-
man gymnasia. It is noticeable that in the accounts of
their career which members prepare for the pages of the
Congressional Directory, they usually dwell upon the
fact of their graduation, or state that they have “ re-
ceived an academic education.”! A good many, but
apparently not the majority, have served in the legis-
lature of their own State. Comparatively few are

1 In the Congressional Directory for the fiftieth Congress I find 209
_members claiming to have received a “collegiate” or “academic” educa-
tion, 84 owning to an elementary or common school education, and the
remainder silent on the subject.

172 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

wealthy, and few are very poor, while scarcely any
were at jthe time of their election working men.
Of course no one could be a working man while he
sits, for he would have no time to spare for his trade,
and the salary would more than meet his wants.
Nothing prevents an artisan from being returned to
Congress, but there seems little disposition among the
working classes to send one of themselves.

A member of the House enjoys the title of Honour-
able, which is given to him not merely within the House
(as in England), but in the world at large, as for instance
in the addresses of his letters, As he shares it with
members of State senates, all the higher officials, both
Federal and State, and judges, the distinction is not
deemed a high one.

' An estimate of the powers of Congress as a whole
belongs to a later chapter. As regards those of the
House in particular, it is enough to say that they are in
theory purely legislative. The House has no share in the
executive functions of the Senate, nothing to do with
confirming appointments or approving treaties. On the
other hand, it has the exclusive right of initiating
revenue bills and of impeaching officials, features bor-
rowed, through the State Constitutions, from the English
House of Commons, and of choosing a President in case.
there should be no absolute majority of presidential
electors for any one candidate. This very important
power it exercised in 1801 and 1825.1 .

Setting extraordinary sessions aside, every Congress
has two sessions, distinguished as the First or Long and
the Second or Short. The long session begins in the
fall of the year after the election of a Congress, and con-
tinues, with a recess at Christmas, till the July or August

1 See above, Chapter V.

CHAP, xin. «= THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 173

following. The short session begins in the December
after the July adjournment, and lasts till the 4th of
. March following. The whole working life of a House is
thus from ten to twelve months. Bills do not, as in the
English Parliament, expire at the end of each session ;
they run on from the long session to the short one. All
however that have not been passed when the fatal 4th
March arrives perish forthwith, for the session being
fixed by statute cannot be extended at pleasure.’ There
is consequently a terrible scramble to get business pushed
through in the last week or two of a Congress.

The House usually meets at noon, and sits till four
or six o'clock, though towards the close of a session these
hours are lengthened. Occasionally when obstruction
occurs, or when at the very end of a session messages
are going backwards and forwards between the House,
the Senate, and the President, it sits all night long.

The usages and rules of procedure of the House,
which differ in many respects from those of the Senate,
are too numerous to be described here. It is said that
an industrious member needs one whole session to learn
them. I will advert only to a few points of special
interest, choosing those which illustrate American poli-
tical ideas or bring out the points of likeness and un-
likeness between Congress and the English Parliament.
The subject of committees will require a chapter to itself.

An oath or affirmation of fidelity to the Constitution
of the United States is (as prescribed by the Constitu-
tion) taken by all members ;* also by the clerk, the
sergeant-at-arms, the doorkeeper, and the postmaster.

1 Senate bills do not die by effluxion of time.

A proposal recently made to extend the session till April and have
the President inaugurated then seems likely to be adopted.

2 The oath is administered by the Speaker, and in the form following :

174 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

The sergeant-at-arms is the treasurer of the House,
and pays to each member his salary and mileage
(travelling expenses). He has the custody of the mace,
and the duty of keeping order, which in extreme cases
he performs by carrying the mace into a throng of dis-
orderly members, This symbol of authority, which, as
in the House of Commons, is moved from its place
when the House goes into committee, consists of the
Roman fasces, in ebony, bound with silver bands in the
middle and at the ends, each rod ending in-a spear head,
at the other end a globe of silver, and on the globe a
silver eagle ready for flight. English precedent.suggests
the mace, but as it could not be surmounted by a crown,
Rome has prescribed its design.

The clerk of the last preceding House acts as a sort
of temporary chairman till a Speaker is chosen ; members
then address him, and he decides questions of order.

The proceedings each day begin with prayers, which
are conducted by a chaplain who is appointed by the
House, not as in England by the Speaker, and who may,
of course, be selected from any religious denomination.!
Lots are drawn for seats at the beginning of the session,
each member selecting the place he pleases according as
his turn arrives. By courtesy the senior member is
allowed to retain the. seat he has appropriated before the
‘T do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support the Constitution of
the United States against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I will
bear true faith and allegiance to the same; thated take this obligation
freely without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion, and that I
will well and faithfully discharge the duties of the office on which I am
_ about to enter, so help me God.” “ Allegiance” to a legal instrument
would have seemed an odd expression to those ages in which the notion
of allegiance arose.

1 Sermons do not seem to have been ever preached before either
House of Congress, as they still occasionally are before the House of Com-

mons. A sermon was preached at the opening of the French States General
in 1789.

cHar,.xut THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 175

drawing by putting his hat upon it. The places at the
extreme right and left of the chair are the least desired.
Members generally try to secure seats near their friends,
or other members from the same State. Although the
Democrats are mostly to the Speaker’s right hand, mem-
bers do not sit strictly according to party, a circum-
stance which deprives invective of much of its dramatic
effect. ~ One cannot, as in England, point the finger of
scorn at “‘hon. gentlemen opposite.” Every member is
required to remain uncovered in the House.

Every member addresses the Speaker and the Speaker
only, and refers to another member not by name but as
the “ gentleman from Pennsylvania,” or as the case may
be, without any particular indication of the district
which the person referred to represents. As there are
twenty-eight gentlemen from Pennsylvania; and the
descriptives used in the English House of Commons
(learned, gallant, right honourable) are notin use, facili-
ties for distinguishing the member intended are not
perfect. A member usually speaks from his seat, but
may speak from the clerk’s desk or from a spot close to
the Speaker’s chair. No one may pass between the
Speaker and the member speaking, a curious bit of ad-
herence to English usage.

Divisions were originally (rule of 17th April 1789)
taken by going to the right and left of the chair, accord-
ing to the old practice of the English House of Commons.’

1 Tt was not until 1836 (and in fact as a result of the change in the
character of the House of Commons made by the Reform Act of 1832) that
the present system of recording the names of members who vote by making.
them pass through lobbies was introduced at Westminster. ‘Till then one
party remained in the House while the other retired into the lobby, and
only the numbers were recorded. Much dislike was at first evinced to
the new plan, and the tellers sometimes found it difficult to ascertain the

names of members as they walked past them. At present the tellers
merely count the numbers, and the names are taken by four division clerks,

176 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

This having been found inconvenient, ‘a resolution of
9th June'1789 established the present practice, whereby
members rise in their seats and are counted in the first
instance by the Speaker, but if he is in doubt, or if a
count be required by one-fifth of a quorum (2.e. by one-
tenth of the whole House), then by two tellers named by
the Speaker, between whom, as they stand in the middle
gangway, members pass. If one-fifth of a quorum
demand a call of yeas and nays, this is taken ; the clerk
calls the full roll of the House, and each member answers
aye or no to his name, or says “no vote.” When the whole
roll has been called, it is called over a second time to let
those vote who have not voted in the first call. Mem-
bers may now change their votes. Those who have
entered the House after their names were passed on the
second call cannot vote, but often take the opportunity
of rising to say that they would, if then present in the
House, have voted for (or against) the motion. All this
is set forth in the Congressional Record, which also con-
tains a list of the members not voting and of the pairs.
When the question is an important one, it is
obviously ‘necessary that the names of members voting
should be put on record. But the call is sometimes
demanded in order to give people time to consider how
they should vote, and while it is proceeding members,
may be seen running hither and thither to take the
advice of friends or prominent men, not answering to
their names on the first call, but awaiting the second
call to vote. A process which consumes so much time,
for it takes an hour and a quarter to call through the
three hundred and twenty-five names, is an obvious
and effective engine of obstruction. It is frequently so
used, for it can be demanded not only on questions of
substance, but on motions to adjourn. This is a rule

CHAP. XII THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 177

which the House cannot alter, for it rests on an express
provision of the Constitution, Art. i. § 5.

* No one may speak more than once to the same
question, unless he be the mover of the motion pend-
ing, in which case he is permitted to reply after every
member choosing to speak has spoken.

Speeches are limited to one hour, subject to a power
to extend this time by unanimous consent, and may,
in committee of the whole House, be limited to five
minutes. So far as I could learn, this hour rule works
very well, and does not tend to bring speeches up to
that length as a regular thing. A member is at liberty
to give part of his time to other members, and this is in
practice constantly done. The member speaking will
say: “I yield the floor to the gentleman from Ohio for
five minutes,” and so on. Thus a member who has
once secured the floor has a large control of the debate.

The great remedy against prolix or obstructive de-
bate is the so-called previous question, which is moved
in the form, “Shall the main question be now put?”
and when ordered closes forthwith all debate, and
brings the House to a direct vote on that main question.
On the motion for the putting of the main question no
debate is allowed ; but it does not destroy the right of
the member “reporting the measure under considera-
tion” from a committee, to wind up the discussion by
his reply. This closure of the debate may be moved
by any member without the. need of leave from the
Speaker, and requires only a bare majority of those
present. When directed by the House to be applied in
committee, for it cannot be moved after the House has
gone into committee, it has the effect of securing five
minutes to the mover of any amendment, and five
minutes to the member who first ‘obtains the floor”

VOL. I N

178 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

(gets the chance of speaking) in opposition to it, per-
mitting no one else to speak. A member in proposing
a resolution or motion usually asks at the same time
for the previous question upon it, so as to prevent it
from being talked out.

Closure by previous question i is in almost daily use,
and is considered so essential to the progress of business
that I never found any member or official who thought
it could be dispensed with. Even the senators, who
object to its introduction into their own much smaller
chamber, agree that it must exist in a large body like
the House. To the inquiry whether it was abused,
most of my informants answered that this rarely hap-
pened, while one, a gentleman officially connected with
the House for thirty years, during fourteen ‘of which he
had been clerk, went so far as to say that he had never
known a case of abuse. This is attributed to the fear
entertained of the disapproval of the people, and to the
sentiment within the House itself in favour of full and
fair discussion, which sometimes induces the majority to
refuse the previous question when demanded by one of
their own party, or on behalf of a motion which they
are as a whole supporting. ‘No one,” they say, “ who
is bond fide discussing a subject in a sensible way,
would be stopped by the application of the previous
question. On the other hand we should never get
appropriation bills through without it.”

Notwithstanding this powerful engine for expediting
business, obstruction, or, as it is called in America,
filibustering, is by no means unknown. It is usually
practised by making repeated motions for the adjourn-
ment of a debate, or for “taking a recess” (suspending
the sitting), or for calling the yeas and nays. Between
one such motion and another some business must inter-

CHAP, XIII THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 179

vene, but as the making of a speech is “ business,” there
is no difficulty in complying with this requirement.
No speaking is permitted on these obstructive motions,
yet by them time may be wasted for many continuous
hours, and if the obstructing minority is a strong one,
it generally succeeds, if not in defeating a measure, yet
in extorting a compromise. It must be remembered
that Swing to the provision of the Constitution above
mentioned, the House is in this matter not sovereign
even over its own procedure. That rules are not
adopted, as they might be, which would do more than
the present system does to extinguish filibustering, is
due partly to this provision, partly to the notion that it
is safer to’ leave some means open by which a minority
can make itself disagreeable, and to the belief that
adequate checks exist on any gross abuse of such means.
These checks are two. .One is the fact that filibustering
will soon fail unless conducted by nearly the whole of
the party which happens to be in a minority, and that
so large a section of the House will not be at the
trouble of joining in it unless upon some really serious
question. Some few years ago, seventeen or eighteen
members tried to obstruct systematically a measure they
objected to, but their number proved insufficient, and
the attempt failed. But at an earlier date, during the
Reconstruction troubles which followed the war, the
Opposition of the solid Democratic party, then in a
minority, succeeded in defeating a bill for placing five
of the southern States under military government.
The other check is found in the fear of popular dis-
approval. If the nation sees public business stopped
and necessary legislation delayed by factious obstrue-
tion, it will visit its displeasure both upon the filibuster-
ing leaders individually, and on the whole of the party

180 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

compromised. However hot party spirit may be, there
is always a margin of moderate men in both parties
whom the unjustifiable use of legally permissible modes
of opposition will alienate. Since such men can make
themselves felt at the polls when the next election
arrives, respect for their opinion cools the passion of
congressional politicians. Thus the general feeling is
that as the power of filibustering is in extreme cases a
safeguard against abuses of the system of closure by
‘previous question,” so the good sense of the community
is in its turn a safeguard against abuses of the oppor-
tunities which the rules still leave open. One ex-
Speaker, who had had large experience in leading both
a majority and a minority of the House, observed to
me that he thought the rules, taken all in all, as near
perfection as any rules could be. This savours of official
optimism. We all know the attachment which those
who have grown old in working a system show to its
faults as well as to its merits. Still, true is it that con-
gressmen generally complain less of the procedure under
which they live, and which seems to an English
observer tyrannical, than do members of the English
House of Commons of the less rigid methods of their
own ancient and famous body. I know no better in-
stance of the self-control and good humour of Americans
than the way in which the minority in the House
generally submit to the despotism of the majority, con-
soling themselves with the reflection that it is all accord-
ing to the rules of the game, and that their turn will
come in due course. To use the power of closing debate
as stringently at Westminster as it is used at Washing-
ton would revolutionize the life of the House of Com-
mons. But the House of Representatives is an assembly
of a very different nature. Like the House of Commons

CHAP, XIII THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 181

it is a legislating, if hardly to be deemed a governing,
body. But it is not a debating body. It rules through
ahd by its committees, in which discussion is unchecked
by any closing power ; and the whole House does little
more than register by its votes the conclusions which
the committees submit. One subject alone, the subject
of revenue, that is to say, taxation and appropriation,
receives genuine cliscussion by the House at large. And
although the “previous question” is often applied to
expedite appropriation bills, it is seldom applied till
opportunity has been given for the expression of all
relevant views.

The rules regarding the procedure in committee of
the whole House are in the main similar to those of the
British House of Commons ; but the chairman of such a
committee is not (as usually in England) a permanent
chairman of Ways and Means, but a person nominated
by the Speaker on each occasion. No member can
speak twice to any question in Committee of the Whole
until every member desiring to speak shall have spoken.

The House has a power of going into secret session
whenever confidential communications are received from
the President, or a member informs it that he has com-
munications of a secret nature to make. But this power
seems to have been rarely used, certainly never of late
years. Every word spoken is reported by official steno-
graphers and published in the Congressional Record,
and the huge galleries are never cleared.

The number of bills brought into the House “every
year is very large, averaging over 7000. In the thirty-
seventh Congress (1861-63) the total number of bills
introduced was 1026, viz.:—613 House bills, and 433
Senate bills. In the forty-sixth it had risen to 9481, of
which 7257 were House bills, 2224 Senate bills, showing

182 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

that the increase has been much larger in the House
than in the Senate. In the forty-ninth Congress
(1885-87) the number was rising still further, the number
up to July 1886 being 12,906, exclusive of 277 joint
resolutions. In the British House of Commons the total
number of bills introduced was, in the session of 1885,
481, of which 202 were public and 279 private bills.’
America is, of course, a far larger country, but the
legislative competence of Congress is incomparably
smaller than that of the British Parliament, seeing that
the chief part of the field both of public bill and private
bill legislation belongs in America to the several States.
By far the larger number of bills-in ents are what
would be called in England “ private” or “local and
personal” bills, i.e. they establish no sae rule of law
but are directed to particular cases. Such are the
numerous bills for satisfying persons with claims against
the Federal Government, and for giving or restoring
pensions to individuals alleged to have served in the
Northern armies during the War of Secession. It is
only to a very small extent that bills can attempt to
deal with ordinary private law, since nearly the whole
of that topic belongs to State legislation. It is needless
to say that the proportion of bills that pass to bills
that fail is a very small one, not one-thirtieth.? As
in England so even more in America, bills are lost

1 The session of 1886 was cut short by a dissolution, and therefore is
not a typical case.

2 In the British Parliamentary session of 1885, out of 202 public bills
brought in, 144 passed the House of Commons, and several of these were
rejected by the House of Lords. Of these 144 public bills 116 had
originated in the House of Commons, 28 in the House of Lords, 54
‘were Government bills, 62 “provisional order” bills, only 28 bills of.
private members. Of the 279 private bills 203 passed, The number
of public bills introduced is increasing in England, but not so rapidly
as in America. In the session of 1888, 282 (besides 45 provisional order
bills) had been introduced in the House of Commons up to 13th July, a
few of them brought from the House of Lords.

CHAP, XIII THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 183

less by direct rejection than by failing to reach their
third reading, a mode of extinction which the good-
neture of the House, or the unwillingness of its members
to administer snubs to one another, would prefer to
direct rejection, even were not the want of time a
sufficient excuse to the committees for failing to report
them. One is told in Washington that few bills are
brought in with a view to being passed. They are
presented in. order to gratify some particular persons or
places, and it is well understood in the House that
they must not*be taken seriously. Sometimes a less
pardonable motive exists. The great commercial com-
panies, and especially the railroad companies, are often
through their land grants and otherwise brought into
relations with the Federal Government. Bills are
presented in Congress which purport to withdraw sqgme
of the privileges of these companies, or to establish or
favour rival enterprises, but whose real object is to levy
blackmail on these wealthy bodies, since it is often
cheaper for a company to buy off its enemy than to
defeat him either by the illegitimate influence of: the
lobby, or by the strength of its case in open combat.
Several great corporations have thus to maintain a per-
manent staff at Washington for the sake of resisting
legislative attacks upon them, some merely extortionate,
some intended to win local. popularity.

The title and attributions of the Speaker of the
House are taken from his famous English original. But
the character of the office has greatly altered from that
original. The note of the Speaker of the British House of
Commons is his impartiality. He has indeed been chosen
by a party, because a majority means in England a
party. But on his way from his place on the benches
to the Chair he is expected to shake off and leave behind

184 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

all party ties and sympathies. Once invested with the
wig and gown of office he has no longer any political
opinions, and must administer exactly the same treatment
to his political friends and to those who have been
hitherto his opponents, to the oldest or most powerful
minister and to the youngest or least popular member.
His duties are limited to the enforcement of the rules
and generally to the maintenance of order and decorum
in debate, including the selection, when several members -
rise at the same moment, of the one who is to carry on
the discussion. These are duties of great importance,
and his position one of great dignity, but neither the
duties nor the position imply political power. It makes
little difference to any English party in Parliament
whether the occupant of the chair has come from their
own or from the hostile ranks. The Speaker can lower
or raise the tone and efficiency of the House as a
whole by the way he presides over it: but a custom
as strong as law forbids him to render help to his own
side even by private advice. Whatever information as
to parliamentary law he may feel free to give must be
equally at the disposal of every member.

In America the Speaker has immense political power,
and is permitted, nay expected, to use it in the interests
of his party. In calling upon members to speak he
prefers those of his own side. He decides in their
favour such points of order as are not distinctly covered
by the rules. His authority over the arrangement of
business is so large that he can frequently advance
or postpone particular bills or motions in a way
which determines their fate. Although he does not
figure in party debates in the House, he may and
does advise the other leaders of his party privately ;
and when they “go into caucus” (ze. hold a party

cHar.xin THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 185

meeting to determine their action on some pending
question) he is present and gives counsel. He is
usually the most eminent member of the, party who
has a seat in the House, and is really, so far as the
confidential direction of its policy goes, almost its
leader. His most important privilege is, however, the
nomination of the numerous standing committees
already referred to. In the first Congress (April 1789)
the House tried the plan of appointing its com-
mittees by ballot; but this worked so ill that in
January 1790 the following rule was passed :—‘ All
committees shall be appointed by the Speaker unless
otherwise specially directed by the House.” This rule
has been: re-adopted by each successive Congress since
then.’ Not only does he, at the beginning of each
Congress, select all the members of each of these com-
mittees, he even chooses the chairman of each, and
thereby vests the direction of its business in hands
approved by himself. The chairman is of course
always selected from the party which commands the
House, and the committee is so composed as to give
that party a majority. Since legislation, and so much
of the control of current administration as the House
has been able to bring within its grasp, belong to these
committees, their composition practically determines the
action of the House on all questions of moment, and as
the chairmanships of the more important committees
are the posts of most influence, the disposal of them is a

1 In England select committees on public matters are appointed by
the House, «. practically by the “whips” of the several parties, though
sometimes a discussion in the House leads to the addition of other mem-
bers. Hybrid committees are appointed partly by the House and partly
by the committee of Selection. Private bill committees are appointed
by the committee of Selection. This committee is a small body of the
older and more experienced members, intended to represent fairly all
parties and sections of opinion.

186 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

tremendous piece of patronage by which a Speaker can
attract support to himself and his own section of the
party, reward his friends, give politicians the oppor-
tunity of rising to distinction or practically extinguish
their congressional career. The Speaker is, of course,
far from free in disposing of these places. He has been
obliged to secure his own election to the chair by pro-
mises to leading members and their friends; and while
redeeming such promises, he must also regard the wishes
of important groups of men or types of opinion, must
compliment particular States by giving a place on good
committees to their prominent representatives, must
avoid nominations which could alarm particular in-.
terests. These conditions surround the exercise of his
power with trouble and anxiety. Yet after all it is
power, power which in the hands of a capable and
ambitious man becomes so far-reaching that it is no
exaggeration to call him the second, if not the first
political figure in the United States, with an influenceupon
the fortunes of men and the course of domestic events
superior, in ordinary times, to the President's, although
shorter in its duration and less patent to the world.’
The Speaker's distribution of members among the

1 «The appointment of the committees implies the distribution of
work to every member. It means the determination of the cast business
shall take. It decides for or against all large matters of policy, or may
so decide ; for while Speakers will differ from each other greatly in force
of character and in the wish to give positive direction to affairs, the weak-
est man cannot escape from the necessity of arranging the appointments
with a view to the probable character of measures which will be agitated.
This, however, is far from the measure of the Speaker’s power. All rules
are more or less flexible. The current of precedents is never consistent or
uniform. The bias of the Speaker at a critical moment will turn the
scale, Mr. Randall as Speaker determined the assent of the House to
the action of the Electoral Commission [of 1877]. Had he wished for a
revolutionary attempt to prevent the announcement of Hayes’s election, no
one who has had experience in Congress, at least, will doubt that he could
have forced the collision."—From an article in the New York Natin of
April 4, 1878, by an experienced member of Congress.

CHAP, XIII THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 187

committees is, next to his own election, the most critical
point in the history of a Congress, and that watched with
most interest. He devotes himself to it for the fort-
night after his installation with an intensity equalling that
of a European prime minister constructing a cabinet.
The parallel goes further, for as the chairmanships of the
chief committees may be compared to the cabinet offices
of Europe, so the Speaker is himself a great party leader
as well as the president of a deliberative assembly.

Although expected to serve his party in all possible
directions, he must not resort to all possible means.
Both in the conduct of debate and in the formation of
committees a certain measure of fairness to opponents is
required from him. He must not palpably wrest the
rules of the House to their disadvantage, though he may
decide all doubtful points against them. He must give
them a reasonable share of “the floor” (ze. of debate).
He must concede to them proper representation on com-
mittees. To define his duties on these points is impossible;
yet everybody knows when they have been neglected, as
was the case with a recent Speaker, whom I heard
universally condemned because he had usually “ recog-
nized” (ae. called on in debate) his own friends only,
and had otherwise crossed the line which custom has
drawn between ordinary and oppressive partisanship.

The dignity of the Speaker’s office is high. He
receives a salary of $8000 a year (£1600), which is a
large salary for America, In rank he stands next after
the “President and on a level with the justices of the
Supreme Court. Washington society was lately agitated
by a claim of his wife to take precedence over the
wives of these judges, a claim so ominous in a demo-
cratic country that efforts were made to have it adjusted
without a formal decision.

CHAPTER XIV
THE HOUSE AT WORK

An Englishman expects to find his House of Commons re-
produced in the House of Representatives. He has the
more reason for this notion because he knows that the latter
was modelled on the former, has borrowed many of its
rules and technical expressions, and regards the procedure
of the English chamber as a storehouse of precedents for
its own guidance.’ The notion is delusive. Resemblances
of course there are. But an English parliamentarian who
observes the American House at work is more impressed
by the points of contrast than by those of similarity.
The life and spirit of the two bodies are wholly different.

The room in which the House meets is in the south
wing of the Capitol, the Senate and the Supreme Court
being lodged in the north wing. It is more than thrice
as large as the English House of Commons, with a floor
about equal .in area to that of Westminster Hall, 139
feet long by 93 feet wide and 36 feet high.” Light is

1 Both the Senate and the House of Representatives have recognized
Jefferson’s Manual of Parliamentary Practice as governing the House when
none of its own rules (or of the joint rules of Congress) is applicable. This
manual, prepared by President Jefferson, is based on English precedents.

2 Not reckoning in the staircase at the south end of Westminster
Hall. The figure of the two halls is different, Westminster Hall being
rather longer, and the House of Representatives wider. The English
House of Commons is only 75 feet long by 45 broad,

CHAP. XIV THE HOUSE AT WORK 189

admitted through the ceiling. There are on all sides
deep galleries running backwards over the lobbies, and
capable of holding two thousand five hundred persons.
The proportions are so good that it is not till you ob-
serve how small a man looks at the farther end, and
how faint ordinary voices sound, that you realize its
vast size. The seats are arranged in curved concentric
rows looking towards the Speaker, whose handsome
marble chair is placed on a raised marble platform pro-
jecting slightly forward into the room, the clerks and
the mace below in front of him, in front of the clerks
the official stenographers, to the right the seat of the
sergeant-at-arms. Each member has a revolving arm-
chair, with a roomy desk in front of it, where he
writes and keeps his papers. Behind these chairs runs
a railing, and behind the railing is an open space into
which strangers may be broug ght, where sofas stand
against the wall; and where smoking i is practised, even
by strangers, though the rules forbid it.

When you enter, your first impression is of noise
and turmoil, a noise like that of short sharp waves
in a Highland loch, fretting under a squall eagainst
a rocky shore. The raising and dropping of desk
lids, the scratching of pens, the clapping of hands
to call the pages, keen little boys who race along
the gangways, the pattering of many feet, the hum of
talking on the floor and in the galleries, make up a din
over which the Speaker with the sharp taps of his
hammer, or the orators straining shrill throats, find it
hard to make themselves audible. I never heard
American voices sound so harsh or disagreeable as they
do here. Nor is it only the noise that gives the im-
pression of disorder. Often three or four members
are on their feet at once, each shouting to catch

190 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

the Speaker’s attention. Others, tired of sitting
still, rise to stretch themselves, while the Western
visitor, long, lank, and imperturbable, leans his arms on
the railing, chewing his cigar, and surveys the scene
with little reverence. Less favourable conditions for
oratory cannot be imagined, and one is not surprised to
be told that debate was more animated and practical
in the much smaller room which the House formerly
occupied.

Not only is the present room so big that only a
powerful and well-trained voice can fill it, “but the desks
and chairs make a speaker feel as if he*were addressing
furniture rather than men, while of the members few
seem to listen to the speeches. It is true that they sit
in the House instead of running out into the lobbies as
people do in the British House of Commons, but they
are more occupied in talking or writing, or reading
newspapers, than in attending to the debate. To attend
is not easy, for only a shrill voice can overcome the
murmurous roar; and one sometimes finds the news-
papers in describing an unusually effective speech,
observe that “Mr. So-and-So’s speech drew listeners
about him from all parts of the House.” They could
not hear him where they sat, so they left their places to
crowd in the gangways near him. ‘Speaking in the
Houge,” says an American writer, ‘is like trying to
address the people in the Broadway omnibusés from, the
kerbstone in front of the Astor House... . Men of fire
intellect and of good ordinary elocution have exclaimed
in despair that in the House of Representatives the
mere physical effort to be heard uses up all the powers,
so that intellectual action becomes impossible. The
natural refuge is in written speeches or in habitual
silence, which one dreads more and more to break.”

CHAP. XIV THE HOUSE AT WORK I9l

It is hard to talk calm good sense at tle top of your
voice, hard to unfold a complicated measure. A speaker's
vocal organs react upon his manner, and his manner on
the substance of his speech. It is also hard to thunder
at an unscrupulous majority or a factious minority
when they do not sit opposite to you, but all round
you and behind you as is the case in the House. The
Americans think this an advantage, because it prevents
scenes of disorder. They may be right; but what order
gains oratory loses. It is admitted that the desks are
a mistake, as encouraging inattention by enabling men
to write their letters; but though nearly everybody
agrees that they would be better away, nobody supposes
that a proposition to remove them would succeed.’ So
too the huge galleries add to the area the voice has to
fill; but the public like them, and might resent a
removal to a smaller room. The smoking shocks an
Englishman, but not more than the English practice of
wearing hats in both Houses of Parliament shocks an
American. Interruption, cries of ‘Divide,’ interjected
remarks, are not more frequent—when I have been
present they seemed to be much less frequent—than in
the House. of Commons. Applause is given more
charily, as is usually the case in America. Instead of
‘Hear, hear,” there is a clapping of hands and hitting
of desks, ‘

The method of taking a division by calling on each
party to stand up, first the ayes and then the noes, is
more expeditious than the English plan of sending men
into opposite lobbies, but the calling of the roll, which
one-fifth of half the House can and frequently does

1 The House decided in 1859, at the end of one Congress, that the

desks should be removed from the Hall (as the House is called), but in the
next succeeding session the old arrangement was resumed.

192 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

demand, is slower. Both methods of dividing are less
dramatic, than the English, and neither compels a man
to vote, for if you wish to abstain, you need not rise ;
and when the roll is called you may refrain from
answering to your name, or may slip outside the bar.

There is little good speaking. I do not mean merelv
that fine oratory, oratory which presents valuable
thoughts. in eloquent words, is rare, for it is rare in all
aaseniblics: But in the House of Representatives a
set speech upon any subject of importance tends to
become not an exposition or an argument but a piece of
elaborate and high-flown declamation. Its author is
often wise enough to send direct to the reporters what
he has written out, having read aloud a small part of it
in the House. When it has been printed in extenso in
the Congressional Record (leave to get this done being
readily obtained), he has copies struck off and distributes
them among his constituents. Thus everybody is pleased
and time is saved.’

That there is not much good business debating,
by which I mean a succession of comparatively short
speeches addressed to q practical question, and ham-
mering it out by the collision of mind with mind, arises
not from any want of ability among the members, but
from the unfavourable conditions under which the
House acts. Most of the practical work’ is done in the
standing committees, while much of tlle House’s time
is consumed in pointless discussions, where member after
member delivers himself upon large questions, not likely
to be brought to a definite issue. Many of the speeches
thus called forth have a value as repertories of facts, but

1 [ was told that formerly speeches might be printed in the Record

as a matter of course, but that, a member having used this privilege to print
and circulate a poem, the right was restrained.

CHAP. X1V THE HOUSE AT WORK 193

the debate as a whole is unprofitable and languid. On
the other hand the five-minute debates which take
place, when the House imposes that limit of time,
in Committee of the Whole on the consideration of
a bill reported from a standing committee, are often
lively, pointed, and effective. The topics which excite
most interest and are best discussed are those of taxation
and the appropriation of money, more particularly to
public works, the improvement of rivers and harbours,
erection of Federal buildings, and so forth. This kind
of business is indeed to most of its members the chief
interest of Congress, the business which evokes the finest
skill of a tactician and offers the severest temptations
to a frail conscience. As a theatre or school either of
political eloquence or political wisdom, the House has
been inferior not only to the Senate but to most
European assemblies. Nor does it enjoy much con-
sideration at home. Its debates are very shortly re-
ported. in the Washington papers as well as in those in
Philadelphia and New York. They are not widely read,
and do little to instruct or influence public opinion.
This is of course only one part of a legislature’s
functions. An assembly may despatch its business
successfully and yet shine with few lights of genius.
But the legislation on public matters which the House
turns out is séanty in quantity and generally mediocre
in quality. What is more, the House’ tends to avoid
all really grave and pressing questions, skirmishing
round them, but seldom meeting them in the face or
reaching a decisioh which marks an advance. If one
makes this observation to an American, he replies that
at this moment there are few such questions lying
within the competence of Congress, and that in his
country representatives must not attempt to move
VOL. I fe)

194 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT - PARTI

faster than their constituents. This latter remark is
eminently true; it expresses a feeling which has gone
so far that Congress conceives its duty to be to follow
and not to seek to lead public opinion. The harm
actually suffered so far is not grave. But the European
observer cannot escape the impression that Congress
might fail to grapple with a serious public danger, and
is at present hardly equal to the duty of guiding and
instructing the political intelligence of the nation.

In all assemblies one must expect abundance of
unreality and pretence, many speeches obviously
addressed to the gallery, many bills meant to be cir-
culated but not to be seriously proceeded with. How-
ever, the House seems to indulge itself more freely
in this direction than any other chamber of equal
rank. Its galleries are large, holding 2500 persons.
But it talks and votes, I will not say to the
galleries, for the galleries cannot hear it, but as if
every section of American opinion was present in the
room. It adopts unanimously resolutions which perhaps
no single member in his heart approves of, but which
no one cares to object to, because it seems not worth
while to do so. This habit sometimes exposes it to a
snub, such as that administered by Prince Bismarck in
the matter of the. resolution of condolence with the
German Parliament on the death of Lasker, a resolution
harmless indeed but certainly superfluous and possibly
obtrusive. A practice unknown to other countries is of
course misunderstood by them, and may provoke re-
sentment, The resolution requesting the British Govern-
ment to suspend the execution of O'Donnell, the mur-
derer of the informer Carey, was adopted by the House
as a mere matter of form, nobody, except a few Irish
members, desiring it, and not even they expecting it to

CHAP, XIV THE HOUSE AT WORK 195

produce any effect. A bill brought into the House
in the session of 1886 requesting the President to
summon a commercial Congress of all' transatlantic
republics to form a species of American commercial
league, produced alarm in the British West Indies and
led to solemn questions in the British House of Commons,
while few people in America noticed it. American
statesmen keep their pockets full of the loose cash of
empty compliments and pompous phrases, and become
so accustomed to scatter it among the crowd that they
are surprised when a complimentary resolution or
electioneering bill, intended to humour some section of
Opinion at home, is taken seriously abroad. The House
is particularly apt to err in this way, because having no
responsibility in foreign policy, and little sense of its
own dignity, it applies to international affairs the habits
of election meetings.

Watching the House at work, and talking to the
members in the lobbies, an Englishman naturally asks
himself how the intellectual quality of the body compares
with that of the House of Commons. His American
friends have prepared him to expect a marked inferiority.
They are fond of running down congressmen. The
cultivated New Englanders and New Yorkers do this
out of intellectual fastidiousness, and in order to support
the réle which they unconsciously fall into when talking
to Europeans. ‘The rougher Western men do it because
they would not have congressmen either seem or be
better in any way than themselves, since that would be
opposed to republican equality. A stranger who has
taken literally all he hears is therefore surprised to
find so much character, shrewdness, and keen though
limited intelligence among the representatives. Their
average business capacity did not seem to me below that

196 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

of ‘members of the House of Commons of 1880-85.
True it is that great lights, such as usually adorn
the British chamber, are absent: true also that there
are fewer men who have received a high education which
has developed their tastes and enlarged their horizons.
The want of such men depresses the average. It
is raised, however, by the almost total absence of
two classes hitherto well represented in the British
Parliament, the rich, dull parvenu, who has bought
himself into public life, and the perhaps equally
unlettered young sporting or fashionable man who,
neither knowing nor caring anything about politics, has
come in for a county or (before 1885) a small borough,
on the strength of his family estates. Few congress-
men sink to so low an intellectual level as these two
sets of persons, for congressmen have almost certainly
made their way by energy and smartness, picking up a
knowledge of men and things “all the time.” In respect
of width of view, of capacity for penetrating thought
on political problems, representatives are scarcely above
the class from which they came, that of second-rate
lawyers or farmers, less often merchants or petty
manufacturers. They do not pretend to be statesmen
in the European sense of the word, for their careers,
which have made them smart and active, have given
them little opportunity for acquiring such capacities.
As regards manners they are not polished, because they
have not lived among polished people; yet neither are
they rude, for to get on in American politics one must
be civil and pleasant. The standard of parliamentary
language, and of courtesy generally, has been steadily
rising during the last few decades; I am not sure that
it is now lower than in the British House of Commons,
where those same decades appear to have witnessed

CHAP, XIV THE HOUSE AT WORK 197

a decline. Scenes of violence and confusion such as
occasionally convulse the French chamber, and were
“common in Washington before the War of Secession,
are now unknown.

On the whole, the most striking difference between
the House of Representatives and European popular
assemblies is its greater homogeneity. The type is
marked ; the individuals vary little from the type. In
Europe all sorts of persons are sucked into the vortex of
the legislature, nobles and landowners, lawyers, physi-
clans, business men, artisans, journalists, men of
learning, men of science. In America five repre-
sentatives out of six are politicians pure and simple,
members of a class as wel) defined as any one of the
above-mentioned European classes. The American people,
though it is composed of immigrants from every country
and occupies a whole continent, tends to become more
uniform than most of the great European peoples; and
this characteristic is palpable in its legislature.

Uneasy lies the head of an ambitious congressman,}
for the chances are about even that he will lose his seat
at the next election. It was observed in 1788 that half
of the members of each successive State legislature were
new members, and this average has been maintained in
the Federal legislature. In the forty-eighth Congress,
elected in 1882, only 148 out of the 325'members had
sat in the forty-seventh Congress. In the fiftieth the
proportion was slightly larger, but only 206 out of the
325 members had sat in any preceding Congress. In
England the proportion of members re-elected from

1 The term “ Congressman” is commonly used to describe a member
of the House of Representatives, though of course it ought to include
senators also, So in England “Member of Parliament” means member
of the House of Commons, though it covers all persons who have seats
in the House of Lords.

198 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

Parliament to Parliament is much higher. It was re-
marked as a novelty i in the Parliament of 1885, elected
after a sw eeping measure for the redistribution of seats,
that about one-third of the members had not sat in
the Parliament of 1880. Any one can see how much
influence this constant change in the composition of
the American House must have upon its legislative
efficiency.

I have kept to the last the feature of the House
which an Englishman finds the strangest.

It has parties, but they are headless. There is
neither Government nor Opposition ; neither leaders nor
whips. No minister, no person holding any Federal
office or receiving any Federal salary, can be a member
of it. That the majority may be and often is opposed
to the President and his.cabinet, does not strike Ameri-
cans as odd, because they proceed on the theory that the
legislative ought to be distinct from the executive
authority. Since no minister sits, there is no official
representative of the party which for the time being
holds the reins of the executive government. Neither
is there any unofficial representative. And as there are
no persons whose opinions expressed in debate are
followed, so there are none whose duty it is to bring up
members to vote, to secure a quorum, to see that people
know which way the bulk of the party is going.

So far as the majority has a chief, that chief is the
Speaker, who has been chosen by them as their ablest
and most influential man; but as the Speaker seldom
joins in debate (though he may do so by leaving the
chair, having put some one else in it), the chairman
of the most important committee, that of Ways and
Means, enjoys a sort of eminence, and comes nearer
than any one else to the position of leader of the

CHAP. XIV THE HOUSE AT WORK 199

House.’ But his authority does not always enable him
to secure co-operation for debate among the best speakers
"of his party, putting up now one now another, after the
fashion of an English prime minister, and thereby guiding
the general course of the discussion.

The minority do not formally choose a leader, nor is
there usually any one among them whose career marks
him out as practically the first man, but the person
whom they have put forward as their party candidate
for the Speakership, giving him what is called ‘ the com-
plimentary nomination,” has a sort of vague claim to
be so regarded. This honour amounts to very little. Jn
the Congress which met in December 1883, Mr. Keifer
of Ohio, Speaker in the last preceding Congress, received
such a complimentary nomination from the Republican
party against Mr. Carlisle of Kéntucky, whom the
Democratic majority elected. But the Republicans
immediately afterwards refused to treat Mr. Keifer as
leader, and left him, on some motion which he made, in
a ridiculously small minority.

How then does the House work ?

If it were a Chamber, like those of France or Germany,
divided into four or five sections of opinion, none of
which commands a steady majority, it would not work
at all. But parties are few in the United States, and
their cohesion tight. There are usually two only, so
nearly equal in strength that the majority cannot afford

‘ to dissolve into groups like those of France. Hence upon
all large national issues, whereon the general sentiment
of the party has been declared, both the majority and
the minority. know how to vote, and vete solid.

If the House were, like the English House of Commons,

1 The Chairman of the Committee on Appropriations has perhaps as
much real power.

200 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1

to some extent an executive as well as a legislative body
—one by whose co-operation and support the daily
business of government had to be carried on—it could
not work without leaders and whips. This it is not. It
neither creates, nor controls, nor destroys, the adminis-
tration, which depends on the President, himself the
offspring of a direct popular mandate.

“Still,” it may be replied, “the House has important
functions to discharge. Legislation comes from it.
Supply depends on it. It settles the tariff, and votes
money for the civil and military services, besides passing
measures to cure the defects which experience must dis-
close in the working of every government, every system
of jurisprudence. How can it satisfy these calls upon it
without leaders and organization ?”

To a European eye, it does not seem to satisfy them.
It votes the necessary supplies, but not wisely, giving
sometimes .too much, sometimes too little money, and
taking no adequate securities for the due application of
the sums voted. For many years past it has fumbled
over both the tariff problem and the currency problem.
It produces few useful laws, and leaves on one side grave
practical questions, such as the silver problem, inter-
national copyright, the establishment of a general bank-
rupt law. An Englishman is disposed to ascribe these
failures to the fact that as there are no leaders, there is
no one responsible for the neglect of buginess, the mis-
carriage of bills, the unwise appropriation of public funds.
“In England,” he says, “the ministry of the day bears
the blame of whatever goes wrong in the House of
Commons. Having a majority, it ought to be able to
do what it desires. If it pleads that its measures have
been obstructed, and that it cannot under the faulty
procedure of the House of Commons accomplish what it

CHAP, XIV THE HOUSE AT WORK 201

secks, it is met, and crushed, by the retort that in such
case it ought to have the procedure changed. What
else is its majority good for but to secure the efficiency
of Parliament? In-America there is no person against
whom similar charges can be brought; although con-
spicuous folly or perversity on the part of the majority
tends to discredit them collectively with the public,
and may damage them at the next presidential or con-
gressional election. But responsibility, to be properly
effective, ought to be fixed on a few conspicuous leaders.
Is not the want of such men, men to whom the country
can look, and whom the ordinary members will follow,
the cause of some of the faults which are. charged
on Congress, of its hesitations, its inconsistencies and
changes, its ignoble surrenders to some petty clique, its
deficient sense of dignity, its shrinking from troublesome
questions, its proclivity to jobs?”

Two American statesmen to whom such a criticism
was submitted, replied as follows: “It is not for want
of leaders that Congress has forborne to settle the ques-
tions mentioned, but because the division of opinion in
the country regarding them has been faithfully reflected
in Congress. The majority has not been strong enough ~
to get its way; and this has happened, not only be-
cause abundant opportunities for resistance arise from -
the methods of doing business, but still more because
no distinct impulse or mandate towards any particular
settlement of these questions has been received from
the country. It is not for Congress to go faster than
the people. When the country knows and speaks its
mind, Congress will not fail to act.” The significance
of this reply lies in its pointing to a fundamental
difference between the conception of the respective
positions and duties of a representative body and of

202 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

the nation at large entertained by Americans, and the
_ conception which has hitherto prevailed in Europe.
Europeans have thought of a legislature as belonging to
the governing class. In America there is no such class.
Europeans think that the legislature ought to consist of
the best men in the country, Americans that it should
be a fair average sample of the country.. Europeans
think that it ought to lead the nation, Americans that
it ought to follow the nation.

Without some sort of organization, an assembly of
three hundred and thirty men would be a mob, so
necessity has provided in the system of committees a
substitute for the European party organization. This
system of committees will be explained in next chapter ;
for the present it is enough to observe that when a
matter which has been (as all bills are) referred to a
committee, comes up in the House to be dealt with
there, the chairman of the particular committee is
treated as a leader pro hac wice, and members who
knew nothing of the matter are apt to be guided by his
speech or his advice given privately. If his advice is
not available, or is suspected because he belongs to the
opposite party, they seek direction from the member
in charge of the bill, if he belongs to their own party, or
- from some other member of the committee, or from
some friend whom they trust. When a debate arises
unexpectedly on a question of importance, members
are often puzzled how to vote. The division being
taken, they get some one to move a call of yeas and
nays, and while this slow process goes on, they scurry
about asking advice as to their action, and give their
votes on the second calling over if not ready on first.
If the issue is one of serious consequence to the
party, a recess is demanded by the majority, say for two

CHAP, XIV THE HOUSE AT WORK 203

hours. The House then adjourns, each party “ goes
into caucus” (the Speaker possibly announcing the
fact), and debates the matter with closed doors. Then
the House resumes, and each party votes solid accord-
ing to the determination arrived at in caucus. In spite
of these expedients, surprises and scratch votes are not
uncommon,

I have spoken of the din of the House of Repre-
sentatives, of its air of restlessness and confusion, con-
trasting with the staid gravity of the Senate, of the
absence of dignity both in its proceedings and in the
bearing and aspect of individual members. All these
things notwithstanding, there is something impressive
about it, something not unworthy of the continent for
which it legislates.

This huge gray hall, filled with perpetual clamour,
this multitude of keen and eager faces, this ceaseless
coming and going of many feet, this irreverent public,
watching from the galleries and forcing its way on to
the floor, all speak to the beholder’s mind of the mighty
democracy, destined in another century to form one
half of civilized mankind, whose affairs are here de-
bated. If the men are not great, the interests and
the issues are vast and fateful. Here, as so often in
America, one thinks rather of the future than of the
present. Of what tremendous struggles may not this
hall become the theatre in ages yet far distant, when
the parliaments of Europe have shrunk to insignificance ?

CHAPTER XV
THE COMMITTEES OF CONGRESS

THE most abiding difficulty of free government is to get
large assemblies to work promptly and smoothly either
for legislative or executive purposes. We perceive this
difficulty i in primary assemblies of thousands of citizens,
like those of ancient Athens or Syracuse ; we see it again
in the smaller representative assemblies of modern coun-
tries. Three methods of overcoming it have been tried.
One is to leave very few and comparatively simple ques-
tions to the assembly, reserving all others for a smaller and
more permanent body, or for executive officers. This was
the plan of the Romans, where the comitza (primary
assemblies) were convoked only to elect magistrates and
pass laws, which were short, clear, and submitted en bloc,
without possibility of amendment, for a simple Yes or No. -
Another method is to organize the assemblies into well-
defined parties, each recognizing and guided by one or
more leaders, so that on most occasions and for most
purposes the rank and file of members exert no volition
of their own, but move like battalions at the word of
command. This has been the English system since
about the time of Queen Anne. It was originally
worked by means of extensive corruption; and not till
this phase was passing away did it become an object of

CHAP, Xv THE COMMITTEES OF CONGRESS 205

admiration to the world. Latterly it has been reproduced
in the parliaments of most modern European states and
of the British colonies. The third method, which admits
of being more or less combined with the second, is to
divide the assembly into a number of smaller bodies to
which legislative and administrative questions may be
referred, either for final determination or to be examined
and réported on to the whole body. This is the system of
committees, applied to some small extent in England,
to a larger extent in France under the name of bureaua,
and most of all in the United States. Some account of
its rules and working there is essential to a comprehen-
sion of the character of Congress and of the relations of
the legislative to the executive branch of the Federal
Government.

When Congress first met in 1789, both Houses found
themselves, as the State legislatures had theretofore
been and still are, without official members and with-
out leaders.1 The Senate occupied itself chiefly with
executive business, and appointed no standing com-
mittees until 1816. The House however had bills to
discuss, plans of taxation to frame, difficult questions
of expenditure, and particularly of the national debt,
to consider. For want of persons whose official duty
required them, like English ministers, to run the
machine by drafting schemes and bringing the raw
material of its work into shape, it was forced to appoint
committees. At first there were few; even in 1802 we
find only five. As the numbers of the House increased
and more business flowed in, additional committees were
appointed ; and as the House became more and more

1 The Congress of the Confederation (1781-88) had been a sort of
diplomatic congress of envoys from States, and furnished few precedents
available for the Congress under the new constitution.

206 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

oceupied by large political questions, minor matters
were more and more left to be settled by these select
bodies. Like all legislatures, the House constantly
sought to extend its vision and its grasp, and the easiest
way to do this was to provide itself with new eyes and
new hands in the shape of further committees. The
members were not, like their contemporaries in the
English House of Commons, well-to-do men, mostly
idle; they were workers and desired to be occupied.
It was impossible for them all to speak in the House ;
but all could talk in a committee. Every permanent
body cannot help evolving some kind of organization.
Here the choice was between creating one ruling com-
mittee which should control all business, like an English
ministry, and distributing business among a number of
committees, each of which should undertake a special class
of subjects. The latter alternative was recommended,
not only by its promising a useful division of labour,
but by its recognition of republican equality. It there-
fore prevailed, and the present elaborate system grew
slowly to maturity.

To avoid the tedious repetition of details, I have
taken the House of Representatives and its committees
for description, because the system is more fully de-
veloped there than in the Senate. Buta very few words
on the Senate may serve to prevent misconceptions.

There were in 1888 forty-one standing Senate
committees, appointed for two years, being the period
of a Congress! They and their chairmen are chosen
not by the presiding officer but by the Senate itself,

1 Although the Senate is a permanent body, its proceedings are for
some purposes regulated with reference to the re-election every two years
of the House ; just as in England the peers are summoned afresh at the
beginning of each Parliament, although they, except the Scotch repre-
sentative peers, sit for life.

CHAP. Xv THE COMAITT. EES OF CONGRESS 207

voting by ballot. Practically they are selected by a
caucus of the party majority meeting in secret conclave,
and then carried wholesale by vote in' the Senate.
Each consists of from three to eleven members, the most
common numbers being seven and nine, and all senators
sit on more than one committee, some upon four or
more. The chairman is appointed by the Senate and not
by the committees themselves. There are also select
committees appointed, for a special purpose and last-
ing for one session only.’ Every bill introduced goes
after its first and second reading (which are granted as
of course) to a standing committee, which examines
and amends it, and reports it back to the Senate.

There were in the fiftieth Congress (1888) fifty-four
Standing committees of the House, 2.¢. committees ap-
pointed under standing regulations, and therefore regu-
larly formed at the beginning of every Congress. Each
committee consists of from three to sixteen. members,
eleven and thirteen being the commonest numbers.’
Every member of the House is placed on some one
committee, and few on more than one. Besides these,
select committees on particular subjects of current
interest are appointed from time to time. In the forty-
ninth Congress there were seven such committees. A
complete list of the committees will be found at the end
of this chapter. The most important standing com-
mittees are the following :—Ways ard means; approp-
riations ; elections; banking and currency; accounts;
rivers and harbours; judiciary (including changes in
private law as well as in courts of justice) ; railways and
canals; foreign affairs; naval affairs; military affairs ;

1 In January 1888 there were seven such committees.

2 The committee rooms are smaller than those of the British
Parliament ; they are carpeted and furnished like private apartments.

208 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1

public lands; agriculture; claims; and the several
committees on the expenditures of the various depart-
ments of the administration (war, navy, etc.)

The members of every standing committee are nomi-
nated by the Speaker at the beginning of each Congress,
and sit through its two sessions ; those of a select com-
mittee also by the Speaker, after the committee has been
ordered by the House. A select committee lasts only
for the session. In pursuance of the rule that the
member first named shall be chairman, the Speaker has
also the selection of all the chairmen.

To some one of these standing eonimittess each and
every bill is referred. Its second as well as its first
reading is granted as of course, and without debate, since
there would be no time to discuss the immense number _
of bills presented. When read a second time it is re-
ferred under the general rules to a committee; but
doubts often arise as to which is the appropriate com-
mittee, because a bill may deal with a subject common
to two or more jurisdictions, or include topics some of
which belong to one jurisdiction, others to another.
The disputes which may in such cases arise between
several committees lead to keen debates and divisions,
because the fate of the measure may depend on which
of two possible paths it is made to take, since the one
may bring it before a tribunal of friends, the other
before a tribunal of enemies. Such disputes are, de-
termined by the vote of the House itself”

Not having been discussed, much less affirmed in
principle, by the House, a bill comes before its com-
mittee with no presumption in its favour, but rather as
& shivering ghost stands before Minos in the nether
world. It is one of many, and for the most a sad fate is
reserved. The committee may take evidence regarding

CHAP. XV THE COMMITTEES OF CONGRESS 209

it, may hear its friends and its opponents. They usually
do hear the member who has introduced it, since it
seldom happens that he has himself a ‘seat on the
committee. Members who are interested approach the
committee and state their case there, not in the House,
because they know that the House will have neither
time nor inclination to listen. The committee can amend
the bill as they please, and although they cannot form-
ally extinguish it, they can practically do so by report-
ing adversely, or by delaying to report it till late in the
Session, or by not reporting it at all.

In one or other of these ways nineteen-twentieths
of the bills introduced meet their death, a death which
the majority doubtless deserve, and the prospect of
which tends to make members reckless as regards both
the form and the substance of their proposals. A motion:
may be made in the House that the committee do
report forthwith, and the House can of course restore
the bill, when reported, to its original form. But these
expedients rarely succeed, for few are the measures which
excite sufficient interest to induce an impatient and over-
burdened assembly to take additional work upon its own
shoulders or to overrule the decision of a committee.

The deliberations of committees are usually secret.
Evidence is frequently taken with open doors, but the
newspapers do not report it, unless the matter excite
public interest ; and even the decisions arrived at are
often noticed in the briefest way. It is out of order to
canvass the proceedings of a committee in the House
until they have been formally reported to it; and the
report submitted does not usually-state ‘how the mem-
bers have voted, or contain more than a very curt out-
line of what has passed. No member speaking in the
House is entitled to reveal anything further.

VOL. I P

210 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

A committee have technically no right to initiate a
bill,| but as they can either transform one referred to
them, or, if none has been referred ‘which touches
the subject they seek to deal with, can procure one
to be brought in and referred to them, their command
of their own province is unbounded. Hence the
character of all the measures that may be passed or
even considered by the House upon a particular branch
of legislation depends on the composition of the com-
mittee concerned with that branch. Some committees,
such as those on naval and military affairs, and those on
the expenditure of the several departments, deal with
administration rather than legislation. They have power
to summon the officials of the departments before them,
and to interrogate them as to their methods and conduct.
Authority they have none, for officials are responsible
only to their chief, the President; but the power of
questioning is sufficient to check if not to guide the
action of a department, since imperative statutes may
follow, and the department, sometimes desiring legisla-
tion and always desiring money, has strong motives
for keeping on good terms with those who control
legislation and the purse. It is through these com-
mittees chiefly that the executive and legislative
branches of government touch one another. Yet the
‘ contact, although the most important thing in a govern-
ment, is the thing which the nation least notices, and
has the scantiest means of watching.

The scrutiny to which the administrative committees
subject the departments is so close and constant as to
occupy much of the time of the officials and seriously
- interfere with their duties. Not only are they often
summoned to give evidence: they are* required to
furnish minute reports on. matters which a member of

CHAP, XV THE COMMITTEES OF CONGRESS 211

Congress could ascertain for himself. Nevertheless the
House committees are not certain to detect abuses or
peculation, for special committees of the Senate have
repeatedly unearthed dark doings which had passed un-
suspected the ordeal of a House investigation. After
a bill has been debated and amended by the committee
it is reported back to the House, and is taken up when
that committee is called in its order. One hour is
allowed to the member whom his fellow committee-men
have appointed to report. He seldom uses the whole
of this hour, but allots part of it to other members,
opponents as well as friends, and usually concludes by
moving the previous question. This precludes subse-
quent amendments and leaves only an hour before the vote
is taken. As on an average each committee (excluding
the two or three great ones) has only two hours out of
the whole ten months of Congress allotted to it to present
and have discussed all its bills, it is plain that few
measures can be considered, and each but shortly, in the
House. The best chance of pressing one through is
under the rule which permits the suspension of standing
orders by a two-thirds majority during the last six days
of the session.

What are the results of this system ?

It destroys the unity of the House as a legislative
body. Since the practical work of shaping legislation is
done in the committees, the interest of members centres
there, and they care less about the proceedings of the
whole body. It is as a committee man that a member
does his real work. In fact the House has become
not so, much a legislative assembly as a huge panel
from which committees are selected.

It prevents the capacity of the best members from
being brought to bear upon any one piece of legislation,

212 .THE NAFIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

however important. The men of most ability and
experience are chosen to be chairmen of the committees,
or to sit on the two or three greatest. For other
committees there remains only the rank and file of
the House, a rank and file half of which is new at
the beginning of each Congress. Hence every com-
mittee (except the aforesaid two or three) is composed
of ordinary persons, and it is impossible, save by
creating a special select committee, to get together what
would be called in England “a strong committee,” 2.¢.
one where half or more of the members are exception-
ally capable. The defect is not supplied by discussion
in the House, for there is no time for such discussion.

It cramps debate. Every foreign observer has
remarked how little real debate, in the European sense, |
takes place in the House of Representatives. The very
habit of debate, the expectation of debate, the idea that
debate is needed, have vanished, except as regards ques-
tions of revenue and expenditure, because the centre of
gravity has shifted from the House to the committees.

It lessens the cohesion and harmony of legislation.
Each committee goes on its own way with its own bills
just as though it were legislating for one planet and
the other committees for others. Hence a want of
policy and method in congressional action. The advance
is haphazard; the parts have little relation to one
another or to the whole.

It gives facilities for the exercise of underhand and
even corrupt influence. In a small committee the voice
of each member is well worth securing, and may be
secured with little danger of a public scandal. The
press cannot, even when the doors of committee
rooms stand open, report the proceedings of fifty
bodies; the eye of the nation cannot follow and mark

CHAP, XV THE COMMITTEES OF CONGRESS 213

what goes on within them; while the subsequent pro-
ceedings in the House are too hurried to permit a
ripping up there of suspicious bargains struck in the
purlieus of the Capitol, and fulfilled by votes given
in a committee. As will be seen subsequently, I do
not think that corruption, in its grosser forms, is rife
at Washington. When it appears, it appears chiefly in
the milder form of reciprocal jobbing or (as it is called)
“‘log-rolling.” But the arrangements of the committee
system have produced and sustain the class of profes-
sional “lobbyists,” men, and women too, who make it
their business to “see” members and procure, by per-
suasion, importunity, oy the use of inducements, the
passing of bills, public as well as private, which involve
gain to their promoters.

It reduces responsibility. In England, if a bad Act
is passed or a good bill rejeeted, the blame falls primarily
upon the ministry in power whose command of the
majority would have enabled them to defeat it, next
upon the party which supported the ministry, then upon
the individual members who are officially recorded to have,
“backed” it and voted for it in the House, The fact that
a select committee recommended it—and comparatively
few bills pass through a select committee—would not be
held to excuse the default of the ministry and the
majority. But in the United States there is no ministry
to be blamed, for the cabinet officers do not sit in
Congress ; the House cannot be blamed because it has
only followed the decision of its committee ; the com-
mittee is a comparatively obscure body, whose members
are usually too insignificant to be worth blaming. The
chairman is often a man of note, but the people have no
leisure to watch fifty chairmen, they know Congress
and Congress only; they cannot follow the acts of

214 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PARTI

those to whom. Congress chooses to delegate its functions.
No discredit attaches to the dominant party, because
they could not control the acts of the eleven men in the
committee room. Thus public displeasure rarely finds
a victim, and everybody concerned is relieved from the
wholesome dread of damaging himself and his party
by negligence, perversity, or dishonesty. Only when a
scandal has arisen so serious as to demand investigation
is the responsibility of the member to his constituents
and the country brought duly home.

It lowers the interests of the nation in the proceedings
of Congress.’ Except in exciting times, when large
questions have to be settled, the bulk of real business is
done not in the great hall of the House but in this
labyrinth of committee rooms and the lobbies that
surround them. What takes place in view of the
audience is little more than a sanction, formal indeed
but hurried and often heedless, of decisions procured
behind the scenes, whose mode and motives remain
undisclosed. Hence people cease to watch Congress
with that sharp eye which every principal ought to keep
fixed on his agent. Acts pass unnoticed, whose results

1 “The doubt and confusion of thought which must necessarily exist in
the minds of the vast majority of voters as to the best way of exerting their
will in influencing the action of an assembly whose organization is so
complex, whose acts are apparently so haphazard, and in which responsi-
bility is spread so thin, throws constituencies into the hands of local
politicians who are more visible and tangible than arg the leaders of Congress,
and generates the while a profound distrust of Congress as a body whose
actions cannot be reckoned beforehand by any standard of promises made
at elections or any programmes announced by conventions. Constituencies
can watch and understand a few banded leaders who display plain
purposes and act upon them with promptness ; but they cannot watch or
understand forty odd standing committees, each of which goes its own way
in doing what it can without any special regard to the pledges of either of
the parties from which its membership is drawn.”——-Woodrow Wilson,
Congressional Government, a lucid and interesting book from which I have
derived much help in this and the two following chapters.

CHAP, XV THE COMMITTEES OF CONGRESS 215

are in a few months discovered to be so grave that the
newspapers ask how it happened that they were allowed
to pass.

The country of course suffers from the want of the

light and leading on public affairs which debates in
Congress ought to supply. But this is perhaps more
fairly chargeable to defects of the House which the
committees are designed to mitigate than to the com-
mittees themselves. The time which the committee
work leaves for the sittings of the House is long enough
to permit due discussion did better arrangements exist
for conducting it.
It throws power into the hands of the chairmen
of committees, especially, of course, of those which deal
with finance and with great material interests. They
become practically a second set of ministers, before
whom the departments tremble, and who, though they
can neither appoint nor dismiss a post-master or a tide-
waiter, can by legislation determine the policy of the
branch of administration which they oversee. This
' power is not necessarily accompanied by responsibility,
because like everything else about the committees, it is
largely exercised in secret. Besides, as an able writer
remarks, “the more power is divided, the more irre-
Sponsible it becomes. The petty character of the leader-
ship of each committee contributes towards making its
despotism sure by making its duties uninteresting.” *

It enables the House to deal with a far greater
number of measures and subjects than could otherwise
be overtaken ; and has the advantage of enabling evi-
dence to be taken by those whose duty it is to re-shape
or amend a bill. It replaces the system of interrogating
ministers in the House which prevails in most European

1 Congressional Government, p. 94.

216 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

chambers; and enables the working of the administrative
departments to be minutely scr utinized.

It sets the members of the House to work for which
their previous training has fitted them much better
than for either legislating or debating “in the grand
style.” They are shrewd keen men of business, apt for
talk in committee, less apt for wide views of policy and
elevated discourse in an assembly. The committees are
therefore good working bodies, but bodies which
confirm congressmen in the intellectual habits they
bring with them instead of raising them to the higher
‘platform of national questions and interests.

On the whole, it may be said that under’ this
system the House despatches a vast amount of work and
does the negative part of it, the killing off of worthless
bills, in a thorough way. Were the committees abolished
and no other organization substituted, the work could
not be done. But much of it, including most of the
private bills, ought not to come before Congress at all ;
and the more important part of what remains, viz. public
legislation, is dealt with by methods securing neither the
pressing forward of the measures most needed, nor the
due debate of those that are pressed forward.

Why, if these mischiefs exist, is the system of
committee legislation maintained ?

It is maintained because none better has been, or, as
most people think, can be devised. ‘‘ We have,” say
the Americans, “three hundred and twevity-five members
in the House, most of them eager to speak, nearly all of
them giving constant &4ttendance. The bills brought in
are so numerous that in our two sessions, one of seven
or eight months, the other of three months, not one-
twentieth could be fairly discussed on second reading
or in committee of the Whole. If even this twentieth

CHAP. XV THE COMMITTEES OF CONGRESS 217

were discussed, no time would remain for supervision of
the departments of State. That supervision itself must,
gince it involves the taking of evidence, ‘be conducted
by committees and not by the whole House. In England
you have one large and strong committee, viz. the
ministry of the day, which undertakes all the more
important business, and watches even the bills of private
members. Your House of Commons could not work
for a single sitting without such a committee, as is
proved by the fact than when you are left for a little
without a ministry, the House adjourns. We can-
not have such a committee, because no office - holder
sits in Congress. Neither can we organize the House
under leaders, because prominent men have among us
little authority, since they are unconnected with the
executive, and derive no title from the people.’
Neither can we create a ruling committee of the
majority, because this would be disliked as an undemo-
cratic and tyrannical institution. Hence our only
course is to divide the unwieldy multitude into small
bodies capable of dealing with particular subjects. Hach
of them is no doubt powerful in its own sphere, but that
sphere is so small that no grave harm can result. The
Acts passed may not be the best possible ; the legislation
of the year may resemble a patchwork quilt, where each
Piece is different in colour and texture from the rest.

1 [nu England the prime minister and the leader of the Opposition
(often an ex-prime minister) have been recognized as leaders not only
by the candidates who at the last preceding general election have declared
their willingness to support one or other, but also by the rank and file
of their respective parties, These leaders have thus a sort of right to
the allegiance of their followers, though a right which they may forfeit. In
America no candidate pledges himself to support a particular congressional
leader. It would be thought unbecoming in him to do so. His allegiance
is to the party, and his constituents do not expect him to support any
given person, however eminent.

218 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

But as we do not need much legislation, and as nearly the
whole field of ordinary private law lies outside the province
of Congress, the mischief is slighter than you Europeans
expect. If we made legislation easier, we might have
too much of it; and in trying to give it the more
definite character you suggest, we might make it too
bold and sweeping. Be our present system bad or good,
it is the only system possible under our Constitution,
and the fact that it was not directly created by that
instrument, but has been evolved by the experience of a
hundred years, shows how strong must be the tendencies
whose natural working has produced it.”

NOTE to CHAPTER XV.

List of ‘STANDING CosmiITTEES of the House in the Fiftieth
Congress, First Session. (Corrected to Jan. 15, 1888.)

On Elections; Ways and Means; Appropriations ; Judiciary ;
Banking and Currency; Coinage, Weights and Measures; Com-
merce; Rivers and‘ Harbours; Merchant Marine and Fisheries ;
Agriculture ; Foreign Affairs; Military Affairs; Naval Affairs ;
Post Office and Post Roads; Public Lands; Indian Affajrs; Ter-
ritories ; Railways and Canals; Manufactures ; Mines and Mining ;
Public Buildings and Grounds; Pacific Railroads; Levees and
Improvements of the Mississippi River; Education; Labour;
Militia ; Patents ; Invalid Pensions ; Pensions ; Claims ; War Claims ;
Private Land Claims; District of Columbia; Revision of the Laws ;
Expenditures in the State Department; Do, Treasury Depart-.
ment; Do., War Department; Do., Navy Department; Do.,
Post Office Department; Do., Interior Department ; Do.,’ Depart-
ment of Justice ; Do., Public Buildings ; Rules ; Accounts ; Mileage ;
Library ; Printing; Enrolled Bills; Reform in the Civil Service ;
Election of President, Vice-President, and Representatives ; Elev-
enth Census ; Indian Depredation Claims; Ventilation and Acoustics ;
Alcoholic Liquor Traffic.

There were also in Jan, 1888 seven Select Committees.

CHAPTER XVI
CONGRESSIONAL LEGISLATION

LxGIsLATION is more specifically and exclusively the
business of Congress than it is the business of govern-
ing parliaments such as those of England, France, and
- Italy. We must therefore, in order to judge of the
excellence of Congress as a working machine, examine
the quality of the legislation which it turns out.

Acts of Congress are of two kinds, public and private.
Passing by private acts for the present, though they
occupy a large part of congressional time,’ let us con-
sider public acts. These are of two kinds, those
which deal with the law or its administration, and
those which deal with finance, that is to say, provide
for the raising and application of revenue. I devote
this chapter to the former class, and the next to the
latter.

: There are many points of view from which one may
regard the work of legislation. I suggest a few only,
in respect of which the excellence of the work may be
tested ; and propose to ask: What security do the legis-
lative methods and habits of Congress offer for the
attainment of the following desirable objects ? viz. :—

1 Some remarks on private bills will be found in Note A to as
chapter at the end of this volume.

220 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

1. The excellence of the substance of a bill, z.c. its
tendency to improve the law and promote the public
welfare.

2. The excellence of the form of a bill, ze. its arrange-
ment and the scientific precision of its language.

3. The harmony and consistency of an act with the
other acts of the same session.

4, The due examination and sifting in debate of a bill.

5. The publicity of a bill, z.e. the bringing it to the
knowledge of the country at large, so that public opinion
may be fully expressed regarding it.

6. The honesty and courage of the legislative as-
sembly in rejecting a bill, however likely to be popular,
which their judgment disapproves.

7. The responsibility of some person or body ‘of
persons for the enactment of a measure, 2.e. the fixing
on the right shoulders of the praise for passing a good,
the blame for passing a bad, act.

The criticisms that may be passed on American
practice under the preceding heads will be made: clearer
by a comparison of English practice. Let us therefore
first see how English bills and acts stand the tests we
are to apply to the work of Congress.

In England public bills fall into two classes,—those .
brought in by the ministry of the day as responsible
advisers of the sovereign, and those brought in by
private members. In point of law and in point of form
there is no difference between these classes, and the
only way of ascertaining to which class a given bill
belongs is by looking to see whether the names on the
back of it are those of ordinary private members or of
the official servants of the Crown.’ Practically there is'

1 If a private member after bringing in a bill accepts office under
the Crown, custom requires that he should either induce his colleagues

*

CHAP, XVI CONGRESSIONAL LEGISLATION 221

all the difference in the world, because a government
bill has behind it the responsibility of the ministry,
and presumably the weight of-the majority which
keeps the ministry in office. The ministry dispose
of a half or more of the working time of the
House, and have therefore much greater facilities for
pushing forward their bills. Nearly all the most im-
portant bills, which involve large political issues, are
government bills, so that the hostile critic of a private
member’s bill will sometimes argue that the House
ought not to permit the member to proceed with it,
because it is too large for any unofficial hands. This
premised, we may proceed to the seven points above
mentioned.

1. In England, as the more important bills are
government bills, their policy is sure to have been care-
fully weighed. The ministry have every motive for care,
because the fortunes of a first-class bill are their own
fortunes. If it is rejected, they fall. A specially difti-
cult bill is usually framed by a committee of the cabinet,
and then debated by the cabinet as a whole before it
appears in Parliament. Minor bills are settled in the
departments by the parliamentary head with his staff
of permanent officials. A private member has not
these advantages : but if he is wise he submits his bill
before it is printed to three or four judicious friends,
profits by their criticism, and obtains a promise of their
Support.

2. In England, government bills are prepared by
the official government draftsmen, two eminent lawyers
with several assistants, who constitute an office for this
purpose. Private members who are lawyers often draft

to take it up, in which case it becomes a government bill, or else
relinquish the charge of it to some private member.

222 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

their own bills; those who are not generally employ a
barrister. The drafting of government bills has much
improved of late years, and the faults of form observ-
able in British Acts are chiefly due to amendments
made in committee of the whole House, which are often
prepared and inserted in a hurry.

3. The harmony of one government bill with others
of the same session is secured by the care of the official
draftsmen, as well as by the fact that all emanate from
one and the same ministry. No such safeguards exist
in the case of private members’ bills, but it is of course
the duty of the ministry to watch these legislative
essays, and get Parliament to strike out of any
one of them whatever is inconsistent with another
measure passed or intended to be passed in the same
session.

4. Difficult and complicated bills which raise no
political controversy are sometimes referred to a
select committee, which goes through them and
reports them as amended to the House.. They are
afterwards considered, and often fully debated, first
in committee of the Whole; and then by the House
on the stage of report (i.e. report from committee of the
Whole to the House). Latterly such bills have begun
to be referred to what are called Grand Committees,
ae. committees of at least fifty appointed in each
session for the consideration of particular kinds of
business. Discussion in these committees replaces
the discussion in committee of the Whole; but the bills
come before the House on report for further debate.
Many bills, however, never go before select or. grand
committees, but are dealt with by the House itself
in the two last-mentioned stages. While measures
which excite political feeling or touch any powerful

CHAP, XVI CONGRESSIONAL LEGISLATION 223

interest (such as that of landowners or railroads or
liquor-dealers) are exhaustively debated, others may
slip through unobserved, The enormous pressure of
work and the prolixity with which some kinds of busi-
ness are discussed, involve the hurrying other business
through with scant consideration.

5. “Except in the case of discussions at unseasonable
hours, the proceedings of Parliament are so far reported
in the leading newspapers and commented on by them
that bills, even those of private members, generally be-
come known to those whom they may concern. There
is usually a debate on the second reading, and this debate
attracts notice. Members often receive from persons
previously unknown to them suggestions regarding
pending measures.

6. A government bill is, by the law of its being,
exposed to the hostile criticism of the Opposition, who
have an interest in discrediting the ministry by dis-
paraging their work. As respects private members’ bills,
it is the undoubted duty of some minister to watch
them, and to procure their amendment or rejection if he
finds them faulty. This duty is discharged less faith-
fully than might be wished, but perhaps as well as can
be expected. from weak human nature, often tempted
to conciliate a supporter or an “‘interest” by allowing
a measure to go through which ought to have been
stopped.! Private members are generally alert in watch-
ing one another’s bills ; and the rules of the House of
Commons enable them to defeat a measure by objecting
to its progress at certain hours.

1 Now and then a bill passes which sensible men of both parties dis-
approve, because its advocates are more strenuous than its opponents,
and the notion that some popular sentiment favours it deters either party
from resistance,

224 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

Responsibility for everything done in the House
rests upon the ministry of the day, because they are
the leaders of the majority. If they allow a private
member to passa bad bill, if they stop him when trying
to pass a good bill, they are in theory no less culpable

than if they pass a bad bill of their own. Accordingly,

when the second reading of a measure of any conse-
quence is moved, it is the duty of some member of the
ministry to rise, with as little delay as possible, and
state whether the ministry support it, or oppose it,
or stand neutral. Standing neutral is, so far as respon-
sibility to the country goes, practically the same thing
as supporting. The Opposition, as an organized body,
are not expected to express their opinion on any bills
except those of high political import. Needless to say,
private members are also held strictly responsible for
the votes they give, these votes being all reeorded
and published next morning. Of course both parties
claim praise or receive blame from the country in respect
of their attitude towards bills of moment, and when a
session has produced few or feeble Acts the Opposition
charge the Ministry with sloth or incompetence.

The rules and usages I have described constitute
valuable aids to legislation, and the quality of English
and Scottish legislation, take it all and all, is good ; that
is to say, the statutes are such as public opinion demands,
and are well drawn for the purposes.they aim at.
The chief complaints against the House of Commons
as a legislative body! are that it is too indulgent to
tediousness, and that, owing to its vast and multifarious

1 Of course there are often blemishes of detail in Acts of Parliament,
which might be removed in a second chamber, djd England possess a
second chamber well qualified for the duty of revision, and wishful to
discharge it.

CHAP. XVI CONGRESSIONAL LEGISLATION 225

business, it leaves serious questions unsettled till they
have grown more serious, and require remedies more
violent than might have at first sufficed.

Let us now “apply the same tests to the legislation
of Congress. What follows refers primarily to the House,
but is largely true of the Senate, because in the Senate
also the-committees play an important part.

The first difference which strikes us between Parlia-
ment and Congress is that in neither House of Congress
are there any government bills. All measures are brought
in by private members because all members are private.
The nearest approach to the government bill of England
is one brought in by a leading member of the majority
in pursuance of a resolution taken in the congres-
sional caucus of that majority. This seldom happens.
One must therefore compare the ordinary congres-

‘sional bill with the English private member’s bill rather

than with a government measure, and expect to find
it marked by the faults that mark the former class.
The second difference is that whereas in England
‘the criticism and amendment of a bill takes place in
committee of the Whole, in the House of Representa-
tives it takes place in a small committee of six-
teen members or less, usually of eleven. In the
Senate also the committees do most of the work, but
the committee of the yee occasionally debates a bill.
pretty fully.

Premising these dissimilarities, 1 go to the seven
points before ; mentioned.

1. The excellence of the substance of a bill intro-
duced in Congress depends entirely on the wisdom and
care of its introducer. He may, if self-distrustful, take
counsel with his" political allies respecting it. But
there is no security for its representing any opinion or

VOL. I Q

226 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PARTI

;
knowledge but his own. It may affect the manage-
ment of an executive department, but the introducing
member does not command departmental information,
and will, if the bill passes, have nothing to do with the
carrying out of its provisions. On the other hand, the
officials of the government cannot submit bills; and if
they find a congressman willing to do so for them, must
leave the advocacy and conduct of the measure entirely
in his hands.

2. The drafting of a measure depends on the pains
taken and skill exerted by its author. Senate bills are
usually well drafted because many senators are experi-
enced lawyers: House bills are often crude‘ and obscure.
There does not exist either among the executive’ depart-
ments or in connection with Congress, any legal office
charged with the duty of preparing bills, or of seeing that
the form in which they pass is technically satisfactory.

8. The only security for the consistency of the
various measures of the same session is to be found in
the fact that those which affect the same matter ought
to be referred to the same ‘committee. However, it
often happens that there are two or more committees
whose spheres of jurisdiction overlap, so that of two
bills handling cognate matters, one may go to Com-
mittee A and the other to Committee B, Should
different views of policy prevail in these two bodies,
they may report to the House” bills containing
mutually repugnant provisions. There is nothing
except unusual vigilance on the part of some member
interested, to prevent both bills from passing. That
mischief from this cause is not serious arises from the
fact that out of the multitude of bills introduced, few
are-reported and still fewer become law.

4, The function of a committee of either House of

CHAP. XVI CONGRESSIONAL LEGISLATION 227

Congress extends not merely to the sifting and amend-
ing of the bills referred to it, but to practically
re-drawing them, if the committee desires any legis-
lation, or rejecting them by omitting to report them
till near the end of the session if it thinks no legis-
lation needed. Every committee is in fact a small
bureau” of legislation for the matters lying within its
jurisdiction. It has for this purpose the advantage of
time, of the right to take evidence, and of the fact
that some of its members have been selected from
their knowledge of or interest in the topics it has to
deal with. On the gther hand, it suffers from the non-
publication of its debates, and from the tendency of
all small and secret bodies to intrigues and compromises,
compromises in which general principles of policy are
sacrificed to personal feeling or selfish interest. Bills
which go in black or white come out gray. The mem-
ber who has introduced a bill may not have a seat on
the committee, and may therefore be unable to protect
his offspring. Other members of the House, masters
of the subject but not members of the committee, can
only be heard as witnesses. Although therefore there
are full opportunities for the discussion of the bill by
the committee, it often emerges in an unsatisfactory
form, or is quietly suppressed, because there is no im-
petus of the general opinion of the House or the public
to push it through. When the bill comes back to the
House the chairman or other reporting member of the
committee generally moves the previous question, after
which no amendment can be offered. Debate ceases
and the bill is promptly passed or lost. In the Senate
there is a better. chance of discussion, for the Senate,
having more time and fewer speakers, can review to
some real purpose the findings of its committees.

228 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

5. As there is no debate on the introduction or on
the second reading of a bill, the public is not necessarily
apprised of the measures which are before Congress. An
important measure is of course watched by the news-
papers and so becomes known: minor measures go
unnoticed.

6. The general good-nature of Americans, and the
tendency of members of their legislatures to oblige one
another by doing reciprocal good turns, dispose people
to let any bill go through which does not injure the
interest of a party or of a person. Such good-nature
counts for less in a committee, because a committee has
its own views and gives effect to them. But in the
House there are few views, though much impatience.
The House has no time to weigh the merits of a bill
reported back to it. Members have never heard it
debated. They know no more of ‘what passed in the
committee than the report tells them. If the measure
is palpably opposed to their party tenets, the majority
will reject it: if no party question arises they usually
adopt the view of the committee.

7. What has been said already will have shown
that except as regards bills of great importance, or
directly involving party issues, there can be little effective
responsibility for legislation. The member who brings
in a bill is not responsible, because the committee
generally alters his bill. The committee is little
observed and the details of what passed . within the
four walls of its room are not published. The great
parties in the House are but faintly responsible, because
their leaders are not bound to express an opinion,
and a vote taken on a non-partisan bill is seldom a
strict party vote. Individual members are no doubt
responsible, and a member who votes against a populay

CHAP. XVI CONGRESSIONAL LEGISLATION 229

measure, one for instance favoured by the working men,
will suffer for it. But the responsibility of individuals,
most of them insignificant, half of them destined to
vanish, like snow-flakes in a river, at the next election,
gives little security to the people.

The best defence that can be advanced for this
system is that it has been naturally evolved as a means
of avoiding worse mischiefs. It is really a plan for
legislating by a number of commissions. Each commis-
sion, receiving suggestions in the shape of bills, taking
evidence upon them, and sifting them in debate, frames
its measures and lays them before the House in a shape
which seems designed to make amendment in details
needless, while leaving the general policy to be accepted
or rejected by a simple vote of the whole body. In
this last respect the plan may be compared with that
of the Romans during the Republic, whose general as-
sembly of the people approved or disapproved of a bill
as a whole, without power of amendment, a plan which
had the advantage of making laws clear and simple.
At Rome, however, bills could be proposed only by a
magistrate upon his official responsibility ; they were
therefore comparatively few and sure to be carefully
drawn. The members of American legislative com-
missions have no special training, no official experience,
little praise or blame to look for, and no means of
securing that the overburdened House will ever come
to a vote on their proposals. There is no more agree-
ment between the views of one commission and another
than what may result from the majority in both belong-

1 The member who has taken this course is the worse off, because he
rarely has an opportunity of explaining by a speech in the House his
reason for his vote, and is therefore liable to the imputation of having
been “got at” by capitalists.

.

230 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

ing to the same party. Hence, as Mr. Wilson observes,
“The legislation of a session does not represent the
policy of either the majority or the minority: it is
simply an aggregate of the bills recommended by com-
mittees composed of members from both sides of the
House, and it is known to be usually not the work of
the majority men upon the committees, but compromise
conclusions bearing some shade or tinge of each of the
variously coloured opinions and wishes of the com-
mittee men of both parties. Most of the measures
which originate with the committees are framed with
a view of securing their easy passage by giving
them as neutral and inoffensive a character as is pos-
sible. The manifest object is to draw them, to the
liking of all factions. Hence. neither the failure nor
the success of any policy inaugurated by one of the
committees can fairly be charged to the account of
either party.”? |
Add to the conditions above described the fact that
the House in its few months of life has not time to deal
with one-twentieth of the twelve thousand bills which are
thrown upon it, that it therefore drops the enormous
majority unconsidered, though some of the best may be
in this majority, and passes many of those which it
does pass by a suspension of the rules which leaves
everything to a single vote,’ and the marvel comes to
be, not that legislation is faulty, but that an intensely
practical people tolerates such defective machinery.
Some reasons may be suggested tending to explain this
phenomenon.
Legislation is a difficult business in all free countries,
1 Congressional Government, pp. 99-101.

2-This can be done by a two-thirds vote during the last six days of a
‘session and on the first and third Mondays of each month.

CHAP. XVI CONGRESSIONAL LEGISLATION 231

and perhaps more difficult the more free the country is,
because the discordant voices are more numerous and
less under control, America has sometimes sacrificed
practical convenience to her dislike to authority.

The Americans surpass all other nations in their
power of making the best of bad conditions, getting the
largest-results out of scanty materials or rough methods.
Many things in that country work better than they
ought to work, so to speak, or could work in any other
country, because the people are shrewdly alert in mini-
mizing such mischiefs as arise from their own haste
or heedlessness, and have a great capacity for self-help.

Aware that they have-this gift, the Americans
are content to leave their political machinery un-
reformed. Persons who propose comprehensive reforms
are suspected as theorists and crotchet-mongers. The
national inventiveness, active in the spheres of
mechanics and money-making, spends little of its
force on the details of governmental methods.

The want of legislation on topics where legisla-
tion is needed breeds fewer evils than would follow in
countries like England or France where Parliament is
the only law-making body. The powers of Congress
are limited to comparatively few subjects: its failures
do not touch the general well-being of the people, nor
the healthy administration of the ordinary law.

The faults of bills passed by the House are often
cured by the Senate, where discussion is more leisurely
and thorough. The committee system produces in
‘that body also some of the same flabbiness and colour-
lessness in bills passed. But the blunders, whether
in substance or of form, of the one chamber are fre-
quently corrected by the other, and many bad bills
fail owing to a division of opinion between the Houses,

232 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

’ The President’s veto kills off some vicious measures.
He does not trouble himself about defects of form ; but
where a bill seems to him opposed to sound policy,
it is his constitutional duty to disapprove it, and to
throw on Congress the responsibility of passing it
“over his veto” by a two-thirds vote. A good Presi-
dent accepts this responsibility.

CHAPTER XVII
CONGRESSIONAL FINANCE

Finance is a sufficiently distinct and important depart-
ment of legislation to need a chapter to itself; nor does
any legislature devote a larger proportion of its time
than does Congress to the consideration of financial bills.
These are of two kinds: those which raise revenue by
taxation, and those which direct the application of the
public funds to the various expenses of the government.
At present Congress raises all the revenue it requires
by indirect taxation,’ and chiefly by duties of customs
and excise; so taxing bills are practically tariff bills,
the excise duties being comparatively little varied from
year to year.

The method of passing both kinds of bills is un-
like that of most European countries. In England,
with which, of course, America can be most easily com-
pared, although both the levying and the spending of
money are absolutely under the control of the House of
Commons, the House of Commons originates no pro-
posal for either. It never either grants money or
orders the raising of money except at the request of the
Crown. Once a year the Chancellor of the Exchequer

1 During the Civil War, direct taxes were levied ; and many other kinds
of taxes besides those mentioned in the text have been imposed at
different times.

234 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

lays béfore it, together with a full statement of the
revenue and expenditure of the past twelve months,
estimates of the expenditure for the coming twelve
months, and suggestions for the means of meeting
that expenditure by taxation or by borrowing. He
embodies these suggestions in resolutions on which,
when the House has accepted them, bills are grounded
imposing certain taxes or authorizing the raising of
a loan. The House may of course amend the bills
in details, but no private member ever proposes a
taxing bill, for it is no concern of any one’s except the
ministry to fill the public treasury. The estimates
prepared by the several administrative departments
(Army, Navy, Office of Works, Foreign Office, etc.),
and revised by the Treasury, specify the items of
proposed expenditure with much particularity, and fill
three or more bulky volumes, which are delivered to
every member of the House. These estimates are de-
bated in committee of the whole House, explanations
being required from the ministers who represent the
Treasury and the several departments, and are passed in
a long succession of separate votes.2 Members may
propose to reduce any particular grants, but not to

1 Of course a private member may carry a resolution involving
additional expenditure; but even this is at variance with the stricter
constitutional doctrine and practice ; a doctrine regarded by the statesmen
of the last generation as extremely valuable, boeause it restrains the pro-
pensity of a legislature to yield to demands emanating from sections
or classes, which may entail heavy and perhaps unprofitable charges on
the country. See the observations of the First Lord of the Treasury
in the House of Commons, March 22, 1886,

2 Complaints are sometimes made that these votes are not discussed
with sufficient fulness and minuteness, and it has been proposed to create
several special standing committees to examine each class of them more
closely. This might be a desirable addition. Three such committees have
recently been appointed. But even under the present system there are

many useful financial debates, by which some abuses are checked and in
‘which valuable suggestions are made. ,

CHAP, XVII CONGRESSIONAL FINANCE 235

increase them; no money is ever voted for the public
service except that which the Crown has asked for
through its ministers. The Crown must never ask for
more than it actually needs, and hence the ministerial
proposals for taxation are carefully calculated to raise
just so much money as will cover the estimated ex-
penses for the coming year. It is reckoned almost as
great a fault in the finance minister if he has needlessly
overtaxed the people, as if he has so undertaxed them as
to be left with a deficit. If at the end of a year a
substantial surplus appears, the taxation for next year is
reduced in proportion, supposing that the expenditure
remains the same. Every credit granted by Parliament
expires of itself at the end of the financial year.

In the United States the Secretary of the Treasury
sends annually to Congress a report containing a state-
ment of the national income and expenditure and of the
condition of the public debt, together with remarks on
the system of taxation and suggestions for its improve-
ment. He also sends what is called his Annual Letter,
enclosing the estimates, framed by the various depart-
ments, of the sums needed for the public services of the
United States during the coming year. So far the
Secretary is like a European finance minister, except
that he communicates with the chamber on paper in-
stead of making his statement and proposals orally.
But here the resemblance stops. Everything that
remains in the way of financial legislation is done solely
by Congress and its committees, the executive having
no further hand in the matter.

The business of raising money belongs to one com-
mittee only, the standing committee of Ways and
Means, consisting of eleven members. Its chairman is
always a leading man in the party which commands a

236 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

majority in the House. This committee prepares and
reports to the House the bills needed for imposing or
continuing the various customs duties, excise duties,
etc. The report of the Secretary has been referred by
the House to this committee, but the latter does not
necessarily base its bills upon or in any way regard that
report. Neither does it in preparing them start from
an estimate of the sums needed to support the public
service. It does not, because it cannot: for it does not
know what grants for the public service will be proposed
by the spending committees, since the estimates sub-
mitted in the Secretary’s letter furnish no trustworthy -
basis for a guess. It does not, for the further reason
that the primary object of customs, duties has for
many years past been not the raising of revenue, but
the protection of American industries by subjecting
foreign products to a very high tariff. At present there
are enormous duties on many classes of raw materials,
and on nearly all classes of manufactured goods, in-
cluding even books and works of art. This tariff
brings in an income far exceeding the current needs
of the government. Nearly two-thirds of the war
debt having heen paid off, the fixed charges have
shrunk to orie-third of what they were when the
present tariff was imposed, yet this tariff remains
with few modifications, and surpluses accumulate year
after year in the national treasury. The committee of
Ways and Means has therefore no motive for adapting
taxation to expenditure. The former will be always
in excess so long as the protective tariff stands, and the
protective tariff stands for commercial or political reasons
unconnected with national finance.!

1 Hitherto there has always been a means of getting rid of surpluses
by paying off debt ; but as financiers are now beginning to hold that a

CHAP, XVII CONGRESSIONAL FINANCE 237

When the revenue bills come to be debated in com-
mittee of the whole House similar causes prevent them
from being scrutinized from the purely financial point of
view. Debate turns on those items of the tariff which
involve gain or loss to influential groups. Little inquiry
is made as to the amount needed and the adaptation of
the bills to produce that amount and no more. It is
the same with ways and means bills in the Senate.
Communications need not pass between the committees
of either House and the Treasury. The person most
responsible, the person who most nearly corresponds to
an English Chancellor of the Exchequer, or a French
Minister of Finance, is the chairman of the House com-
mittee of Ways and Means. But he stands in no official
relation to the Treasury, and is not required to exchange
a word or a letter with its staff. Neither, of course, can
he count on a majority in the House. Though he is a
leading man he is not a leader, 2.e. he has no claim on the
votes of his own party, many of whom may (as happened
to Mr. Morrison in 1886) disapprove of and cause the
defeat of his proposals. That gentleman was chairinan
of the committee of Ways and Means,-and perhaps,
after the Speaker, the most considerable person in the
Democratic majority. But he was beaten in his at-
tempted reform of the tavriff.

The business of spending money belongs primarily
to two standing committees, the old committee on

certain portion of the debt ought to be kept on foot for banking and
currency purposes, much discussion has arisen as to how the accumulating
balance shall be disposed of. Hence the issues of commercial policy,
issues affecting the great manufacturing industries, dwarf questions of
revenue proper. The committee considers not which is the best and
cheapest means of raising a given sum, but how the tariff will affect
protected industries. Since there is no fear of a deficit, it drafts its bills

with no view to the raising of a particular sum, and does not care to
calculate the exact income the taxes will produce,

238 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

Appropriations and the new committee on Rivers and
Harbours, created in 1883. The committee on appro-
priations starts from, but does not adopt, the estimates
sent in by the Secretary of the Treasury, for the appro-
priation bills it prepares usually make large and often
reckless reductions in these estimates. The Rivers and
Harbours committee proposes grants of money for what
are called “internal improvements,” nominally in aid
of navigation, but practically in order to turn a
stream of public money into the State or States where
each “improvement” is to be executed. More money
is wasted in this way than what the parsimony of the
Appropriations committee can save. There are several
committees on the departments, such as those on the
navy, the army, the judiciary. There is the com-
mittee on pensions, a source of infinite waste! Each of
these proposes grants of money, not knowing nor heeding
what is being proposed by other committees, and guided
by the executive no further than the members choose.
All the expenditures recommended must be met by
appropriation bills, but into their propriety the Appro-
priations committee cannot inquire.

Every revenue bill must, of course, come before the
House ; and the House, whatever else it mayneglect, never
neglects the discussion of taxation and money grants.
These are discussed as fully as the pressure of work
permits, and are often added to by the insertion of fresh
items, which members interested in getting money voted
for a particular purpose or locality suggest. These bills
then go to the Senate, which forthwith refers them to its
committees. The Senate committee on finance deals
with revenue-raising bills; the committee on appropria-
tions with supply bills. Both sets then come before the

1 The expenditure on pensions was in 1887 $75,000,000 (£15,000,000).

CHAP, XVII CONGRESSIONAL FINANCE 239

whole Senate. Although it cannot initiate appropriation
bills, the Senate has long ago made good its claim to
amend them, and does so without stint, adding new
items and often greatly raising the total of the grants.
When the bills go back to the House, the House usually
rejects the amendments; the Senate adheres to them,
and a Conference committee is appointed, consisting of
three senators and three’ members of the House, by
which a compromise is settled, hastily and in secret, and
accepted, generally in the last days of the session, by a
hard-pressed but reluctant House. Even as enlarged by
this committee, the supply voted is usually found inade-
quate, so a Deficiency bill is introduced in the following
session, including a second series of grants to the
departments.

The European reader will ask how all this is or
can be done by Congress without frequent communi-
cation from or to the executive government. There
are such communications, for the ministers, anxious
to secure appropriations adequate for their respective
departments, talk to the chairmen and appear before
the committees to give evidence as to departmental
needs. But in Congress itself they never now appear,
nor does Congress ‘look to them for guidance as
in the early days it looked to Hamilton and Gallatin.
If the House cuts down their estimates they turn to
the Senate and beg it to restore the omitted items; if
the Senate fail them, the only resource left is a Deficiency
bill in the next session. If one department is so starved
as to be unable to do its work, while another obtains
lavish grants which invite jobbery. or -waste, it is the
committees, not the executive, whom the people ought
to blame. If, by a system of log-rolling, vast sums
are wasted upon useless public works, no minister has

240 _ THE:- NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

any opportunity to interfere, any right to protest. A
minister cannot, as in England, bring Congress to reason
by 4 threat of resignation, for it would make no oer
ence to Congress if the whole cabinet were to resign.’

What I inn stated may be summarized as follows :

* There is practically no connection between the
policy of revenue raising and the policy of revenue
spending, for these are left to different committees whose
views may be opposed, and the majority in the House
has no recognized leaders to remark the discrepancies or
make one or other view prevail. In the forty-ninth
Congress (1885-1887) a strong free-trader was chairman
of the tax-proposing committee on Ways and Means,
while a strong protectionist was chairman of the spend-
ing committee on. Appropriations.

There is no relation between the amount proposed
to be spent in any one year, and the amount proposed
to be raised. But for the fact that the high tariff pro-
duces a large annual surplus, a financial breakdown
would speedily ensue.

The knowledge and experience of the permanent
officials either as regards the productivity of taxes,
and the incidental benefits or losses attending their
collection, or as regards the nature of various kinds of
expenditure and their comparative utility, can be turned
to account only by interrogating these officials before
the committees. Their views are not stated in the
House by a parliamentary chief, nor tested in debate by
arguments addressed to him which he must there and
then answer.

Little check exists on the tendency of members té
deplete the public treasury by securing grants for their

1 Unless of course Congress should be so clearly in the wrong that the
‘people were roused to vigorous disapproval of its conduct.

rae CONGRESSIONAL FINANCE. 241

friends or constituents, or by putting through financial
jobs.for which they are to receive some priyate: vonsidera-
tion. If either the majority of the committee on
Appropriations or the House itself suspects a job, thé
grant proposed may be rejected. But it is the duty
of no one in particular to scent out a job, and to defeat
it by piiblic exposure.

The nation becomes so puzzled by a financial policy
varying from year to year, and controlled by no
responsible leaders, as to feel diminished interest in
congressional discussions and diminished confidence ‘in
Congress."

The result on the national finance is unfortunate.
A thoughtful American publicist remarks, “So long as
the debit side of the national account is managed by
one set of men, and the credit side by another set, both
sets working separately and in secret without public
responsibility, and without intervention on the part

1 “The noteworthy fact that even the most thorough debates in Con-
gress fail to awaken any genuine or ‘active interest in the minds of the
people has had its most striking illustrations in the course of our financial
legislation, for though the discussions which have taken place in Congress
upon financial questions have been so frequent, so protracted, and to
thorough, engrossing a large part of the time of the House on their every
recurrence, they seem in almost every instance to have made scarcely any
impression wpon the public mind. The Coinage Act of 1873, by which
silver was demonetized, had been before the country many years ere it
reached adoption, having been time and again considered by committees
of Congress, time and again printed and discussed in one shape or another,
and having finally gained acceptance apparently by sheer persistence and
importunity. The Resumption Act of 1875, too, had had a like career
of repeated considerations by committees, repeated printings and a full
discussion by Congress, and yet when the Bland Silver Bill of 1878 was
on its way through the mills of legislation, some of the most prominent
newspapers of the country declared ‘with confidence that the Resumption
Act had been passed inconsiderately and in haste ; and several members
of Congress had previously complained that the demonetization scheme of
1873 had been pushed surreptitiously through the courses of its passage,
Congress having been tricked into accepting it, doing it scarcely knew
what.”—-Woodrow Wilson, Congressional Government, p. 148.

VOL, I R

242 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PARTI

of the' executive official who is nominally responsible ;
so long as these sets, being composed largely of new men
every two years, give no attention to business except
when Congress is in session, and thus spend in prepar-
ing plans the whole time which ought to be spent in
public discussion of plans already matured, so that an
immense budget is rushed through without discussion in
a week or ten days—just so long the, finances will go
from bad to worse, no matter by what name you call
the party in power. No other nation on earth attempts
such a thing, or could attempt it without soon coming to
grief, our salvation thus far consisting in an enormous in-
come, with practically no drain for military expenditure.”

It may be replied to this criticism that the enormous
income, added to the fact that the tariff is imposed for
protection rather than for revenue, is not only the
salvation of the United States Government under the
present system, but also the cause of that system.
Were the tariff framed with a view to revenue only,
no higher taxes would be imposed than the public
service required, and a better method of balancing the
public accounts would follow. Thisis true. The present
state of things is evidently exceptional. America is
the only country in the world whose difficulty is not
to raise money but to spend it.’ Still, as our critic
remarks, Congress is contracting lax habits, and ought
to change them.

1 The Report of the Secretary of the Treasury for 1887 states the
surplus in the treasury on Ist December of that year at $55,000,000,
and estimates the surplus for the financial year ending 30th June 1888
under the law then in force at $140,000,000. For twenty-two years
there have been surpluses, the smallest of $2,344,000 in 1874, the
largest of $145,543,000 in 1882. ‘The surplus taxation for the year
ending 30th‘June 1888 was $113,000,000. The total estimated revenue

of 1887-88 was $383,000,000. The receipts frqm customs alone were
greater by $24,000,000 in 1887 than in.1886.

CHAP, XVII CONGRESSIONAL , FINANCE 243
——

Considering these faults, and considering that it is
by. preaching an adoption of British methods that the
wisest American reformers are trying to cure the defects
in the financial administration of Congress, it is odd
that English publicists should at the same moment be
suggesting the American system as a model for imita-
tion by the House of Commons. The present British
plan is probably open to the charge of‘not securing
a full parliamentary control either of the expenses or of
the administrative methods of the spending departments.
But the arrangements of Congress seem, so far as an
English observer can judge, less conducive to economy
as well as to efficiency than those of Parliament.

How comes it, if all this be true, that the finances
of America are so flourishing, and in particular that
the war debt has been paid off with such regularity
and speed that from $3,000,000,000 (£600,000,000)
in 1865, it had sunk to less than $1,200,000,000
(£240,000,000) in 18872 Doés not so brilliant a result
speak of a continuously wise and skilful management of
the national revenue ?

The paying off of the debt seems to be due to the
following causes :—

To the prosperity of the country which, with one
interval of trade depression, has for twenty years been
developing its amazing natural resources so fast as to
produce an amount of wealth which is not only greater,
but more widely diffused through the population, than
in any other part: of the world.

To the spending habits of the people, who allow
themselves luxuries such as the masses enjoy in no
other country, and therefore pay more than any other
people in the way of indirect taxation. The fact that
Federal revenue is raised by duties of customs and excise

244 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT — PARTI

makes the people far less sensible of the pressure of
taxation than they would be did they pay directly.

To the absence of the military and naval charges
which press so heavily on European states.

To the maintenance of an exceedingly high tariff at
the instance of numerous interested persons who have
obtained the public ear and can influence Congress.
Without expressing any opinion as to whether the
policy of Protection be or be not sound, one may observe
that to its acceptance, more perhaps than to any
deliberate conviction that the debt ought to be paid off,
has been due the continuance of a tariff whose huge
and constant surpluses have enabled the debt to be
reduced.

Europeans, admiring and envying the rapidity with
which the war debt has been reduced, have been dis-
posed to credit the Americans with brilliant financial
skill. That, however, which was really admirable in the
conduct Sf the American people was not their judgment
in selecting particular methods for raising money, but
their readiness to submit during and immediately after
the war to unprecedentedly heavy taxation. The in-
terests (real or supposed) of the manufacturing classes
have caused the maintenance of the tariff then imposed ;
nature, by giving the people a spending power which
has rendered the tariff marvellously productive, has
done the rest.

Under the system of congressional finance here
described America wastes millions annually. But her
wealth is so great, her revenue so elastic, that she is not
sensible of the loss. She has the glorious privilege of
youth, the privilege of committing errors without suffer-
ing from their consequences.

CHAPTER XVIII
THE RELATIONS OF THE TWO HOUSES

THE creation by the Constitution of 1789 of two
chambers in the United States, in place of the one
chamber which existed under the Confederation, has been
usually ascribed by Europeans to mere imitation of
England ; and one learned writer goes so far as to sug-
gest that if England had possessed three chambers, like
the States General of France, or four, like thé, Diet of
Sweden, a crop of three-chambered or four-chambered
legislatures would, in obedience to the example of
happy and successful England, have sprung up over the
world. There were, however, better reasons than defer-
ence to English precedents to justify the division of
Congress into two houses and no more; and so many
’ indubitable instances of such a deference may be quoted
that there is no need to hunt for others. Not to dwell
upon the fact that there were two chambers in all but
two' of the thirteen original States, the Convention of
1787 had two solid motives for fixing on this number,
a motive of principle and theory, a motive of immediate
expediency.

The chief advantage of dividing a legislature into

1 Pennsylvania and Georgia ; the former of which added a Senate in
1789, the latter in 1790. See post, Chapter XX XIX. on State Legislatures,

246 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

two branches is that the one may check the haste and
correct the mistakes of the other. This advantage is
purchased at the price of some delay, and of the weak-
ness which results from a splitting up of authority. If
a legislature be constituted of three or more branches,
the advantage is scarcely increased, the delay and weak-
ness are immensely ageravated. Two chambers can be
made to work together in a way almost impossible to
more than two. As the proverb says, “ Two's company,
three’s none.” If there be three chambers, two are sure
to intrigue and likely to combine against the third.
The dittculties of carrying a measure without sacrificing
its unity of principle, of fixing responsibility, of secur-
ing the watchful attention of the public, serious with two
chambers, become enormous with three or more.

To these considerations there was added the practical
ground that the division of Congress into two houses
supplied a means of settling the dispute which raged
between the small and the large States. The latter
contended for a representation of the States in Con-
gress proportioned to their respective populations,
the former for their equal representation as sovereign
commonwealths. Both were satisfied by the ‘plan
which created two chambers in one of which the former
principle, in the other of which the latter principle was
recognized. ‘The country remained a federation in re-
spect of the Senate, it became a nation in respect of the
House: there was no occasion for a third ehamber.

The respective characters of the two bodies are
wholly unlike those of the so-called upper and lower
chambers of Europe. In Europe there is always a
difference of political complexion, generally resting on a
- difference in personal composition. There the upper
chamber represents the aristocracy of the country, or

cuar,.xvir RELATIONS OF THE TWO HOUSES 247

the men of wealth, or the high officials, or the influence
of the Crown and Court; while the lower chamber re-
presents the multitude. Between the Senate and the
House there is no such difference. Both equally repre-
sent the people, the whole people, and nothing but the
people. The individual members come from the same
classes. of the community; and though there are more
rich men (in proportion to numbers) in the Senate than
in the House, the influence of capital is not markedly
greater. Both have been formed by the same social
influences: and the social pretensions of a senator
expire with his term of office. Both are possessed by
the same ideas, governed by the same sentiments,
equally conscious of their dependence on public opinion.
The one has never been, like the English House of
Commons, a popular pet, the other never, like the
English House of Lords, a popular bugbear.

What is perhaps stranger, the two branches of Con-
gress have not exhibited that contrast of feeling and
policy which might be expected from the different
methods by which they are chosen. In the House the
large States are predominant: nine out of thirty-eight
(less than one-fourth) return an absolute majority of
the 325 representatives. In the Senate these same
nine States have only eighteen members out of seventy-
81x, less than a fourth of the whole. In other words,
these nine States are more than sixteen times as power-
ful in the House as they are in the Senate. But as the
House has never been the organ of the large States, nor
prone to act in their interest, so neither has the Senate
been the stronghold of the small States, for American
politics have never turned upon an antagonism between
these two sets of commonwealths. Questions relating to
States’ rights and the greater or less extension of the

248 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

powers of the national government have played a leading
part in the history of the Union. But although small
States might be supposed to be specially zealous for
States’ rights, the tendency to uphold them has been
no stronger in the Senate than in the House. In one
phase of the slavery struggle the Senate happened to be
under the control of the slaveholders while the House
was not; and then of course the Senate championed the
sovereignty of the States. But this attitude was purely
accidental, and disappeared with its transitory cause.

The real differences between the two bodies have
been indicated in speaking of the Senate. They are
due to the smaller size of the latter, to the somewhat
superior capacity of its members, to the habits which its
executive functions form in individual senators, and have
formed in the whole body.

In Europe, where the question as to the utility of
second chambers is actively canvassed, two objections
are made to them, one that they deplete the first or
popular chamber of able men, the other that they induce
deadlocks and consequent stoppage of the wheels of
government. On both arguments light may be ex-
pected from American experience.

Although the -Senate does draw off from the
House many of its ablest men, it is not clear, para-
doxical as the observation may appear, that the House
would be much the better for retaining those men.
The faults of the House are mainly due, not to
want of talent among individuals, but to its defective
methods, and especially to the absence of leadership.
These are faults which the addition of twenty or thirty
able men would not cure. Some of the committees
would be stronger, and so far the work would be better
done. But the House as a whole would not (assuming

cHap.xvin RELATIONS OF THE TWO HOUSES 249

its rules and usages to remain what they are now) be
distinctly a greater power in the ‘country. On the
other hand, the merits of the Senate are largely due to
the fact that it trains to higher efficiency the ability
which it has drawn from the House, and gives that
ability a sphere in which it can develop with better
results: Were the Senate and the House thrown into
one, the country would lose more, I think much more,
by losing the Senate than it would gain by improving
the House, for the united body would have the qualities
of the House and not those of the Senate.
Collisions between the two Houses are frequent.
Each is jealous and combative. Each is prone to alter
the bills that come from the other; and the Senate in
particular knocks about remorselessly those favourite
children of the House, the appropriation bills. The fact
that one House has passed a bill goes but a little way
in inducing the other to pass it; the Senate would
reject twenty House bills as readily as one. Dead-
locks, however, disagreements over serious issues which
stop the machinery of administration, are not common.
They rarely cause excitement or alarm outside Wash-
ington, because the country, remembering previous
instances, feels sure they will be adjusted, and knows
that either House would yield were it unmistakably
condemned by public opinion. The executive govern-
ment goes on undisturbed, and the worst that can
happen is the loss of a bill which may be passed four
months later. Even as between the two bodies there
is no great bitterness in these conflicts, because the
causes of quarrel do not lie deep. Sometimes it is
self-esteem that is involved, the sensitive self-esteem
of an assembly. Sometimes one or other House is
playing for a party advantage. That intensity which

250 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

in the similar contests of Europe arises from class feel-
ing is absent, because there is no class distinction
between the two American chambers. Thus the
country seems to be watching a fencing match rather
than a combat @ outrance.

I dwell upon this substantial identity of character
in the Senate and the House because it explains the
fact, surprising to a European, that two perfectly co-
ordinate authorities, neither of which has any more
right than its rival to claim to speak for the whole
nation, manage to get along together. Their quarrels
are professional and personal rather than conflicts of
adverse principles. The two bodies are not hostile
elements in the nation, striving for supremacy, but
servants of the same master, whose word of rebuke will
quieten them.

It must, however, be also remembered that in such
countries as England, France, and Italy, the popular
chamber stands in very close relation with the executive
government, which it has virtually installed and which
it supports. A conflict between the two chambers in
such countries is therefore a conflict to which the
executive is a party, involving issues which may be of
the extremest urgency; and this naturally intensifies
the struggle. For the House of Lords in England or
the Senate in Italy to resist a demand for legislation
made by the ministry, who are résponsible for the
defence and peace of the country, and backed by the
representative House, is a more serious matter than
almost any collision between the Senate and the House
can be in America.’

1 Of course a case may be imagined in which the President should
ask for legislation, as Lincoln did during the war, and one House of
Congress should grant, the other refuse, the Acts demanded. But such

car. xvi. RELATIONS OF THE TWO HOUSES 251

The United States is the only great country in the
world in which the two Houses are really equal and co-
ordinate. Such a system could hardly work, and
therefore could not last, if the executive were the
creature of either or of both, nor unless both were in
close touch with the sovereign people.

When each chamber persists in its own view, the
regular proceeding is to appoint a committee of confer-
ence, consisting of three members of the Senate and
three of the House. These six meet in secret, and gener-
ally settle matters by a compromise, which enables each
side to retire with honour. When appropriations are
involved, a sum intermediate between the smaller one
which the House proposes to grant and the larger one
desired by the Senate is adopted. If no compromise
can be arranged, the conflict continues till one side
yields or it ends by an adjournment, which of course
involves the failure of the measure disagreed upon.
The House at one time tried to coerce the Senate
into submission by adding “riders,” as they are called,
to appropriation bills, z.e. annexing or “ tacking” (to
use the English expression) pieces of general legislation
to bills granting sums of money. This puts the Senate
in the dilemma of either accepting the unwelcome
rider, or rejecting the whole bill, and thereby with-
holding from the executive the funds it needs. This
happened in 1855 and 1856. However, the Senate stood
firm, and the House gave way. The device had pre-
viously been attempted (in 1849) by the Senate in tack-
ing a pro-slavery provision to an appropriation bill which
it was returning to the House, and it was revived by
both Houses against President Andrew Johnson in 1867.
cases are less likely to occur in America than in Europe under the

Cabinet system.

i

252 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

In a contest the Senate usually, though not in-
variably, gets the better of the House. It is smaller,
and can therefore more easily keep its majority to-
gether ; its members are more experienced; and it has
the great advantage of being permanent, whereas the
House is a transient body. The Senate can hold out,
because if it does not get its way at once against the
House, it may do so when a new House comes up to
Washington. The House cannot afford to wait, be-
cause the hour of its own dissolution is at hand.
Besides, while the House does not know the Senate
from inside, the Senate, many of whose members
have sat in the House, knows all the ‘‘ins and outs”
of its rival, can gauge its strength and-play upon its
weakness,

CHAPTER XIX
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON CONGRESS

AFTER this inquiry into the composition and working
of each branch of Congress, it remains for me to make
some observations which apply to both Houses, and
which may tend to indicate the features that distinguish
them from the representative assemblies of Europe. The
English reader must bear in mind three points which, in
following the details of the last few chapters, he may
have forgotten. The first is that Congress is not like
the Parliaments of England, France, and Italy, a sover-
eign assembly, but is subject to the Constitution, which
only the people can change. The second is, that it
neither appoints nor dismisses the executive govern-
ment, which springs directly from ‘popular election.
The third is, that its sphere of legislative action is
limited by the existence of thirty-eight governments in
the several States, whose authority is Just as well based
as its own, and cannot be curtailed by it. .

I. The choice of members of Congress is locally
limited by law and by custom. Under the Constitution
every representative and every senator must when
elected be an inhabitant of the State whence he is
‘elected. Moreover, State law has in many and custom
practically in all States, established that a representative

254 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

must be resident in the congressional district which
elects him.’ ‘The only exceptions to this practice occur
in large cities where occasionally a man is chosen who
lives in a different district of the city from that which
returns him; but such exceptions are extremely rare.
This restriction surprises a European, who thinks it
must be found highly inconvenient both to candidates,
as restricting their field of choice in looking for a con-
stituency, and to constituencies, as excluding persons,
however eminent, who do not reside in their midst. To
Americans, however, it seems so obviously reasonable
that I found very few persons, even in the best educated
classes, who would admit its policy to be disputable.
In what are we to seek the causes of this opinion ?
Firstly. In the existence of States, originally separate
political communities, still for many purposes independ-
ent, and accustomed to consider the inhabitant of another
State as almost a foreigner. A New Yorker, Pennsyl-
vanians would say, owes allegiance to New York; he
cannot feel and think as a citizen of Pennsylvania, and
cannot therefore properly represent Pennsylvanian in-
terests. This sentiment has spread by a sort of sym-
pathy, this reasoning has been applied by a sort of
analogy, to the counties, the cities, the electoral districts
of the State itself. State feeling has fostered local
feeling; the locality deems no man a fit representative
who has not by residence in its limits, and by making
it his political home, the place where he exercises his
ciyic rights, become soaked with its own local sentiment.
1 The best legal authorities hold that a provision of this kind is
invalid, because State law has no power to narrow the qualifications for
a Federal representative prescribed by the Constitution of the United
States. And Congress would probably so hold if the question arose in a

case brought before it as toa disputed election. So far as I have been
able to ascertain, the point has never arisen for determination.

cHar.x1IX GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON CONGRESS — 255

Secondly. Much of the interest felt in the proceed-
ings of Congress relates to the raising and spending of
money. Changes in the tariff may affect the industries
of a locality ; or a locality may petition for an appropri-
ation of public funds to some local public work, the
making of a harbour, or the improvement of the navi-
gation of ariver. In both cases it is thought that no
one but an inhabitant can duly comprehend the needs
or zealously advocate the demands of a neighbourhood.

Thirdly. Inasmuch as no high qualities of statesman-
ship are expected from a congressman, a district would
think it a slur to be told that it ought to look beyond
its own borders for a representative ; and as the post is
a paid one, the people feel that a good thing ought to
be kept for one of themselves rather than thrown away
on a stranger. - It is by local political work, organizing,
canvassing, and haranguing, that a party is kept going:
and this work must be rewarded.

A perusal of the chapter of the Mederalist, which
argues that one representative for 30,000 inhabitants
will sufficiently satisfy republican needs, suggests
another reflection. The writer refers to some who
held a numerous representation to be a democratic
institution, because it enabled every small district
to make its voice heard in the national Congress.
Such representation then existed in the State legis-
latures. Evidently the habits of the people were
formed by these State legislatures, in which it was a
matter of course that the people of each township or
city sent one of themselves to the assembly of the State.
When they came to return members to Congress, they
‘followed the same practice. A stranger had no means
of making himself known to them and would not think
of offering himself. That the habits of England are

256 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PARTI

different may be due, so far as the eighteenth century
is concerned, to the practice of borough-mongering,
under which candidates unconnected with the place
were sent down by some influential person, or bought
the seat from the corrupt corporation or the limited
body of freemen. Thus the notion that a stranger
might do well enough for a borough grew up, while in
counties it remained, till 1885, a maxim that a candi-
date ought to own land in the county’—the old law
required a freehold qualification somewhere—or ought
to live in, or ought at the very least (as I once heard a
candidate, whose house lay just outside the county for
which he was standing, allege on his own behalf) to look
into the county from his window while shaving in the
morning? ‘The English practice might thus seem to be

1 The old law (9 Anne, c. 5) required all members to possess a free-
hold qualification somewhere. All property qualifications were abolished
by statute in 1858.

2 The English habit of allowing a man to stand for a place with which
he is personally unconnected would doubtless be favoured by the fact
that many ministers are necessarily members of the House of Commons.
The inconvenience of excluding a man from the service of the nation
because he could not secure his return in the place of his residence would
be unendurable. No such reason exists in America, because ministers
cannot be members of Congress. In France, Germany, and Italy the
practice seems to resemble that of England, ze. many members sit for
places where they do not reside, though of course a candidate residing.
in the place he stands for has a certain advantage.

It is remarkable that the original English practice required the
member to be a resident of the county or borough which returned him
to Parliament. This is said to be a requirement at common law (wit-
ness the words “de comitatu tuo” in the writ for the election addressed
to the sheriff); and was expressly enacted by the statute 1 Henry V.
cap. 1. But already in the time of Elizabeth the requirement was not
enforced ; and in 1681 Lord Chief-Justice Pemberton ruled that ‘little
‘regard was to be had to that ancient statute 1 Henry V. forasmuch as
common practice hath been ever since to the contrary.” The statute was
repealed by 14 Geo. III. cap. 50.—See Anson, Law and Custom of the
Constitution, vol, i, p. 83; Stubbs, Constit. Hist, vol. iii, p. 424. Dr.
Stubbs observes that the object of requiring residence.in early times
was to secure “that the House of Commons should be a really repre-
sentative body.” Mr. Hearn (Government of England) suggests that

cHaP.xix GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON CONGRESS 257

an exception due to special causes, and the American
practice that which is natural to a free country, where
local self-government is fully developed and rooted in
the habits of the people. It is from their local govern-
ment that the political ideas of the American people
have been formed: and they have applied to their
State assemblies and their national assembly the customs
which grew up in the smaller area."

These are the best explanations I can give of a
phenomenon which strikes Europeans all the more be-
- cause it exists among a population more unsettled and
migratory than any in the Old World. But they leave
me still surprised at this strength of local feeling, a
feeling not less marked in the new regions of the Far
West than in the venerable commonwealths of Massa-
chusetts and Virginia. The most significant fact about
the practice in America is that one seldom hears it
there commented on as a defect of the political system.
Fierce as is the light of criticism which beats upon
every part of that system, this point, which at once
strikes the European as specially weak, remains uncen-
sured, because assumed to be part of the order of nature.

Its results are unfortunate. So far as the restriction
the requirement had to be dropped because it was hard to find country
gentlemen (or indeed burgesses) possessing the legal knowledge and states-
manship which the constitutional struggles of the sixteenth and_seven-
teenth centuries demanded. 4

1 When President Garfield was one of the leaders of the House of
Representatives it happened that his return for the district in which he re-
sided became doubtful, owing to the strength of the Democratic party there.
One of his friends (to whom I owe the anecdote), anxious to make sure
that he should somehow be returned to the House, went into the adjoining
district to sound the Republican voters there as to the propriety of run-
ning Mr. Garfield for their.constituency, They laughed at the notion,
“Why, he don’t live in our deestrict.” I have heard of a case in which
8 member of Congress having after his election gone to live in a neigh-

bouring district, was thereupon compelled by the pressure of public
Opinion to resign his seat.

VOL. I 8

258 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART!

to residents in a State is concerned it is intelligible.
The senator was—to some extent is‘still—a sort of
ambassador from his State. He is chosen by the legis-
lature or collective authority of his State. He cannot
well be a citizen of one State and represent another.
Even a representative in the House from one State who
lived in another might be perplexed by a divided allegi-
ance, though there are groups of States, such as those
of the north-west, whose great industrial interests are
substantially the same. But what reason can there be
for preventing a man resident in one part of a State
from representing another part, a Philadelphian, for
instance, from being returned for Pittsburg, or a Bos-
tonian for Lenox in the west of Massachusetts? In
England it is not found that a member is less active ‘or
successful in urging the local interests of his constituency
because he does not live there. He is often more
successful, because more personally influential or per-
suasive than any resident whom the constituency could
supply ; and in case of a conflict of interests he always
feels his efforts to be owing first to his constituents, and
not to the place in which he happens to reside.

The mischief is twofold. Inferior men aré returned,
because there are. many parts of the country which do
not grow statesmen, where nobody, or at arly rate
nobody desiring to enter Congress, is to be found above
a moderate level of political cap&tity. And men of
marked ability and zeal are prevented from forcing their
way in. Such men are produced chiefly in the great
cities of the older States. There is not room enough
there for nearly all of them, but no other doors to
Congress are open. Boston, New York, Philadelphia,
Baltimore, could furnish six or eight times as many
good members as there are seats in these cities. As

cuap. xix. GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON CONGRESS 259

such men cannot enter from their place of residence,
they do not enter at all, and the nation is deprived of
the benefit of their services. Careers are moreover
interrupted. A promising politician may lose his seat
in his own district through some fluctuation of opinion,
or perhaps because he has offended the local wire-pullers
by too much independence. Since he cannot find a seat
elsewhere, as would happen in England, he is stranded ;
his political life is closed, while other young men inclined
_ to independence take warning from his fate. Changes
in the State laws would not remove the evil, for the
habit of choosing none but local men is rooted so deeply
that it would probably long survive the abolition of a
restrictive law, and it is just as strong in States where
no such law cxists.!

II. Every senator and representative receives a
salary at present fixed at $5000 (£1000) per annum,
besides an allowance (called mileage) of 20 cents (10d.)
per mile for travelling expenses to and from Washington,
and $125 (£25) for stationery. The salary is looked upon
as a matter of course. It was not introduced for the sake
of enabling working men to be returned as members, but
on the general theory that all public work pught to be
paid for. The reasons for it are stronger than in England
or France, because the distance to Washington from most
parts of the United States is so great, and the attendance
required there so continuous, that a man cannot attend
to his profession or’ business while sitting in Congress.
If he loses his livelihood in serving the community, the

1 In Maryland, a State almost divided into two parts by Chesapeake
Bay, it is the invariable practice that one of the two senators should
be chosen from the residents east of the bay, the other from those of the
western shore. ,

2 Benjamin Franklin argued strongly in the Convention of 1787
against this theory, but found little support. See his remarkable speech in
Mr. John Bigelow's Life of Franklin, vol. iii. p. 389.

260 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PARTI

community ought to compensate him, not to add that
the class of persons whose private means put them
above the need of a lucrative calling, or of compensa-
tion for interrupting it, is comparatively small even
now, and hardly existed when the Constitution was
framed. Cynics defend the payment of congressmen on
another ground, viz. that “ they would steal worse if they
didn’t get it,” and would make politics, as Napoleon made
war, support itself. Be the thing bad or good, it is at
any rate necessary, so that no one talks of abolishing it.
For that reason its existence furnishes no argument for
its introduction into a small country with a large leisured
and wealthy class. In fact, the conditions of European
countries are so different from those of America that one
must not cite American experience either for or against
the remuneration of legislative work. I do not believe
that the practice works ill by preventing good men from
entering politics, for they feel no more delicacy in accept-
ing their $5000 than an English duke does in drawing
his salary as a secretary of state. It may strengthen the
tendency of members to regard themselves as mere
delegates, but that tendency has other and deeper roots.
It contributes to keep up a class of professional poli-
ticians, for the salary, though small in comparison with
the incomes earned by successful merchants or lawyers, is
a prize to men of the class whence professional politicians
mostly come. But those English writers who describe it
as the formative cause of that class are mistaken. That
class would have existed had members not been paid,
would continue to exist if payment were withdrawn. On
the other hand, the benefit which the English advocates
of paid legislators dilate on, viz. the introduction of a
large number of representative working men, has hither- ,
to been little desired and nowise secured. Few such

cuar.xix. GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON CONGRESS 261

persons appear as candidates in America, and until
recently the working class has not deemed itself, nor
acted as, a distinct body with special interests,’

In 1873 Congress passed an act increasing many
official salaries, and among others those of senators and
representatives, which it raised from $5000 to $7500
(£1500). All the increases were to take effect for the
future only, except that of congressional salaries, which
was made retroactive. This unblushing appropriation
by Congress of nearly $200,000 to themselves roused so
much indignation that the act, except with relation to
the salaries of Federal judges, was repealed by the next
Congress, It is known as the “ back-pay grab.”

ITI. A congressman’s tenure of his place is usually
short. Senators are sometimes returned for two, three,
or even four successive terms by the legislatures of their
States, although it may befall even the best of them
to be thrown out by a change in the balance of parties,
or by the intrigues of an opponent. But a member
of the House can seldom feel safe in the saddle. If
he is so eminent as to be necessary to his party, or if
he maintains intimate relations with the leading local
Wire-pullers of his district, he may in the eastern,
middle, and southern States hold his ground for three
or four Congresses, z.¢e. for six or eight years. Very
few do more than this. In the West a member is
extremely lucky if he does even this. Out there a seat
is regarded as a good thing which ought to go round.

1 In Victoria (Australia) members of the popular house receive 8
salary of £300 a year. I understand that this has had so far no con-
siderable effect in enabling working men to enter the assembly. In
Australia, however, a representative seems to be expected to subscribe to
local objects within his constituency, which is not the case in America,
and is every day less the case in England. In France and Germany
representatives are paid. In Italy they receive no salary, but a free pags
over the railroads.

262 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

It has’ a salary. It sends a man, free of expense, for
two winters and springs to Washington and lets him
see something of the fine world there, where he rubs
shoulders with ambassadors from Europe. Local leaders
cast sheep’s eyes at the seat, and make more or less
open bargains between themselves as to the order in
which they shall enjoy it. So far from its being, as
in England, a reason for re-electing a man that he has
been a member already, it is a reason for passing him
by, and giving somebody else a turn. Rotation in
office, dear to the Democrats of Jefferson’s school a
century ago, still charms the less educated, who see in
it a recognition of equality, and have no sense of the
value of special knowledge or training. They like it
for the same reason that the democrats of Athens liked
the choice of magistrates by lot. It is a recognition
and application of equality. An ambitious congress-
man is therefore forced to think day and night of his re-
nomination, and to secure it not only by procuring, if he
can, grants from the Federal treasury for local purposes,
and places for the relatives and friends of the local '
wire-pullers who control the nominating conventions,
but also by sedulously “nursing” the constituency
during the vacations. No habit could more effectually
discourage noble ambition or check the growth of a class
of accomplished statesmen. There are few walks of life
in which experience counts for more than it does in
parliamentary politics. It is an education in itself, an
education in which the quick-witted western’ American
would make rapid progress were he suffered to remain long
enough at Washington. At present he is not suffered,
for, as observed above, nearly one-half of each succes-
sive house consists of new men, while the old members
are too much harassed by the trouble of procuring their

cuap. xix GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON CONGRESS 263

re-election to have time or motive for the serious study
af political problems. This is what comes of the doctrine
that a member ought to be absolutely dependent on his
constituents, and of the notion that politics is neither
a science, nor an art, nor even an ‘occupation, like farm-
ing or store-keeping, in which one learns by experience,
but a-thing which comes by nature, and for which one
man of common sense is as fit as another.

IV. The last-mentioned evil is aggravated by the
short duration of a Congress. Short as it seems, the
two years term was warmly opposed, when the Con-
stitution was-framed, as being too long. The con-
stitutions of the several States, framed when they shook
off the supremacy of the British Crown, all fixed one
year, except the ultra-democratic Connecticut'and Rhode
Island, where under the colonial charters a legislature met
every six months, and South Carolina, which had fixed
two years. So essential to republicanism was this prin-
ciple deemed, that the maxim “ where annual elections
end tyranny begins” had passed into a proverb ;* and the
authors of the Federalist were obliged to argue that the
limited authority of Congress, watched by the executive
on one side, and the State legislatures on the other, would
prevent so long a period as two years from proving
dangerous to liberty, while it was needed in order to
enable the members to master the laws and understand

1 In the Massachusetts Convention of 1788, when this question was
being discussed, “General Thomson then broke out into the following
pathetic apostrophe, ‘O my country, never give up your annual elections :
young men, never give up your jewel.’ He apologized for his zeal.”—
Elliot’s Debates, vol. ii. p. 16.

2 The whole subject is discussed with acuteness and judgment in the
51st and 52d numbers of the Federalisé; numbers whose authorship is
variously attributed to Hamilton and to Madison. In England the dura-
tion of parliaments was at one time (and may perhaps be again) matter of ,
active controversy. One of the five points of the “ People’s Charter” of
1848 was the restriction of their duration to one year,

264 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

the conditions of different parts of the Union. At
present the two years term is justified on. the ground
‘that it furnishes a proper check on the President. The
Congress elected in the autumn of 1884 at the same
time as the President, meets in December 1885, while
another, elected in 1886, meets in 1887, and thus covers
the later part of his four years term. Thus the people
can, if they please, express disapproval of the policy
which he has so far followed. One is also told that
these frequent elections are necessary to keep up popular
interest in current politics, nor do some fail to hint that
the temptations to jobbing would overcome the virtue
of members who had a longer term before them.
Where American opinion is unanimous, it would be
presumptuous for a stranger to dissent. Yet the
remark may be permitted that the dangers originally
feared have proved chimerical. There is no country
whose representatives are more dependent on popular
opinion, more ready to trim their sails to the lcast
breath of it. The public acts, the votes, and speeches
of a member from Oregon or Texas can be more closely
watched by his constituents than those of a Virginian
member could be watched in 1789.1 And as the fre-
quency of elections involves inexperienced members, the
efficiency of Congress suffers. ,

V. The numbers of the two American houses
seem small to a European when compared on the one
hand with the population of the country, on the other
with the practice of European States. The Senate has
76 members against the British House of Lords with
about 560, and the French Senate with 300. The House
has 325 against the British House of Commons with

4
1 Of course his conduct in committee is rarely known, but I doubt
whether the shortness of the term makes him more scrupulous.

cnar. xix GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON CONGRESS 265

670, and the French and Italian Chambers with 584 and
508 respectively.

The Americans, however, doubt whether both their
Houses have not already become too large. They began
with 26 in the Senate, 65 in the House, numbers
then censured as too small, but which worked well, and
gave less encouragement to idle talk and vain display
than the crowded halls of to-day. The proportion of
representatives to inhabitants, originally 1 to 30,000,
is now 1 to 154,000, having constantly fallen as the
population increased. The inclination of wise men is to
stop further increase when the number of 400 has been
reached, for they perceive that the House already suffers |
from disorganization, and fear that a much larger oné
would prove unmanageable.’ So much depends on the

1 There is force in the following observations which I copy from the
54th and 67th numbers of the Federalist :—‘ A certain number at least
Seems necessary to secure the benefits of free consultation and discussion, and
to guard against too easy a ‘combination for improper purposes ; as on the
other hand, the number ought to be kept within a certain limit in order to
avoid the confusion and intemperance of a multitude. In all very numer-
ous assemblies, of whatever characters composed, passion never fails to wrest
the sceptre from reason. Hand every Athenian citizen been a Socrates, every
Athenian assembly would still have been a mob... . In all legislative
assemblies, the greater the number comprising them may be, the fewer
will be the men who will in fact direct their proceedings. The larger
the number, the greater will be the proportion of members of limited in-
formation and of weak capacities. Now it is precisely on characters of
this description that the eloquence and address of the few are known to
act with all their force. In the ancient republics where the whole body
of the people assembled in person, a single orator, or an artful statesman,
was generally seen to rule with as complete a sway as if a sceptre had been
placed in his single hand. On the same principle the more nnutitudinous
n representative assembly may be rendered, the more it will partake of the
infirmities incident to collective meetings of the people. Ignorance will
be the dupe of cunning, and passion the slave of sophistry and declamation.
The people can never err more than in supposing that by multiplying their
representatives beyond a certain limit they strengthen the barrier against
the government of a few. Experience will for ever admonish them that,
on the contrary, after securing a certain number for the purposes of safety, of
local information, and of diffusing sympathy with the whole society, they will
counteract their own views by every addition to their representatives,”

266 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

particular circumstances of each country that no general
rule can be laid down as to the size of representative
assemblies, and the experience of one nation is of no
great value for another. So far as general principles go,
a student of politics will be disposed to think that as
the American Chamber ought not to be raised much
further, so the British House of Commons ought to be
rather reduced than increased.!

VI. American congressmen are more assiduous in
their attendance than the members of most European
legislatures. The great majority not only remain
steadily at Washington through the session, but are
usually to be found in the Capitol, often in their
Chamber itself, while a sitting lasts. There is therefore
comparatively little trouble in making a quorum,’
though the quorum consists of one half in each House,
whereas in England the House of Lords, whose quorum
is three, has usually less than thirty peers present, and
the House of Commons finds a difficulty, through many
private members’ days and on government days from
eight till ten o’clock p.m., in making up its modest
quorum of forty.’ This requirement of a high quorum,
which is prescribed in the Constitution, has doubt-
less .helped to secure a good attendance. Other
‘causes are the distance from Washington of the resi-
dences of most members, so that it is not worth
while to take the journey home for a short sojourn,

1 The House of Commons would be much less manageable than it is did
the whole of its 670 members attend. Even now, the number present
during a debate rarely exceeds 450, though of course as many as 600 some-
times vote in great divisions. There is sitting space on the floor for only 360.

? Though sometimes the sergeant-at-arms is sent round Washington
with a carriage to fetch members down from their residences to the Capitol.

3 Oliver Cromwell’s House of 360 members, including 30 from Scot-

land and 30 frori Ireland, had a quorum of 60. See the Articles of
December 1653 in Parliamentary History, vol. iii. p. 1417.

cuar. xix. GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON CONGRESS — 267

- and the fact that very few attempt to carry on
any regular business or profession while the session
lasts. Those who are lawyers, or merchants, or manu-
facturers, leave their work to partners; but many are
politicians and nothing else. In Washington, a city
without commerce or manufactures, political or, semi-
political intrigue is the only gainful occupation possible;
for the Supreme Court practice employs only a few lead-
ing barristers. The more democratic a country is, so
rouch the more regular is the attendance, so much closer
the attention-to the requests of constituents which a
member is expected to render. Every extension of the
suffrage in England has been followed not only by a
change in the character of the House of Commons, but
by an increase in the numbers usually present, and in
the eagerness of members to defer to every wish of
those who have returned them.’ Apart from that pain-
ful duty of finding places for constituents which con-
Sumes so much of a congressman’s time, his duties are not
heavier than those of a member of the English Pazrlia-
ment who desires to keep abreast of current questions.
The sittings are neither so long nor so late as those of
the House of Commons; the questions that come up
not so multifarious, the blue books to be read less
humerous, the correspondence (except about places) less
troublesome. The position of senator’ is more onerous
than that of a member of the House, not only because
his whole State, and not merely a district, has a direct
claim upon him, but also because, as one of a smaller

1 Before the Reform Bill of 1832 there were rarely more than 200
members present in the House of Commens, and it usually sat for two or
three hours only in each day. Iremember to have been told of a member
for Hampshire about 1820, who sat for thirteen years, being in perfect

health, and was only thrice in the House. Nor was this deemed a very
singular case.

268 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

body, he incurs a larger individual responsibility, and.
sits upon two or more committees instead of on one only.
VII.*The reasons which make a political career un-
attractive to most Americans will deserve to be con-
sidered in a later chapter. Here I will only remark
that the want of opportunities for distinction in Con-
gress is one of them. It takes a new member at least a
session to learn the procedure of the House. Full dress
debates are rare, newspaper reports of speeches delivered
are curt and little read. The most serious work is done
in committees ; it is not known to the world, and much
of it results in nothing, because many .bills which
a committee has considered are perhaps never even
voted on by the House. A place on a good House
committee is to be obtained by favour, and a high-
spirited man may shrink from applying for it to the
Speaker. Ability, tact, and industry make their way in
the long run in Congress, as they do everywhere else.
But in -Congress there is, for most men, no long run.
Only very strong local influence, or some remarkable
party service rendered, will enable a member to keep
his seat through two or three successive congresses.
Nowhere therefore does the zeal of a young politician
sooner wax cold than in the House of Representatives,
Unfruitful toil, the toil of turning a crank which does
nothing but register its own turnings, or of writing
‘contributions which an editor steadily rejeets, is of all
things the most disheartening. It is more disheartening
than the non-requital of merit; for that at least spares
the self-respect of the sufferer. Now toil for the public
is usually unfruitful in the House of Representatives,
indeed in all Houses. But toil for the pecuniary
interests of one’s constituents and friends is fruitful, for
it obliges people, it wins the reputation of energy and

car. xIx GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON CONGRESS 269

smartness, it has the promise not only of a re-nomination,
but of a possible seat in the Senate. Now a seat in the
Senate is the highest ambition of the congressman.
Power, fame, perhaps even riches, sit upon that, pignacle.
But the thin spun life is usually slit before the fair
guerdon has been found. When I first went to America,
I ‘used to ask the ablest and most ambitious of
the friends Tmade among young men whether they.
looked forward to entering Congress. Out of many
scarcely one seemed drawn towards the career which
those who have won success at the universities of
England naturally look forward to.’ Presently I
came to understand ‘their ‘attitude, and to feel that the
probable disappointments and vexations of a life in Con-
gress so far outweighed its attractions that nothing but
a strong sense of public duty would induce a man of
fine tastes and high talents to adopt it. Law, ‘educa-
tion, literature, the higher walks of commerce, finance,
or railway work, offer a better prospect of usefulness,
enjoyment, or distinction.

Inside Washington, the representative is dwarfed by
the senator and the Federal judges. Outside Washing-
ton he enjoys no great social consideration.? His opinion
is not quoted with respect. He seems to move about
under a prima facie suspicion of being a jobber, and to
feel that the burden of proof lies on him to show that

1 Although young Englishmen seem Jess drawn to parliamentary life
now than they were twenty or thirty years ago.

2 A few years ago an eminent Englishman, not then a member of
the House of Commons, visiting one of the colleges for women in New
England, and wishing to know something of the social standing of the
students, remarked, “ a suppose you have a good many young ladies here
belonging to the best families, daughters of members of Congress and 80
forth ? ” The question excited so much amusement that it was repeated
to me months afterwards not only as an instance of English ignorance but
as an excellent joke.

270 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

the etirrent jests on this topic do not apply to him.
Rich men therefore do not seek, as in England, to enter
the legislature in order that they may enter society.
They will get no entrée which they could not have
secured otherwise. Nor is there any opportunity for
the exercise of those social influences which tell upon
members, and still more upon members’ wives and
daughters, in European legislatures. It may of course
be worth while to ‘“‘capture” a particular senator, and
for that purpose to begin by capturing his wife. But
the salon plays no sensible part in American public life.

The country does not go to Congress to look for its
presidential candidates as England looks to Parliament
for its prime ministers. The opportunities by which a
man can win distinction there are few. He does not
, Inake himself familiar to the eye and ear of the
people. Congress, in short, is not a focus of political
life as are the legislatures of France, Italy, and England.
This has always been so, and is no less so now than
formerly. Although Congress has become more power-
ful against the several States than it was formerly,
though it has extended its arms in every direction, and
encroached upon the executive, it has not become more
interesting to the people, it has not strengthened its
hold on their respect and affection.

VIII. Neither in the Senate nor in the House are
there any recognized leaders. There is no miaistry, no ex-
ministry leading an opposition, no chieftains at the head
of definite groups who follow their lead, as the Irish
Nationalist members in the British Parliament follow Mr.
Parnell, and a large section of the Left in the French
chamber follow M. Clemenceau. In other words, no
reoulat means exist for securing either that members
shall be apprised of the approach of an important

cuarp. x1x. GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON CONGRESS 271

division, or that they shall vote in that divisiomin a
particular way.

To any one familiar with the methods of the English
parliament this seems incomprehensible. How, he asks,
can business go on at all, how can the party make itself
felt as a party with neither leader.nor Whips ?

J have mentioned the Whips. Let mesay a word on
this vital, yet even in England little appreciated, part
of the machinery of constitutional government. Each
party in the House of Commons has, besides its leaders, a
member of the House nominated by the chief leader as
his aide-de-camp, and called the whipper-in, or, for
shortness, the whip. The whip’s duties are (1) to inform
every member belonging to the party when an important
division may be expected, and if he sees the member in
or about the House, to keep him there until the division
is called ; (2) to direct the members of his own party
how to vote; (3) to obtain pairs for them if they cannot
be present to vote ; (4) to “ tell,” ze. count the members -
in every party division ; (5) to “ keep touch ” of opinion
within the party, and convey to the leader a faithful
impression of that opinion, from which the latter can
judge how far he may: count on the support of his whole
party in any course he proposes to take. A member in
doubt how he shall vote on a question with regard to
which he has no opinion of his own, goes to the whip
for counsel. A member who without grave cause stays
away unpaired from an important division to which
the whip has duly summoned him is guilty of a misde-
meanour only less flagrant than that of voting against
his party. A ministerial whip is further bound t to “keep
a house,” #.e. to secure that when government business is
being considered there shall always be a quorum of
members present, and of course also to keep a majority,

272 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

ae. to have within reach a number of supporters suffi-
cient to give the ministry a majority on any ministerial
division.1_ Without the constant presence and activity
of the ministerial whip the wheels of government could
not go on for a day, because the ministry would be
exposed to the risk of casual defeats which would destroy
their credit and might involve their resignation. Simi-
larly the Opposition, and any third or fourth party, find
it necessary to have a whip, because it is only thus that
they can act as a party, guide their supporters, and
bring their full strength to bear on a division. Hence
when a new party is formed, its first act, that by which
it realizes and proclaims its existence, is to name a whip,
to whom its adherents may go for counsel, and who may
in turn receive their suggestions as to the proper strategy
for the party to adopt. P So essential are these officers to
the discipline of English parliamentary armies that an
English politician’s first question when he sees Congress

“Where are the whips?” his next, “ How in the
world do you get on without them ?”

The answer to this question is threefold. Whips are
‘not so necessary at Washington as at Westminster. A

? That which was at one time the chief function of the ministerial
whip, viz. to pay members for the votes they gave in support of the
government, has been extinct for about a century. He is still, however,
the recognized organ for handling questions of political patronage, and is
therefore called the Patronage Secretary to the Treasury. People who want
places for their friends, or titles for themselves, still address their requests
to him, which he communicates to the prime minister with his opinion as
to whether the applicant’s party services justify the request. Nowadays
this patronage has no great political importance.

2 Even parties formed with a view to particular, and probably transitory
issues, such as that of the English Anti-Home-Rule Liberals in the House
of Commons at this moment (1888), appoint one or more ‘of their members
as whips, because they could not otherwise act with that effect which only
habitual concert gives. Each party has its whips in the House of Lords
also, but as divisions there have less political significance their functions
are less important.

cHap.xix GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON CONGRESS 273

sort of substitute for them has been devised. Congress
does suffer from the want of them, that is, it suffers
from the‘inadequacy of the substituted device.

A division in Congress has not the importance it has
in the House of Commons. There it may throw out
the ministry. In Congress it never does more than
affirm or negative some particular bill or resolution.
Even a division in the Senate which involves the rejec-
tion of a treaty or of an appointment to some great office,
does not disturb the tenure of the executive. Hence
it is not essential to the majority that its full strength
should be always at hand, nor has a minority party any
great prize set before it as the result of a successful vote.

Questions, however, arise in which some large party
interest is involved. There may be a bill by which the
party means to carry out its main views of policy or
perhaps to curry favour with the people, or a resolution
whereby it hopes to damage a hostile executive. In
such cases it is important to bring up every vote.
Accordingly a meeting of the party is convened, called a
senatorial caucus or congressional (7.¢. House) caucus (as
the case may be).’ The attitude to be assumed by the
party is debated with closed doors, and a vote taken as
to the course to be adopted. By this vote every mem-
ber of the party is deemed bound, just as he would be
in England by the request of the leader conveyed
through the whip. Disobedience cannot be punished
in Congress itself, except of course by social penalties ;
but it endangers the seat of the too independent mem-

1 At the beginning of a session each party in the Senate and in the
House elects a chairman of the party caucus; and it is the duty of this
person to convoke a caucus of his party when the need arises. An ex-
perienced senator told me that the Senate caucus of his party used to meet
on an average twice a month, the House caucus less frequently. General
meetings of a party in Parliament are much less common in England.

VOL. I Ay

274 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

ber, for the party managers at Washington will com-
municate with the party managers in his district, and
the latter will probably refuse to re-nominate him
at the next election. The most important caucus of a
Congress is that held at the opening to select the party
candidate for the speakership, selection by the majority
being of course equivalent to election. As the views
and tendencies of the Speaker determine the composi-
tion of the committees, and thereby the course of legis-
lation, his selection is a matter of supreme importance,
and is preceded by weeks of intrigue and canvassing.

This process of “going into caucus” is the regular
American substitute for recognized leadership, and has
the advantage of seeming more consistent with demo-
cratic equality, because every member of the party has
in theory equal weight in the party meeting. It is used
whenever a line of policy has to be settled, or the whole
party to be rallied for 4 particular party division.. But
of course it cannot be employed every day or for every bill.
Hence when no party meeting has issued its orders, a
member is free to vote as he pleases, or rather as he
thinks his constituents please. If he knows nothing of
the matter, he may take a friend’s advice, or vote as he
hears some prominent man on his own side vote. Any-
how, his vote is doubtful, unpredictable; and conse-
quently divisions on minor questions are uncertain.
This is a further reason, added to the .power of the
standing committees, why there is a want of consistent
policy in the action of Congress. As its leading men
have comparatively little authority, and there are no
means whereby a leader could keep his party together
on ordinary questions, so no definite ideas run through
its conduct and express themselves in its votes, It
moves in Zig-zags.

cuar. xix GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON CONGRESS — 275

The freedom thus enjoyed by members on minor
questions has the interesting result of preventing dis-
sensions and splits in the parties. There are substances
which cohere best when their contact is loose. Fresh
fallen snow keeps a smooth surface even on a steep
slope, but when by melting and regelation it has be-
come ice, cracks and rifts begin to appear. A loose
hung carriage will hold together over a road whose rough-
ness would strain and break a more solid one. Hence
serious differences of opinion may exist in a congressional
party without breaking its party unity, for nothing more
is needed than that a solid front should be presented on
the occasions, few in each session, when a momentous
division arrives. The appearance of agreement is all
the more readily preserved because there is little
serious debating, so that the advocates of one view
seldom provoke the other section of their party to
rise and contradict them;, while a member who dis-
sents from the bulk of his party on an important issue
is slow to vote against it, because he has little chance
of defining and defending his position by an explana-
tory speech.

The congressional caucus is more or less called
into action according to the number and gravity of the
party issues that come before Congress. In troublous
times it has to be supplemented by something like
obedience to regular leaders. Mr. Thaddeus Stevens,
for instance, led with recognized authority the majority
of the House in its struggle with President Andrew
Johnson. The Senate is rather more jealous of the
equality of all its members. No senator can be said to
have any authority beyond that of exceptional talent
and experience ; and of course a senatorial caucus, since
it rarely consists of more than forty persons, is a better

276 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

working body, than a House caucus, which may reach
two hundred.’

The European reader may be perplexed by the
apparent contradictions in what has been said regarding
the party organization of Congress. “Is the American
House after all,” he will ask, “more or less a party
body than the British House of Commons? Is the
spirit of party more or less strong in Congress than in
the American people generally ?”

I answer firstly that the House of Representatives i is
for the purpose of serious party issues fully as much a
party body as the House of Commons. A member
voting against his party on such an issue is more certain
to forfeit his party reputation and his seat than is an
English member. This is true of both the Senate and
the House. But for the purpose of ordinary questions,
of issues, not involving party fortunes, a representative
is less bound by party ties than an English member,
because he has neither leaders to guidé him by their
speeches nor whips by their private instructions. The
apparent gain, is that a wider field is left for independent
judgment on non-partisan questions. The real loss is
that legislation becomes weak and inconsistent. This
conclusion is not encouraging to those who expect us to
get rid of party in our legislatures. A deliberative
assembly is, after all, only a crowd of men; and the
more intelligent a crowd is, so much the more numerous
are its volitions; so much greater the difficulty of

1 At one time the congressional caucus played in American history
a great part which it has now renounced. From 1800 till 1824 party
mectings of senators and representatives were held which nominated the
party candidates for the presidency, who were then accepted by each party
as its regular candidates. In 1828 the State legislatures made these
nominations, and in 1832 the present system of national conventions (see
post, in Vol, II.) was introduced.

cuHarp, xIx GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON CONGRESS — 277

agreement. Like other crowds, a legislature must be
led and ruled. Its merit lies not in the independence
of its niembers, but in the reflex action of its opinion
upon the leaders, in its willingness to defer to them
in minor matters, reserving disobedience for the issues
in which some great principle overrides both the obli-
gation of deference to established authority and the
respect due to special knowledge.

The above remarks answer the second question also.
The spirit of party may seem to be weaker in Con-
gress than in the people at large. But this is only
because the questions which the people decide at the
polls are always questions of choice between candidates
for office. These are definite questions, questions emin-
ently of a party character, because candidates represent
in the America of to-day not principles but parties.
Whenever a vote upon persons occurs in Congress, ’
Congress gives a strict party vote. Were thé people to
vote at the polls on matters not explicitly comprised
within a party platform, there would be the same uncer-
tainty as Congress displays. The habit of joint action
which makes the life of a party is equally intense
in every part of the American system. But in England
the existence of a Ministry and Opposition in Parliament
sweeps within the circle of party action many topics
which in America are left outside, and therefore Con-
gress seems, but is not, less permeated than Parliament
by party spirit.

CHAPTER XxX
THE RELATIONS OF CONGRESS TO THE PRESIDENT!

So far as they are legislative bodies, the House and the
Senate have similar powers and stand in the same rela-
tion to the executive.” We may therefore discuss them
together, or rather the reader may assume that whatever
is said of the House as a legislature is also true of the
Senate. The Senate is also a semi-executive council,
intended to advise and to restrain the President, but its
functions in that capacity have been already discussed.*

Although the Constitution forbids any Federal official
to be chosen a member of either the House or the
Senate, there is nothing in it to prevent officials from
speaking there ; as indeed there is nothing to prevent
either House from assigning places and the right to

1 The relations of the various organs of government to one another in
the United States are so interesting and so unlike those which exist in ~
most European countries, that I have found it necessary Y describe them
with some minuteness, and from several points of view. In this chapter
an account is given of the actual working relations of the President and
Congress ; in the next chapter the general theory of the respective func-
tions of the executive and legislative departments is examined, and the
American view of the nature of these functions explained; while in
Chapter XXV. the American system as a whole is compared with the so-
called “ cabinet system” of England and her colonies.

2 The House has the exclusive initiative in revenue bills; but this
privilege does not affect what follows.

3 See above, Chapter XL.

CHAP. XX CONGRESS AND THE PRESIDENT 279

speak to any one whom it chooses. Now, however, no
Federal officer appears on the floor. In the early days
Washington came down and delivered his opening
speech. Occasionally he remained in the Senate dur-
ing a debate, and even expressed his opinion there.
When Hamilton, the first secretary of the treasury,
prepared his famous report on the national finances, he
asked the House whether they would hear him speak it,
or would receive it in writing. They chose the latter
course, and the precedent then set has been followed
by subsequent ministers,’ while that set in 1801 by
President Jefferson when he transmitted his message in
writing instead of delivering a speech, has been similarly
respected by all his successors. Thus neither House
now hears a member of the executive. A committee
may request the attendance of a minister and examine
him, but he appears before it only as a witness to
answer questions, not to state and argue his own case.
There is therefore little direct intercourse between
Congress and the administration, and no sense of in-
terdependence and community of action such as exists

1 Hamilton, however, was, while secretary, frequently present in
Congress and addressed it. Nor has any rule ever been made by either
House to prevent a secretary from doing so now. It is mere matter of
custom. A bill was brought in some years ago giving seats in both
Houses of Congress to cabinet ministers, and permitting them to speak on
matters relating to their department, but not to join in general debate.
This was provided in the Constitution of the Southern Confederacy (see
note to Chapter XX VI. at the end of this volume). The President may
of course come into the Senate, though he does not now address it. He does
not go into the House of Representatives. Nor has any English king
entered the House of Commons, except Charles I. in 1642, on the occasion

of his attempt to seize the five members, when, says the Journal, “ His

Majesty came into the House and took Mr. Speaker's chair: ‘Gentlemen,
I am sorry to have this occasion to come unto yon’” The results did not
encourage his successors to repeat the visit. But Charles JI. and Anne
were sometimes present during debates in the House of Lords; and there
would not, it is conceived, be anything to prevent the Sovereign from
being present now.

280 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

in other parliamentary countries.. Be it remembered
also that a minister may never have sat in Congress,
and may therefore be ignorant of its temper and ‘habits.
Three members of Mr. Cleveland’s present cabinet have
never had a seat in either House. The President, him-
self, although he has been voted into office by his party,
is not necessarily its leader, nor even one among its
most prominent leaders. Hence he does not sway the
councils and guide the policy of those members of
Congress who belong to his own side. The expression
of his wishes conveyed in a message has not necessarily
any more effect on Congress than an article in a pro-
minent party newspaper. No duty lies on Congress to
take up a subject to which he has called attention as
needing legislation; and, in fact, the suggestions which
he makes, year after year, are usually neglected, even
when his party has a majority in both Houses, or when
the subject lies outside party lines.

The President and his cabinet have no recognized
spokesman in either House. A particular senator or
representative. may be in confidential communication
with them, and be the instrument through whom
they seek to act; but he would probably disavow
rather than claim the position of an exponent of
ministerial wishes. The only means the President
possesses of influencing members of Congress is through
patronage. He may give places to them or their friends ;
he may approve or veto bills in which they are in-
terested ; his ministers may allot lucrative contracts to
their nominees. This power is considerable, but covert,
for the knowledge that it was being used might damage

1 The House some years ago passed a Dill for transferring Indian
affairs from the Secretary of the Interior to the Secretary of War without
consulting either official.

cHaP.xx CONGRESS AND THE PRESIDENT 281

the member in public estimation and expose the execu-
tive to imputations. The consequence of cutting off
open relations has been to encourage secret influence,
which may of course be used for legitimate purposes,
but -which, being exerted in darkness, is seldom
above suspicion. When the President or a minister is
attacked in Congress, it is not the duty of any one
there to justify his conduct. The accused official may
send a written defence or may induce a member to
state his case; but this method lacks the advantages
of the European parliamentary system, under which
the person assailed repels in debate the various charges,
showing himself not afraid to answer fresh questions
and grapple with new points. Thus by its exclusion
from Congress the executive is deprived of the power
of leading and guiding the legislature and of justifying
in debate its administrative acts.

Next as to the power of Congress over the execu-
tive. Either House of Congress, or both Houses jointly,
can pass resolutions calling on the President or his
ministers to take certain steps, or censuring steps they
have already taken. The President need not obey such
resolutions, need not even notice them. They do not
shorten his term or limit his discretion.’ If the resolu-
tion be one censuring a minister, or demanding his dis-
missal, there is another ground on which the “President

may disregard it. The act is in law not the minister's
act, but that of the President himself, and he does not

1 In England a resolution of the House of Commons alone is treated
ag imperative in matters lying within the discretion of the executive, but
then the House of Commons has the power of dismissing the Government
if its wishes are disregarded. There have even been instances of late
years in which the executive has ceased to put in force the provisions of
an unrepealed statute, because the House of Commons has expressed its
disapproval of that statute.

282 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

therefore escape responsibility by throwing over his
adviser.

Hither House of Congress can direct a committee to
summon and examine a minister, who, though he might
legally refuse to attend, never does refuse. The com-
mittee, when it has got him, can do nothing more than
question him. He may evade their questions, may put
them off the scent by dexterous concealments. He
may with impunity tell them that he means to take
his own course. To his own master, the President, he
standeth or falleth.

Congress may refuse to the President the legislation
he requests, and thus, by mortifying and embarrassing
him, may seek to compel his compliance with its wishes.
It is only a timid President, or a President greatly
bent on accomplishing some end for which legislation
is needed, who will be moved by such tactics,

Congress can pass bills. requiring the President or
any minister to do or abstain from doing certain acts
of a kind hitherto left to his free will and judgment,
may, in fact, endeavour to tie down the officials by pre-
scribing certain conduct for them in great detail. ‘The
President will presumably veto such bills, as contrary
to sound administrative policy. If, however, he signs
them, or if Congress passes them by a two-thirds vote
in both Houses over his veto, the further question may
arise whether they are within the constitutional powers
of Congress, or are invalid as unduly trenching on the
discretion which the Constitution leaves to the President.
If he (or a minister), alleging them to be unconstitutional,
disobeys them, the only means of deciding whether he is
right is by getting the point before the Supreme Court
as an issue of law in some legal proceeding. This
cannot always be done. If it is done, and the court

CHAP. XX CONGRESS AND THE PRESIDENT 283

decide against the President, then if he still refuses
to obey, nothing remains but to impeach him.
Impeachment, of which an account has already been
given, is-the heaviest piece of artillery in the con-
gressional arsenal, but because it is so heavy it is unfit
for ordinary use. It is like a hundred-ton gun which
needs complex machinery to bring it into position, an
enormous charge of powder to fire it, and a large mark
to aim at. Or to vary the simile, impeachment is what
physicians call a heroic medicine, an extreme remedy,
proper to be applied against an official guilty of political
crimes, but ill adapted for the punishment of small
transgressions. Since 1789 it has been used only once
against a President, and then, although that President
(Andrew Johnson) had for two years constantly, and
with great intemperance of language, so defied and .
resisted Congress that the whole machinery of govern-
ment had been severely strained by the collision of the
two authorities, yet the Senate did not convict him,
because no single offence had been clearly made out.
Thus impeachment does not tend to secure, and indeed
was never meant to secure, the co-operation of the
executive with Congress. .
It accordingly appears that Congress cannot compel
the dismissal of any official. It may investigate his
conduct by a committee and so try to drive him
to resign. It may request the President to dismiss
him, but if his master stands by him and he sticks to
his place, nothing more can be done. He may of
course be impeached, but one does not impeach for
mere Incompetence or laxity, as one does not use steam
hammers to crack nuts. Thus we arrive at the result,
surprising to a European, that while Congress may
examine the servants of the public to any extent, may

284 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

censure them, may lay down rules for their guidance, it
cannot get rid of them. It is as if the directors of a
company were forced to go on employing a manager
whom they had ceased to trust, because it was not they
but the shareholders who had appointed him.

There remains the power which in free countries has
been long regarded as the citadel of parliamentary
supremacy, the power of the purse. Congress has
the sole right of raising money and appropriating
it to the service of the state. Its management of
national finance is significantly illustrative of the plan
which separates the legislative from the executive.
It has been shown in a preceding chapter that in
this supremely important matter of raising and apply-
ing the public revenue, the executive government,
instead of proposing and supervising, instead of securing
that each department gets the money that it needs, that
no money goes where it is not needed, that revenue is
procured in the least troublesome and expensive way,
that an exact yearly balance is struck, that the policy of
expenditure is self-consistent and reasonably permanent
from year to year, is by its exclusion from Congress
deprived of influence on the one hand, of responsibility
on the other. The chancellorship of the exchequer, to
use an English expression, is put into commission, and
divided between the chairmen of several unconnected
~ committees of both Houses. A mass of business which,
as English experience shows, specially. needs the know-
ledge, skill, and economical conscience of a responsible
ministry, is left to committees which are powerful
but not responsible, and to Houses whose nominal
responsibility is in practice sadly weakened by their
want of appropriate methods and organization.

The question follows : How far does the power of the

CHAP, XX CONGRESS AND THE PRESIDENT 285

purse enable Congress to control the President? Much
less than in Kuropean countries. Congress may check
any partictlar scheme which the President favours by re-
fusing supplies for it. If he were to engage in military
operations—he cannot under the Constitution “ declare
war” for that belongs to Congress—the House might
paralyse him by declining to vote the requisite army
appropriations. If he were to repeat the splendid
audacity of Jefferson by purchasing a new territory, they
could withhold the purchase money. But if, keeping
within the limits of his constitutional functions, he takes
a different course from that they recommend, if for
instance he should refuse, at their repeated requests, to
demand the liberation of American citizens pining in
foreion dungeons, or to suppress disorders in a State
whose government had requested Federal intervention,
they would have to look on. To withhold the ordinary
supplies, and thereby stop the machine of government,
would injure the country and themselves far more than
the President. They would, to use a common expression,
be cutting off their nose to spite theirface. They could
not lawfully refuse to vote his salary, for that is guaran-
teed to him by the Constitution. They could not, except
by a successful impeachment, turn him out of the White
House or deprive him of his title to the obedience of
all Federal officials.

Accordingly, when Congress has endeavoured to
coerce the President by the use of its money powers, the
case being one in which it could not attack him by
ordinary legislation (either because such legislation
would be unconstitutional, or for want of a two-thirds
majority), it has proceeded not by refusing appropria-
tions altogether, as the English House of Commons
would do in like circumstances, but by attaching what

286 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART J

is called a “rider” to an appropriation bill. More than
twenty years ago the House had formed the habit of in-
serting in bills appropriating money to the purposes of
the public service, provisions relating to quite different
matters, which there was not time to push through in
the ordinary way.’ In 1867 Congress used this device
against President Johnson, with whom it was then at
open war, by attaching to an army appropriation bill a
clause which virtually deprived the President of the
command of the army, entrusting its management to
the general highest in command (General Grant). The
President yielded, knowing that if he refused the bill
would be carried over his veto by a two-thirds vote ;
and a usage already mischievous was confirmed. In
1879, the majority in Congress attempted to overcome,
by the same weapon, the resistance of President Hayes
to certain measures affecting the South which they
desired to pass. They tacked ‘these measures to three
appropriation bills, army, legislative, and judiciary.
The minority in both houses fought hard against the
riders, but were beaten. The President vetoed all three
bills, and Congress was obliged to pass them without
the riders. Next session the struggle recommenced in
the same form, and the President, by rejecting the
money bills, again compelled Congress to drop the
tacked provisions. This victory, which was of
course due to the fact that the dominent party in
Congress could not command a two-thirds majority,
was deemed to have settled the question as between
the executive and the legislature, and may have per-

1 A leading member of the House, Mr, Reagan of Texas, said there that
between 1862 and 1875, 375 measures of general legislation had been
passed as provisoes upon appropriation bills. See Mr. Horace -Davis’s
“ American Constitutions,” p. 30, in Johns Hopkins University Studies,
Third Series.

CHAP, XX CONGRESS AND THE PRESIDENT 287

manently discouraged the latter from recurring to the
same tactics.

President Hayes in his veto messages argued strongly
against the whole practice of tacking other matters to
money bills. It has certainly caused great abuses, and
is now forbidden by the constitutions of many States.
Recently the President has urged upon Congress the
desirability of so amending the Federal Constitution as
to enable him, as a State governor is by some recent
State constitutions allowed to do, to veto single items
in an appropriation bill without rejecting the whole bill.
Such an amendment is generally desired by enlightened
men, because it would enable the executive to do its
duty by the country in defeating many petty jobs
which are now smuggled into these bills, without losing
the supplies necessary for the public service which the
bills provide. The change seems a small one, but its
adoption would cure one of the defects due to the absence
of ministers from Congress, and might save the nation
millions of dollars a year, by diminishing wasteful ex-
penditure on local purposes. But the process of amend-
ing the Constitution is so troublesome that even a change
which involves no party issues may remain unadopted
long after the best opinion has become unanimous in its
favour.

CHAPTER XXI
THE LEGISLATURE AND THE EXECUTIVE

Tue fundamental characteristic of the American National
Government is its separation of the legislative, executive,
and judicial departments. This separation is the merit
which the Philadelphia Convention chiefly sought toattain,
and which the Americans have been wont to regard as
most completely secured by their Constitution. In
Europe, as well as in America, men are accustomed to
talk of legislation and administration as distinct. But a
consideration of their nature will show that it is not easy
to separate these two departments in theory by analysis,
and still less easy to keep them apart in practice. We
may begin by examining their relations in the internal
affairs of a nation, reserving foreign policy for a later
part of the discussion.

People commonly think of the Legislature as the
body which lays down general rules of law, which pre-
scribes, for instance, that at a man’s death his children
shall succeed equally to his property, or that a convicted
thief shall be punished with imprisonment, or that.a
manufacturer may register his trade mark. They
think of the Executive as the person or persons who
do certain acts under those rules, who lock up con-
victs, register trade marks, carry letters, raise and pay

CHAP. XXI LEGISLATURE AND EXECUTIVE 289

a police and an army. In finance the Legislature im-
poses a tax, the Executive gathers it, and places it in
the treasury or in a bank, subject to legislative orders ;
the Legislature votes money by a statute, appropriating
it to a specific purpose; the Executive draws it from
the treasury or bank, and applies it to that purpose,
perhaps in paying the army, perhaps in building a
bridge. ~

The executive is, in civilized countries, itself the crea-
ture of the law, deriving therefrom its existence as well as
its authority. Sometimes, as in France, it is so palpably
and formally. The President of the Republic has been
called into existence by the Constitution. Sometimes,
as in England, it is so substantially, though not formally.
The English Crown dates from a remote antiquity, when
custom and belief had scarcely crystallized into law ; and
though Parliament has repeatedly determined its devolu-
tion upon particular persons or families—it is now held
under the Act of Settlement—uno statute has ever affected
to confer upon it its rights to the obedience of the people.
But practically it holds its powers at the pleasure of
Parliament, which has in some cases expressly limited
them, and in others given them a tacit recognition.
We may accordingly say of England and of all con-
stitutional monarchies as well as of republics that the
executive in all its acts must obey the law, that is to
say, if the law prescribes a particular course of action,
the executive must take that course; if the law forbids
a particular. course, the executive must avoid it.

It is therefore clear that the extent of the power of
the executive magistrate depends upon the particularity
with which-the law is drawn, that is, upon the amount of
discretion which the law leaves to him. If the law is
general in its terms, the executive has a wide discretion,

VOL. I U

290 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

If, for instance, the law prescribes simply that a duty of
ten per cent ad valorem be levied on all manufactured
goods imported, it rests with the executive to determine
by whom and where that duty shall be collected, and on
what principles it shall be calculated. If the law merely
creates a post-office, the executive may fix the rate of
payment for letters and parcels, and the conditions on
which they will be received and delivered. In these
‘cases the executive has a large field within which to
exert its free will and choice of means. Power means
nothing more than the extent to which a man can make
his individual will prevail against the wills of other
men, so as to control them. Hence, when the law
gives to a magistrate a wide discretion, he is powerful,
because the law clothes his will with all the power of the
state. On the other hand, if the law goes into very
minute details, directing the official to do this and not
to do that, it narrows the discretion of the executive
magistrate. His personal will and choice are gone. He
can no longer be thought of as a co-ordinate power in
the state. He becomes a mere servant, a hand to carry
out the bidding of the legislative brain, or, we may even
say, a tool in the legislative hand.

As the legislature has been the body through which
the people have chiefly asserted their authority, we
find that in all free states law-making assemblies,
whether primary or representative, have sought to
extend their province and to subject the executive to
themselves. They have done this in several ways.
In the democracies of ancient Greece the assembly of
all citizens not only passed statutes of general applica-
tion, but made peace or declared war; ordered an ex-
pedition to start for Sphacteria, and put Cleon at the
head of it; commanded the execution of prisoners or

CHAP. XXI LEGISLATURE AND ENECUTIVE 291

reprieved them; conducted, in fact, most of the public
business of the city by a series of direct decrees, all of
which were laws, 1.e. declarations of its sovereign will.
It was virtually the government. The chief executive
officers of Athens, called the generals, had little authority
except over the military operations in the field. Even
the Roman Constitution, a far more highly developed
and scientific; though also a complicated and cumbrous
system, while it wisely left great discretion to the chief
magistrates (requiring them, however, to consult the
Senate), yet permitted the passing pro re nata of im-
portant laws, which were really executive acts, such as
the law by which Pompey received an extraordinary
command against Mithridates. The Romans did not
draw, any more than the Greek republics, a distinction
between general and special legislation.’

This method, in which the people directly govern
as a legislature, reducing the executive magistrates to
passive instruments, is inapplicable where the country is
large, because the mass of citizens cannot come together
as an assembly. It is almost equally inapplicable where
the legislature, though a representative body, is very:
numerous. England, accordingly, and the nations which
have imitated England,’ have taken a different method.

1 The distinction between ‘general legislative acts, which we call
laws proper or statutes, and special legislative acts, ordering a particular
thing to be done, is marked in Greek by the words voyos and yrjdiopa; and
in some cities, as in Athens, a vépos could be passed or changed only by a
specially provided method. At Rome everything done by the people was
of equal legal force and called lex (though the word privilegium is some-
times applied to-special acts). The distinction is apt to be forgotten under
a despotic monarch, who is at once the executive and the legislative
authority, Nevertheless, even under an autocrat, there are some general
rules which his individual volition dares not change, because the universal
opinion of the people approves them. The book of Daniel’ even repre-
sents Darius as unable to revoke a general law he has once sanctioned, or
to except a particular person from its operation.

2 But during and immediately after the great Civil War the Long

292° THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

The people (that is, the qualified voters) have allowed
an executive to subsist with apparently wide powers,
but they virtually choose this executive, and keep it in
so close and constant a dependence upon their pleasure,
that it dare not act against what it believes their will
to be. The struggle for popular liberties in England
took at first the form of a struggle for the supremacy
of law; that is to say, it was a struggle to restrain the
prerogative of the king by compelling his ministers to
respect the ancient customs of the land and the statutes
passed in Parliament. As the customs were always
maintained, and the range of the statutes constantly
widened, the executive was by degrees hemmed in
within narrow limits, its discretionary power restricted,
and that characteristic principle of the Constitution,
which has been well called “The Reign of Law,” was
established. It was settled that the law, 7.e. the ancient
customs and the statutes, should always prevail against
the discretion of the Crown and its ministers, and that
acts done by the servants of the Crown should be justi-
ciable, exactly like the acts of private persons. This
once achieved, the executive fairly bitted and bridled,
and the ministry made to hold office at the pleasure of
the House of Commons, Parliament had no longer its
former motive for seeking to restrict the discretion of
the ministers of the ‘Crown by minutely particular
legislation, for ministers had become so .accustomed
to subjection that their discretion might be trusted.
‘ Parliament has, in fact, of late years begun to sail on

Parliament acted as both a legislative and an executive authority, as
did the Convention through part of the French Revolution. And Parlia-
ment of course still retains its power of giving what are practically execu-
tive orders, e.g. it could pass a statute directing an expedition to seize a
particular Pacific island.

1 See Mr. Dicey’s Law of the Constitution for a lucid exposition of this
Principle,

CHAP. XX1 LEGISLATURE AND EXECUTIVE 293

the other tack, and allows ministers to do many things
by regulations, schemes, orders in council, and so forth,
which would previously have been done by statute.’

It may be asked how it comes, if this be so, that people
nevertheless talk of the executive in England as being a
separate and considerable authority? The answer is
twofold. The English Crown has never been, so to
speak, thrown into the melting-pot and recast, but
has continued, in external form and seeming, an in-
dependent and highly dignified part of the constitutional
system.” Parliament has never asserted a direct control
over certain parts of the royal prerogative, such as the
bestowal of honours, the creation of peerages, the making
of appointments to office. No one at this moment can
say exactly what the royal prerogative does or does not
include. And secondly, the actual executive, 7.¢. the

- 2 In these cases, however (of which schemes under the Endowed
Schools Acts may be taken as an instance), Parliament reserves to itself a
right of veto in the form of an address to the Crown requesting that the
regulation or scheme be not approved.

2 An interesting illustration of the relations of the English executive
to the legislature in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, when Parliament
was little more than a pure legislature, is afforded by the present constitu-
tion of the tiny kingdom of the Isle of Man, the last survivor of those
numerous kingdoms among which the British Isles were once divided.
Its government is carried on by a Governor (appointed by the English
Crown), a council of eight (composed partly of persons nominated by the
Crown and partly of ex-officio members holding posts to which they
have been appointed by the Crown), and an elected representative
assembly of twenty-four. The assembly is purely legislative, and cannot
check the Governor otherwise than by withholding the legislation he
wishes for and such taxes as are annually voted. For the purposes of
finance bills the assembly (House of Keys) and the council sit together but
vote separately, The Governor presides, as the English king did in his
Great Council. The Governor can stop any legislation he disapproves,
and can retain his ministers against the will of the assembly. He is a true
executive magistrate, commanding, moreover, like the earlier English kings,
a considerable revenue which does not depend on the annual votes of
the legislature. Here therefore is an Old-World instance of the American
system as contradistinguished from the cabinet system of England and
her colonies,

294 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PARY I

ministry of the day, retains some advantages which are
practically, though not legally, immense. It has an
initiative in all legislation, a sole initiative in financial
legislation. It is a small and well organized body
placed in the midst of a much larger and jess organized
body (i.e. the two Houses), on which therefore. it can
powerfully act. All patronage, ecclesiastical as well
as civil, lies in its gift, and though it must not use
this function so as to disgust the Commons, it has
great latitude in the disposal of favours. While Parlia-
ment is sitting it disposes of a large part, sometimes
(as in 1887) of the whole of the time of the House
of Commons, and can therefore advance the measures it
prefers, while retarding or evading motions it dislikes,
During nearly half the year Parliament is not sitting,
and the necessities of a great State placed in a réstleas
world oblige a ministry to take momentous resolutions
upon its own responsibility. Finally, it includes a few
men who have obtained a hold on the imagination and
confidence of the people, which emboldens them to resist
or even to lecture Parliament, and often to prevail, not
only against its first impulses, but possibly against its de-
liberate wishes. And an English ministry is strong not
only because it so frankly. acknowledges its dependence
on the Commons as not to rouse the antagonism of that
body, to which, be it remembered, most ministers belong,
but also because it has another power outside to which it
can, in extreme cases, appeal. It may dissolve Parlia-
ment, and ask the people to judge between its views
and those of the majority of the House of Commons.
Sometimes such an appeal succeeds. The power of
making it is at all times a resource. .
This delicate equipoise of the ministry, the House
of Commons, and the nation acting at a general election,

CHAP, XXI LEGISLATURE AND EXECUTIVE 295

is the secret of the smooth working of the British
Constitution. It reappears in two remarkable Con-
stitutions, which deserve fuller study than they ,have
yet received from American or English publicists,
those of Prussia and the new German Empire. There,
however, the ministry is relatively stronger than in
England, because the Crown retains not only a wider
stretch of legal authority, but a greater moral influence
over the people, who have had less practice than the
English in working free institutions, and who never forget
that.they are soldiers, and the King-Emperor head of
the army. A Prussian minister is so likely to have
the nation on his side when he makes an appeal to it
in the name of the King, and feels so confident that
even if he defies the Chambers without dissolving, the
nation will not be greatly stirred, that he sometimes
refuses to obey the legislature. This is one of those
exceptions which illustrate the rule. The legislature
is prevented from gaining ground on the executive,
not so much by the Constitution as by the occasional
refusal of the executive to obey the Constitution, a refusal
made in reliance on the ascendency of the Crown.

So far we have been considering domestic policy.
The case of foreign affairs differs chiefly in‘ this, that
they cannot be provided for beforehand by laws general
in application, but minutely particulay in wording. A
governing assembly may take foreign affairs into its own
hand. In the republics of antiquity the Assembly did so,
- and was its own foreign office. The Athenian Assembly
received ambassadors, declared war, concluded treaties.
It got on well enough while it had to deal with other
republics like itself, but suffered when the contest came
to be with an astute diplomatist like Philip of Macedon.
The Roman Senate conducted the foreign policy of Rome,

296 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

often with the skill to be expected from men of immense
experience and ability, yet sometimes with a vacillation
which a monarch would have been less likely to show.
But the foreign relations of modern states are so nume-
rous and complex, and so much entangled with com-
mercial questions, that it has become necessary to
create a staff of trained officials to deal with them.
No large popular assembly could have either the time
or the knowledge requisite for managing the ordinary
business, much less could it conduct a delicate negotia-
tion whose success would depend on promptitude and
secrecy. Hence even democratic countries like France
and England are forced to leave foreign affairs to a far
greater degree than home affairs to the discretion of the
ministry of the day. France reserves to the Chambers
the power of declaring war or concluding a treaty.
England has so far adhered to the old traditions as to
leave both to the Crown, though the first, and in most
cases the second, must be exerted with the virtual
approval of Parliament. The executive is as distinctly
responsible to the legislature, as clearly bound to obey
the directions of the legislature, as in matters of
domestic concern. But the impossibility which the
legislature in countries like France and England finds
in either assuming executive functions in international
intercourse, or laying down any rules by law for the
guidance of the executive, necessarily gives the executive
a wide discretion and a correspondingly large measure of
influence and authority. The only way of restricting this
authority would be to create a small foreign affairs com-
mittee of the legislature and to empower it to sit when the
latter was not sitting. And this extreme course neither
France nor England has yet taken, because the depend-
ence of the ministry on the majority of the legislature has

CHAP. XXI LEGISLATURE AND EXECUTIVE 297

hitherto seemed to secure the conformity of the Foreign
Office to the ideas and sentiments of that majority.

Beforé applying these observations to the United
States, let us summarize the conclusions we have
reached.

We have found that wherever the will of the people
prevails, the legislature, since it either is or represents
the people, can make itself omnipotent, unless checked
by the action of the people themselves. It can do this
in two ways. It may, like the republics of antiquity,
issue decrees for particular cases as they arise, giving
constant commands to all its agents, who thus become
mere servants with no discretion left them. Or it may
frame its laws with such particularity as to provide by
anticipation for the greatest possible number of imagin-
able cases, in this way also so binding down its officials
as to leave them no volition, no real authority.

We have also observed that every legislature tends
so to enlarge its powers as to encroach on the executive ;
and that it has great advantages for so doing, because a
succeeding legislature rarely consents to strike off any
fetter its predecessor has imposed.

Thus the legitimate issue of the process would be the
extinction or absorption of the executive as a power in
the State. It would become a mere set of employés,
obeying the legislature as the clerks in a "bank obey the
directors. If this does not happen, the cause is generally
to be sought in some one or more of the following
circumstances :—

The legislature may allow the executive the power of
appealing to the nation against itself (England).

The people may from ancient reverence or the habit

1 In France the President can dissolve the Chambers, but only with
the consent of the Senate.

298 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

of military submission be so much disposed to support
the executive as to embolden the latter to defy the
legislature (Prussia).

The importance of foreign policy and the difficulty
of taking it out of the hands of the executive may be so
great that the executive will draw therefrom an influence
re-acting in favour of its general weight and dignity
(Prussia, England, and, to some extent, France).

Let us now see how the founders of the American Con-
stitution settled the relations of the departments. They
were terribly afraid of a strong executive, and desired to
reserve the final and decisive voice to the legislature, as
representing the people. They could not adopt what I
have called the Greek method of an assembly both
executive and legislative, for Congress was to be a body
with limited powers; continuous sittings would be in-
convenient, and the division into two equally powerful
houses would evidently unfit it to govern with vigour
and promptitude. Neither did they adopt the English
method of a legislature governing through an executive
dependent upon it. It was urged in the Philadelphia Con-
vention of 1787 that the executive ought to be appointed
by and made accountable to the legislature, as being the
supreme power in the national government. This was
over-ruled, because the majority of the Convention were
fearful of “‘ democratic haste and instability,” fearful that
the legislature would, in any event, become too power-
ful, and therefore anxious to build up some counter
authority to check and balance it. By making the Pre-
sident independent, and keeping him and his ministers
apart from the legislature, the Convention thought they
were strengthening him, as well as protecting it from
attempts on his part to corrupt it.’ They were also

1 Their sense of the danger to a legislature from corruption by the

CHAP, XXI LEGISLATURE AND EXECUTIVE 299

weakening him. He lost the initiative in legislation
which the English executive enjoys. He had not the
English King’s power of dissolving the legislature, and
throwing himself upon the country. Thus the executive
‘magistrate seemed left at the mercy of the legislature.
It could weave so close a network of statutes round
him, like the net of iron links which Hephestus throws
over the lovers in the Odyssey, that his discretion, his
individual volition, seemed to disappear, and he ceased
‘to be a branch of the government, being nothing more
than a servant working under the eye and at the nod of
his master. This would have been an absorption of the
executive into the legislature more complete than that
of England, for the English prime minister is at any
rate a leader, perhaps as necessary to his parliamentary
majority as it is to him, whereas the President would
have become a sort of superior police commissioner, irre-
movable during four years, but debarred from acting
either on Congress or on the people.

Although the Convention may not have realized
how helpless such a so-called Executive must be,
they felt the danger of encroachments by an ambitious
legislature, and resolved to strengthen him against
it. This was done by giving the President a veto
which it requires a two-thirds vote of Congress to over-
ride. In doing this they went back on their previous
action. They had separated the President and his
ministers from Congress. They now bestowed on him
legislative functions, though in a different form. He
became a distinct. branch of the legislature, but for

executive was probably quickened by what they knew of the condition of
the Irish Parliament, full, even after 1782, of placemen and pensioners.
Much of the best blood of Ulster had emigrated to America in the preced-
ing half century, and Irish politics must have excited a good deal of
interest: there,

300 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

negative purposes only. He could not propose, but he
could refuse. Thus the executive was strengthened, not
as an executive, but by being made a part of the legis-
lature ; and the legislature, already weakened by being
divided into two co-equal houses, was further weakened
by finding itself liable to be arrested in any new de-
parture on which two-thirds of both houses were not
agreed.

When the two houses are of one mind, and the party
hostile to the President has a two-thirds majority in both,
the Executive is almost powerless. It may be right that
he should be powerless, because such majorities in both
houses presumably indicate a vast preponderance of
popular opinion against him,’ The fact to be emphasized.
is, that in this case all “balance of powers” is gone.
The legislature has swallowed up the executive, in virtue
of the principle from which this discussion started, viz.
that the executive is in free States only an agent who
may be so limited by express and minute commands
as to have no volition left him.

The strength of Congress consists in the right to
pass statutes; the strength of the President in his right
to veto them. But foreign affairs, as we have seen,
cannot be brought within the scope of statutes. How
then was the American legislature to deal with them?
There were two courses open. One was to leave foreign
affairs to the executive, as in England, giving Congress
the same indirect control as the English Parliament
enjoys over the Crown and ministry. This course could

1 An exceptionally experienced observer (Mr. James G. Blaine) says
(Twenty Years of Congress, vol. i. p. 185) : “ The practical deduction as to the
working of our governmental system from the whole of that troublous
period (the contest between President Johnson and Congress) is that two-
thirds of each House united and stimulated to one end can practically
neutralize the executive power of the government, and lay down its policy
in defiance of the efforts and the opposition of the President.”

CHAP, XXI LEGISLATURE AND EXECUTIVE 301

not be taken, because the President is independent of
Congress and irremovable during his term. The other
course would have been for Congress, like a Greek
assembly, to be its own foreign office, or to create a
foreign affairs committee of its members to handle
these matters. As the objections to this course, which.
would have excluded the chief magistrate from functions
naturally incidéntal to his position as official representa-
tive of the nation, were overwhelmingly strong, a com-
promise was made. The initiative in foreign policy
and the conduct of negotiations were left to him, but the
right of declaring war was reserved to Congress, and
that of making treaties to one, the smaller and more
experienced, branch of the legislature. A measure of
authority was thus suffered to fall back to the executive
which would have served to raise materially his position
had foreign questions played as large a part in American
politics as they have in French or English. They have,
however, been comparatively unimportant, especially
since 1815.

It may be said that there was yet another source
whence the executive might draw strength to support
itself against the legislature, viz. those functions which
the Constitution, deeming them necessarily incident to
an executive, has reserved to the President and excluded
from the competence of Congress. But examination
shows that there is scarcely one of these which the long
arm of legislation cannot reach. The President is
commander-in-chief of the army, but the’ numbers and
organization of the army are fixed by statute. The
President makes appointments, but the Senate has the
right of rejecting them, and Congress may pass Acts
specifying the qualifications of appointees, and reducing
the salary of any official except the President himself

302 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

and the judges. The real strength of the executive
therefore, the rampart from behind which it can resist
the aggressions of the legislature, is in ordinary times
the veto power.' In other words, it survives as an
executive in virtue not of any properly executive function,
but of the share in legislative functions which it has
received ; it holds its ground by force, not of its separa-
tion from the legislature, but of its participation in a
right properly belonging to the legislature.’

An authority which depends on a veto capable of
being over-ruled by a two-thirds majority may seem
frail. But the experience of a century has shown that,
owing to the almost equal strength of the two great
parties, the Houses often differ, and there is rarely a
two-thirds majority of the same colour in both,
Hence the Executive has enjoyed some independence.
He is strong for defence, if not for attack. Congress
can, except within that narrow sphere which the Con-
stitution has absolutely reserved to him, baffle the
President, can interrogate, check, and worry his min-
isters. But it can neither drive him the way it wishes

1 In moments of public danger, as during the War of: Secession, the
executive of course springs up into immense power, partly because the
command of the army is then of the first importance ; partly because the
legislature, feeling its unfitness for swift arid secret decisions, gives free
rein to the Executive, and practically puts its law-making powers at his
disposal.

2 What is said here of the national executive and national legislature
is a fortiori true of the State executive and State legislatures. The State
governor has no power of independent action whatever, being checked at
every step by State statutes, and his discretion superseded by the minute
directions which those statutes contain. He has not even ministers,
because the other chief officials of the State are chosen, not by himself,
but by popular vote. He has very little patronage; and he has no
foreign policy at all. The State legislature would therefore prevail
against him in everything, were it not for his veto and for the fact that
the legislature is now generally restrained (by the provisions of the State
constitution) from passing laws on many topics, (See post, Chapters
XXXVITI-XLV.

CHAP, XXI LEGISLATURE AND EXECUTIVE 303

‘him to go, nor dismiss them for disobedience or incom-
petence.
An individual man has some great advantages in
combating an assembly. His counsels are less dis-
racted. His secrets are better kept. He may sow
discord among his antagonists. He can strike a more
sudden blow. Julius Caesar was more than a match
for the Senate, Cromwell for the Long Parliament,
even Louis Napoleon for the French Assembly of 1851.
Hence, when the President happens to be a strong
man, resolute, prudent, and popular, he may well
hope to prevail against a body whom he may divide
by the dexterous use of patronage, may weary out by
inflexible patience, may overawe by winning the admira-
tion of the masses, always disposed to rally round a
striking personality. But in a struggle extending over
a long course of years an assembly has advantages over
a succession of officers, especially of elected officers.
The Roman Senate encroached on the consuls, though it
was neither a legislature nor representative; the Car-
thaginian Councils encroached on the Suffetes; thé
Venetian Councils encroached on the Doge. Men come
and go, but an assembly goes on for ever ; it is immortal,
because while the members change, the policy, the
passion for extending its authority, the tenacity in
clinging to what has once been gained, remain persistent.
A weak magistrate comes after a strong magistrate, and
yields what his predecessor had fought for; but an
assembly holds all it has ever won.’ Its pressure is

1 This is still more conspicnously the case when the members of the
executive government do not sit in the assembly. When they do, and lead
it, their influence tends to restrain legislative encroachments, Even the
presence of persons who are likely to be soon called on to form the execu-
tive has its influence. In 1886 a resolution moved in the House of
Commons declaring that the executive ought to make no treaty without

304 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

steady and continuous ; it is always, by a sort of natural
process, expanding its own powers and devising new
methods for fettering its rival. Thus Congress, though
it is no more respected or loved by the people now
than it was seventy years ago, though it has developed,
no higher capacity for promoting the best interests
of the State, has succeeded in occupying nearly all the
ground which the Constitution left debatable between
the President and itself;* and would, did it possess a
better internal organization, be even more plainly than
it now is the supreme power in the government.

In their effort to establish a balance of power, the
framers of the Constitution so far succeeded that
neither power has subjected the other. But they
underrated the inconveniences which arise from the dis-
junction of the two chief organs of government. They
relieved the Administration from a duty which European
ministers find exhausting and hard to reconcile with
the proper performance of administrative work — the
duty of giving attendance in the legislature and taking
the lead in its debates. They secured continuity of
executive policy for four years at least, instead of leav-
ing government at the mercy of fluctuating majorities
in an excitable assembly. But they so narrowed the
sphere of the executive as to prevent it from leading
the country, or even its own party in the country.
the previous consent of Parliament was resisted by the léiders of the
Opposition as well as by thé Government, partly because the former,
feeling they might at any time be called back to power, had personal
as well as public grounds for not desiring to see the executive fettered.

1 The modification (in 1869) and repeal (in 1886) of the. Tenure of
Office Act (see above, p. 81) are scarcely instances to the contrary, because
that Act, even if constitutional, had proved difficult to work. ‘

Justice Miller observes (Oration at the Centennial Celebration of the
framing of the Constitution, p. 20), “No department of the government

has been more shorn of its just powers or crippled in the exercise of them
than the Presidency.”

CHAP, XXI LEGISLATURE AND EXECUTIVE 305

They sought to make members of Congress independent,
but in doing so they deprived them of some of the means
which European legislators enjoy of learning how to
administer, of learning even how to legislate in admin-
istrative topics. They condemned them to be architects
without science, critics without experience, censors with-
out responsibility.

VOL. 1 x

CHAPTER XXII
THE FEDERAL COURTS

WHEN in 1788 the loosely confederated States of North
America united themselves into a nation, national
tribunals were felt to be a necessary part of the national
government. Under the Confederation there had existed
no means of enforcing the treaties made or orders
issued by the Congress, because the courts of the
several States owed no duty to that feeble body,
and had little will to aid it. Now that a Federal
legislature had been established, whose laws were to
bind directly the individual citizen, a Federal judi-
eature was evidently needed to interpret and apply
these laws,-and to compel obedience to them. The
alternative would have been to entrust the en-
forcement of the laws to State courts. But State
courts were not fitted to deal with matters of a quasi-
international character, such as admiralty jurisdiction
and rights arising under treaties. They supplied
no means for deciding questions between different
States. They could not be trusted to do complete
justice between their own citizens and those of an-
other State. Being under the control of their own
State governments, they might be forced to disregard
any Federal law which the State disapproved; or even

CHAP, XXII THE FEDERAL COURTS 307

if they admitted its authority, might fail in the zeal
or the power to give due effect to it. And being
authorities co-ordinate with and independent of one
another, with no common court of appeal placed over
¢hem to correct their errors or harmonize their views,
they would be likely to interpret the Federal Con-
stitution and statutes in different senses, and make
the law uncertain by the variety of their decisions.
These reasons pointed imperatively to the establish-
ment of a new tribunal or set of tribunals, alto-
gether detached from the States, as part of the
machinery of the new government. Side by side of the
thirteen (now thirty-eight) different sets of State courts,
whose jurisdiction under State laws and between their
own citizens was left untouched, there arose a new
and complex system of Federal courts. The Constitu-
tion drew the outlines of the system. Congress per-
fected it by statutes; and as the details rest upon these
statutes, Congress retains the power of altering them.
Few American institutions are better worth studying
than this intricate judicial machinery: few deserve more
admiration for the smoothness of their working: few
have more contributed to the peace and well-being of
the country.

The Federal courts fall into three classes :—

The Supreme court, which sits at Washington.

The Circuit courts.

The District courts.

The Supreme court is directly created by Art. iii.
§ 1 of the Constitution, but with no provision as to
the number of its judges. _ Originally there were six;
at present. there are nine, & chief justice, with a salary
of $10,500 (£2100), and eight associate justices (salary
$10,000). ‘The justices are ; nominated by the President

308 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

and confirmed'by the Senate. They hold office during
good behaviour, z.c. they are removable only by im-
peachment. They have thus a tenure even more secure
than that of English judges, for the latter may be
removed by the Crown on an address from both Housea
of Parliament.1 Moreover, the English statutes secure
the permanence only of the judges of the Supreme
-court of judicature, not also of judges of county or
other local courts, while the provisions of the American
Constitution are held to apply to the inferior as well
as the superior Federal judges. The Fathers of the
Constitution were extremely anxious to secure the
independence of their judiciary, regarding it as a bul-
wark both for the people and for the States against
aggressions of either Congress or the President.” They
affirmed the life tenure by an unanimous vote in the
Convention of 1787, because they deemed the risk of
the continuance in office of an incompetent judge a
less evil than the subserviency of all judges to the legis-
lature, which might flow from a tenure dependent on
legislative will. The result has justified their expecta-
tions. The judges have shown themselves independent
of Congress and of party, yet the security of their posi-
tion has rarely tempted them to breaches of judicial
duty. Impeachment has been four times resorted to,
once only against a justice of the Supreme court, and

1 12 and 13 William III., cap. 2.; ef. 1 George IIL, cap. 23. The
occasional resistance of the parliament of Paris, whose members held office
for. life, to the French Crown may probably have confirmed the Convention
of 1787 in its attachment to this English principle.

2 See Hamilton in Federalist, No. Ixxviii.: “The standard of good
behaviour for the continuance in office ‘of the judicial magistracy is
certainly one of the most valuable of the modern improvements in the
practice of government. In a monarchy it is an excellent barrier to the
despotism of the prince ; in a republic it is a no less excellent barrier to
the encroachments and oppressions of the legislative body.”

CHAP, XXII THE FEDERAL COURTS 309

then unsuccessfully... Attempts have been made, be-
ginning from Jefferson, who argued that judges should
hold office for terms of four or six years only, to alter
the tenure of the Federal judges, as that of the State
judges has been altered in most States ; but Congress has
alvays rejected the proposed constitutional amendment.

The Supreme court sits at Washington from October
till July in every year. The presence of six judges is
required to pronounce a decision, a rule which, by pre-
venting the division of the court into two or more
branches, retards the despatch of business, though it has
the advantage of securing a thorough consideration of
every case. The sittings are held in : the Capitol, in the
chamber formerly occupied by the Senate, and the
justices wear black gowns, being not merely the only
public officers, but the only non-ecclesiastical persons of
any kind whatever within the bounds of the United States
who use any official dress.? Every case is discussed by the
whole body twice, over, once to ascertain the opinion
of the majority, which is then directed to be set forth
in a written judgment; then again when that written
Judgment, which one of the judges has prepared, is
submitted for criticism and adoption as the judgment
of the court.

The Cireuit courts have been created by Congress
under a power in the Constitution to establish “ inferior
courts.” There are at present nine judicial circuits, in
which courts are held annually. For each of these there
has been appointed a Circuit judge (salary $6000),

1 This was Samuel Chase of Maryland in 1804-5. The other three
cases were of district Federal judges. Two were convicted (one of violence,
apparently due to insanity, the other of rebellion), the third was acquitted.

2 Save that of late years in one or two universities the president and

professors have taken to wearing academic gowns on great occasions, such
as the annual Commencement.

310 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

and to each there is also allotted one of the justices of.
the Supreme'court. The Circuit court may be held
either by the Circuit judge alone, or by the Supreme
court Circuit justice alone, or by both together, or by
either sitting along with the District judge (hereafteg
mentioned) of the district wherein the particular circuit
court is held. An appeal lies from the Circuit court to
the Supreme court, except in certain cases where the
amount in dispute is small.

The District courts are the third and lowest class of
Federal tribunals. They are at present fifty-five in
number, and their judges receive salaries of from $3500
to $5000 (£700 to £1000) perannum. The Constitution
does not expressly state whether they and the Circuit
judges are to be appointed by the President and Senate
like the members of the Supreme court; but it has
always been assumed that such was its intention, and
the appointments are so made accordingly. _

For the purpose of dealing with the claims of
private persons against the Federal government there
has been established in Washington a special tribunal
called the Court of Claims, with five justices (salary
$4500), from which an appeal lies direct to the Supreme
court.

The jurisdiction of the Federal courts extends to
the following classes of cases, on each of which I say
no more than what seems absolutely neeessary to
explain their nature.’ All other cases have been left to

1 « All the enumerated cases of Federal cognizance are those which
touch the safety, peace, and sovereignty of the nation, or which presume
that State attachments, State prejudices, State jealousies, and State
interests might sometimes obstruct or control the regular administration
of justice. The appellate power in all these cases is founded on the
clearest principles of policy and wisdom, and is necessary in order to
preserve uniformity of decision upon all subjects within the purview of
the Constitution.”-—Kent’s Commentaries (Holmes’ edition), vol. i. p. 320.

CHAP. XXII THE FEDERAL COURTS Bir

the State courts, from which there does not lie (save as
hereinafter specified) any appeal to the Federal courts.

1. ‘Cases in law and equity arising under the con-
stitution, the laws of the United States and treaties
made under their authority.”

In order to enforce the supremacy of the national
Constitution and laws over all State laws, it was neces-
sary to place the former under the guardianship of the
national judiciary. This provision accordingly brings
before a Federal court every cause in which either party
to a suit relies upon any Federal enactment. It entitles
a plaintiff who bases his case on a Federal statute to
bring his action in a Federal court: it entitles a defend-
ant who rests his defence on a Federal enactment to
have the action, if originally brought in a State court,
removed to a Federal court.’ But, of course, if the
action has originally been brought in a State court, there
is no reason for removing it unless the authority of the
Federal enactment can be supposed to be questioned.
Accordingly, the rule laid down by the Judiciary Act
(1789) provides ‘‘ for the removal to the supreme court
of the United States of the final judgment or decree in
any suit, rendered in the highest court of law or equity
of a State in which a decision could be had, in which is
drawn in question the validity of a treaty or statute of,
or authority exercised under, the United States, and the
decision is against their validity ; or where is drawn in
question the validity of a statute of, or an authority
exercised under, any State, on the ground of their being
repugnant to the Constitution, treaties, or laws of the
United States, and the decision is in favour of their
validity ; or where any title, right, privilege, or im-

1 The removal may be before or after judgment given, and in the
latter event, by way of appeal or by writ of error.

312 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

munity is claimed under the Constitution, or any treaty
or statute of a commission held or authority exercised
under the United States, and the decision is against the
title, right, privilege, or immunity specially set up or
claimed by either party under such Constitution, treaty,
statute, commission, or authority. But to authorize the
removal under that act, it must appear by the record,
either expressly or by clear and necessary intendment,
that some one of the enumerated questions did arise in
the State court, and was there passed upon. It is not
sufficient that it might have arisen or been applicable.
And if the decision of the State court is in favour of
the right, title, privilege, or exemption so claimed, the
Judiciary Act does not authorize such removal, neither
does it where the validity of the State law is drawn in
question, and the decision of the State court is against
its validity.” ?

The rule seems intricate, but the motive for it
and the working of it are plain. Where in any legal
proceeding a Federal enactment has to be construed or
applied by a.State court, if the latter supports the
Federal enactment, z.e. considers it to govern the case,
and applies it accordingly, the supremacy of Federal
law is thereby recognized and admitted. There is there-
fore no reason for removing the case to a Federal tribunal.
Such a tribunal could do no-more to vindicate Federal
authority than the State court has already dene. But if
the decision of the State court has been against the
applicability of the Federal law, it is only fair that
the party who suffers by the decision should be entitled
to Federal determination of the point, and he has

1 Cooley, Constitutional Limitations, p. 16. For details regarding
the removal of suits, and the restrictions when the amount in dispute is
small, see Cooley, Principles of renee Law, p. 122 sgq.; and see
also the Act of 3d March 1887.

CHAP, XXII THE FEDERAL COURTS 313

accordingly an absolute right to carry it before the
Supreme court.

The principle of this rule is applied even to executive
acts of the Federal authorities. If, for instance, a person
has been arrested by a Federal officer, a State court has
nd jurisdiction to release him on a writ of habeas corpus,
or otherwise to inquire into the lawfulness of his deten-
tion by Federal authority, because, as was said by Chief-
Justice Taney, “ The powers of the general government
and of the State, although both exist and are exercised
within the same territorial limits, are yet separate and
distinct sovereignties, acting separately and independ-
ently of each other, within their respective spheres.
And the sphere of action appropriated to the United
States is as far beyond the reach of the judicial process
issued by a State court as if the line of division was
traced by landmarks and monuments visible to the eye,”?

2. “ Cases affecting ambassadors, other public minis-
ters, and consuls.”

As these persons have an international character, it
would be improper to allow them to be dealt with by a
State court which has nothing to do with the national
‘government, and for whose learning and respectability
there may, exist no such securities as those that sur-
round the Federal courts.

3. “Cases of admiralty and maritime jurisdiction.”

These are deemed to include not only prize cases but
all maritime contracts, and all transactions relating to
navigation, as well on the navigable lakes and rivers of
the United States as on the high seas.

4, “Controversies to which the United States shall
be a party.”

1 Ableman v. Booth, 21 How. 516; and see Cooley, Constitutional
Limitations, p. 429.

314 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

This provision is obviously needed to protect the
United States from being obliged to sue or be sued in a
State court, to whose decision the national government
could. not be expected to submit. When a pecuniary
claim is sought to be established against the Federal
ee the proper tribunal is the Court of Claims.

5. “Controversies between two or more States,
between a State and citizens of another State, between
citizens of different States, between citizens of the same
State claiming lands under grants of different States,
and between a State, or the citizens thereof, and foreign
states, citizens, or subjects.”

In all these cases a State court is likely to be, or at
any rate to seem, a partial tribunal, and it is therefore
desirable to vest the jurisdiction in judges equally
unconnected with the plaintiff and the defendant. By
securing recourse to an unbiassed and competent tribunal,
the citizens of every State obtain better commercial
facilities than they could otherwise count upon, for their
credit will stand higher with persons belonging to other
States if the latter know that their legal rights are under
the protection, not of local and possibly prejudiced
judges, but of magistrates named by the national
government, and unamenable to local influences.’

One important part of the jurisdiction here conveyed
has been subsequently withdrawn from the Federal
judicature. When the Constitution was submitted to
the people, a principal objection urged against it was
that it exposed a State, although a sovereign common-

? There are countries in Europe with which English merchants are
unwilling to do business because they can seldom obtain justice from the
courts against a native. Local feeling was, of course, much stronger in
the America of 1787 than it is now. Englishmen who had claims against
American citizens failed to obtain their enforcement from 1783 till the
Federal-courts were established in 1789,

CHAP, XX THE FEDERAL COURTS 315

wealth, to be sued by the individual citizens of some
other State. That one State should sue another was
perhaps necessary, for what other way could ,be dis-
covered of terminating disputes? But the power as well
as the dignity of a State would be gone if it could be
diagged into court by a private plaintiff. Hamilton
(writing in the Federalist) met the objection by arguing
that the jurisdiction-giving clause of the Constitution
ought not to be so construed, but must be read as being
subject to the general doctrine that a sovereign body
cannot be sued by an individual without its own consent,
a doctrine not to be excluded by mere implication but
only by express words.’ However, in 1793 the Supreme
court, in the famous case of Chisholm v. The State
of Georgia,? construed the Constitution in the very
sense which Hamilton had denied, holding that an
action did lie against Georgia at the suit of a private
plaintiff; and when Georgia protested and refused to
appear, the court proceeded (in 1794) to give judgment
against her by default in case she should not appear and
plead before a day fixed. Her cries of rage filled the
Union, and brought other States to her help, An
amendment (the eleventh) to the Constitution was
passed through Congress and duly accepted by the
requisite majority of the States, which declares that
“the judicial power of the United States shall not be
construed to extend to any suit commenced or prosecuted
against one of the United States by citizens of another
State or by citizens or subjects of any foreign state.” *

1 Federalist, No. lxxxi. The same view was contemporaneously
maintained by John Marshall (afterwards Chief-Justice) in the Virginia
Convention of 1788. 2 2 Dall. 419.

3 It has been held that the amendment applies only when a State isa
party to the record, and therefore does not apply to the case of a State
holding shares in a corporation. Neither does it apply to appeals and
writs of error.

316 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

Under the protection of this amendment, not a few
States have with impunity repudiated their debts.’

The jurisdiction of the Supreme court is original in
cases affecting ambassadors, and wherever a State is a
party; in other cases it is appellate; that is, cases
may be brought to it from the inferior Federal courts
and (under the circumstances before mentioned) from
State courts. The jurisdiction is in some matters ex-
clusive, in others concurrent with that of the State
courts. Upon these subjects there have arisen many
difficult and intricate questions, which I must pass by,
because they would be unintelligible without long ex-
planations.? One point, however, may be noted. The
State courts cannot be invested by Congress with any
jurisdiction, for Congress has no authority over them,
and is not permitted by the Constitution to delegate
any judicial powers to them. Hence the jurisdic-
tion of a State court, wherever it is concurrent with
that of Federal judges, is a jurisdiction which the court
possesses of its own right, independent of the Consti-
tution. And, in some instances where congressional
statutes have purported to impose duties on State
courts, the latter have refused to accept and discharge
them. .

The criminal jurisdiction of the Federal courts, which

1 Quite recently (February 1, 1886), a decision has been pronounced
requiring the State of Virginia to accept in payment of taxes coupons in
terms made by her law so receivable, and attached to bonds which she had
repudiated. The circumstances of this case are very intricate, but the
above is the broad result. The decision was pronounced by five justices
against four, the minority holding that the Eleventh Amendment must be
taken to govern the case.

2 The lawyer who is curious in such matters may be referred to
Story’s Commentaries on the Constitution (4th edition by Judge Cooley),
chapter xxxviii, and to the judgments of Chief-Justice Marshall in the

cases of Martin v. Hunter (1 Wheat. 304) and Cohens v. Virginia (6
Wheat. 406).

CHAP, XXII THE FEDERAL COURTS 317

extends to all offences against Federal law, is purely
statutory. “The United States as such can have no
common law. It derives its powers from the grant of
the people made by the Constitution, and they are all to
be found in the written law, and not elsewhere.” }

The procedure of the Federal courts is prescribed by
Congress, subject to some few rules contained in the
Constitution, such as those which preserve the right of
trial by jury in criminal cases? and suits at common
law. As “cases in law and equity” are mentioned,
it is held that Congress could not accomplish such a
fusion of law and equity as has been effected in several
States of the Union, and was recently effected in
England,‘ but must maintain these methods of pro-
cedure as distinct, though administered by the same
judges. ;

The law applied in the Federal courts is of course
first and foremost that enacted by the Federal legis-
lature, which, when it is applicable, prevails against
any State law. But very often, as for instance in suits
between citizens of different States, Federal law does not,
or does only in a secondary way, come in question. In
such instances the first thing is to determine what law
it is that ought to govern the case, each State having
a law of its own; and when this has been ascertained,
it is applied to the facts, just as an English court would
apply French or Scotch law in pronouncing on the
validity of a marriage contracted in France or Scotland.
In administering the law of any State (including its
constitution, its statutes, and its common law, which in
Louisiana is the civil law in its French form) the Federal
courts ought to follow the decisions of the State courts,

1 Cooley, Principles, p.131. | 2 Art. iii. § 2.

3 Amendment vii. § 1. 4 By the Judicature Act, 1873.

318 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

treating those decisions as the highest authority.on the
law of the particular State. This doctrine is so fully
applied that the Supreme court has even over-ruled its
own previous determinations on a point of State law in
order to bring itself into agreement with the view of
the highest court of the particular State. Needless ‘to
say, the State courts follow the decisions of the Federal
courts upon questions of Federal law.’

For the execution of its powers each Federal court
has attached to it an officer called the United States
marshal, corresponding to the sheriff in the State
governments, whose duty it is to carry out its writs,
judgments, and orders by arresting prisoners, levying
execution, putting persons in possession, and so forth.
He is entitled, if resisted, to call on all good
citizens for help; if they will not or cannot render
it, he must refer to Washington and obtain the
aid of Federal troops. There exists also in every
judiciary district a Federal public prosecutor, called
the United States district attorney, who institutes
proceedings against persons transgressing Federal
laws or evading the discharge of obligations to the
Federal treasury. Both sets of officials are under
the direction of the attorney-general, as head of the
department of justice. They constitute a net-work
of Federal authorities covering the whole territory
of the Union, and independent of the -officers of the

1 “The judicial department of every government is the appropriate
organ for construing the legislative acts of that government. . On this
principle the construction given by this (the supreme) court to the Constitn-
tion and laws of the United States is received by all as the true construc-
tion ; and on the same principle the construction given by the courts of
the various States to the legislative acts of those States is received as
true, unless they come in conflict with the Constitution, laws, or treaties

of the United States.”—-Marshall, C.-J., in Elmendorf v. Taylor, 10
Wheat. 109.

CHAP, XXII THE FEDERAL COURTS : 319

State courts and of the public prosecutors who repre-
sent the State governments. Where a State maintains
a gaol for the reception of Federal prisoners, the U.S.
marshal delivers his prisoners to the State gaoler;
where this provision is wanting, he must himself arrange
for their custody.

The French or English reader may ask how it is
possible to work a system so extremely complex, under
which every yard of ground in the Union is covered by
two jurisdictions, with two sets of judges and two sets
of officers, responsible to different superiors, their spheres
of action divided only by an ideal line, and their action
liable in practice to clash, The answer is that the
system does work, and now, after a hundred years of
experience, works smoothly. It is more costly than
the simpler systems of France, Prussia, or England,
though, owing to the small salaries paid, the expense
falls rather on litigants than on the public treasury.
But it leads to few conflicts or heart-burnings, because
the key to all difficulties is found in the principle that
wherever Federal law is applicable Federal law must pre-
vail, and that every suitor who contends that Federal law
is applicable is entitled to have the point determined by
a Federal court. The acumen of the lawyers and judges,
the wealth of accumulated precedents, make the solution
of these questions of applicability and jurisdiction easier
than a European practitioner can realize: while the
law-abiding habits of the people and their sense that the
supremacy of Federal law and jurisdiction works to the
common benefit of the whole people, secure general
obedience to Federal judgments. The enforcement of
the law, especially the criminal law, in some parts of
America leaves much to be desired ; but the difficulties
which arise are now due not to conflicts between State

320 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

and Federal pretensions but to other tendencies equally
hostile to both authorities.

A word in conclusion as to the separation of the
judicial from the other two departments, a point on
which the framers of the Constitution laid great stress.
The functions of the legislature are more easily dis-
tinguished from those of the judiciary than from
those of the executive. The legislature makes the
law, the judiciary applies it to’ particular cases by in-
vestigating the facts and, when these have been ascer-
tained, by declaring what rule of law governs them.
Nevertheless, there are certain points in which the
functions of the two departments touch, certain
ground which is debatable between the judiciary
on the one hand and the legislature on the other.
In most countries the courts have grown out of the
legislature ; or rather, the sovereign body, which, like
Parliament, was originally both a law court and a
legislature, has delivered over most of its judicial duties
to other persons, while retaining some few to be still
exercised by itself.

In most points America has followed the principles
and practice of England. Like England, she creates
no separate administrative tribunals such as exist in the
states of the European continent, but allows officials
to be sued in or indicted before the ordinary courts.
Like England, she has given the judges (z.e-the Federal
judges) a position secured against the caprice of the
legislature or executive. Like, England, she recognizes
judicial decisions as law until some statute has set them
aside.! In one respect she has improved on England—
viz. in forbidding the legislature to exercise the powers

1 Assuming the statute to be one within the competence of the legisla-
ture which has passed it.

CHAP. XXII THE FEDERAL COURTS 321

of a criminal court, by passing acts of attainder or
of pains and penalties, measures still legal, though
virtually obsolete, in England! In others, she stands
behind England. England has practically ceased to use
one branch of her Pailiament as a court for the trial
of %impeachments. America still occasionally throws
upon one House of Congress this function; which
though it is ill suited to an ordinary court of justice,
is scarcely better discharged by a political assembly.
England has remitted to the courts of law the trial
of disputed parliamentary elections; America still
reserves these for committees of Congress. Special
and local bills which vest in private hands certain
rights of the State, such as public franchises, or
the power of taking. private property against the
owner’s will, are, though in form exercises of legis-
lative power, really fitter to be examined and settled
by judicial methods than by the loose opinion, the
private motives, the lobbying, which determine legis-
lative decisions where the control of public opinion
is insufficiently provided for. England accordingly,
though she refers such bills to committees of Par-
liament, directs these committees to apply a quasi-
judicial procedure, and to decide according to the
evidence tendered. America takes no such securities,
but handles these bills like any others. Here there-
fore we see three pieces of ground debatable between
the legislature and the judiciary. All of them
originally belonged to the legislature. All in America
still belong to it. England, however, has abandoned
the first, has delivered over the second to the judges,

1 Neither House of Congress can punish a witness for contempt, after

the fashion of the British Parliament (Kilbourn v. Thompson, 103 US. p.
168), See note to Chapter XXXII, post.

VOL. I

322 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

and treats the third as matter to be dealt with by
judicial rather than legislative methods. Such points
of difference are worth noting, because the impression
has prevailed in Europe that America is the country
in which the province of the judiciary has been most
widely extended.

CHAPTER XXIII
THE COURTS AND THE CONSTITUTION

No feature in the government of the United States has
awakened so much curiosity in the European mind,
caused so much discussion, received so much admira-
tion, and been more frequently misunderstood, than the
duties assigned to the Supreme Court and the functions
which it discharges in guarding the ark of the Constitu-
tion. Yet there is really no mystery about the matter.
It is not a novel device. It is not a complicated
device. It is the simplest thing in the world if ap-
proached from the right side.

In England and many other modern States there
is no difference in authority between one statute and
another. All are made by the legislature: all can be
changed by the legislature. What are called in Eng-
land constitutional statutes, such as Magna Charta, the
Bill of Rights, the Act of Settlement, the Acts of
Union with Scotland and Ireland, are merely ordinary
laws; which, could be repealed by Parliament at any
moment in exactly the same way as it can repeal a
highway act or lower the duty on tobacco. The
habit has grown up of talking of the British Con-
stitution as if it were a fixed and definite thing. But
there is in England no such thing as a Constitution

324 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1

apart from the, rest of the law: there is merely a mass

of law, consisting partly of statutes and partly of decided
cases and accepted usages, in conformity with which the
government of the country is carried on from day to
day, but which is being constantly modified by fresh
statutes and cases. The same thing existed in ancient
Rome, and everywhere in Europe a century ago. It
is, so to speak, the “natural,” and used to be the
vormal, condition of things in all countries, free or
despotic. .

The condition of America is wholly different. There
the name Constitution designates a particular instru-
ment adopted in 1788, amended in some points since,
_which is the foundation of the national government.
"This Constitution was ratified and made binding, not
by Congress, but by the people acting through con-
ventions assembled in the thirteen States which then
composed the Confederation. It created a legislature
of two houses; but that legislature, which we call Con-
gress, has no power to alter it in the smallest particular.
That which the people nBye enacted, the people only
can alter or repeal.

Here therefore we observe two capital differences
between England and the United States. The former
has left the outlines as well as the details of her system
of government to be gathered from a multitude of
statutes and cases. The latter has drawn them out in
one comprehensive fundamental enactment. The former
has placed these so-called constitutional laws at ,the
mercy of her legislature, which can abolish when it
pleases any institution of the country, the Crown, the
House of Lords, the Established Church, the House
of Commons, Parliament itself. The latter has placed

1 Parliament of course cannot restrict its own powers by any par-

cuar, xxi THE COURTS AND THE CONSTITUTION 325

her Constitution altogether out of the reach of Congress,
providing a method of amendment whose difficulty is
shown by the fact that it has been very sparingly used.

In England Parliament is omnipotent. In America
Congress is doubly restricted. It can make laws only
fdr certain purposes specified in the Constitution, and
in legislating for these purposes it must not transgress
any provision of the Constitution itself, The stream
cannot rise above its source.

Suppose, however, that Congress does so transgress,
or does overpass the specified purposes. It may do
so intentionally: it is likely to do so inadvertently.
What happens? If the Constitution is to be respected,
there must be some means of securing it against Con-
gress. Ifa usurpation of power is attempted, how is it
to be checked? If a mistake is committed, who sets it
right ?

The point may be elucidated by referring it to a
wider category, familiar to lawyers and easily compre-
hensible by laymen, that of acts done by an agent for
a principal. If a landowner directs his bailiff to collect
rents for him, or to pay debts due to tradesmen, the
bailiff has evidently no authority to bind his employer
by any act beyond the instructions given him, as, for
instance, by contracting to buy a field.. If a manu-
facturer directs his foreman to make rules for the hours
of work and meals in the factory, and the foreman
ticular Act, because that Act might be repealed in a subsequent
session, ‘and indeed any subsequent Act inconsistent with any of its
provisions repeals ipso facto that provision. (For instance, the Act of
Union with Scotland (6 Anne, c. 11) declared certain provisions of the
Union, for the establishment of Presbyterian church government in Scot-
land, to be “essential and fundamental parts of the Union,” but some of
those provisions have been altered by subsequent statutes.) Parliament,

could, however, extinguish itself by legally dissolving itself, leaving no
legal means whereby a subsequent Parliament could be summoned.

326 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

makes rules not only for those purposes, but also pre-
scribing what clothes the workmen shall wear and
what church they shall attend, the latter rules have
not the force of the employer's will behind them, and
the workmen are not to be blamed for neglecting
them. ‘

The same principle applies to public agents. In
every country it happens that acts are directed to be
‘done and rules to be made by bodies which are in the
position of agents, z.e. which have received from some
superior authority a limited power of acting and of
rule-making, a power to be used only for certain pur-
poses or under certain conditions. Where this power
is duly exercised, the act or rule of the subordinate body
has ‘all the force of an act done or rule made by the
superior authority, and is deemed to be made by it.
And if the latter be a law-making body, the rule of the
subordinate body is therefore also a law. But if the
subordinate body attempts to transcend the power com-
mitted to it, and makes rules for other purposes or
under other conditions than those specified by the
superior authority, these rules are not law, but are null
and void. Their validity depends on their being within
the scope of the law-making power conferred by the
superior authority, and as they have passed outside
that scope they are invalid. They do not justify any
act done under them forbidden by the ordinary law.
They ought not to be obeyed or in any way regarded
by the citizens, because they are not law.

The same principle applies to acts done by an
executive officer beyond the scope of his legal authority.
In free countries an individual citizen is justified
in disobeying the orders of a magistrate if he cor-
rectly thinks these orders to’ be in excess of the

cnar. xxi THE COURTS AND THE CONSTITUTION — 327

magistrate’s legal power, because in that case they are
not really the orders of a magistrate, but of a private
person’ affecting to act as a magistrate. In England,
for instance, if a secretary of state, or a police constable,
does any act which the citizen affected by it rightly
d@éems unwarranted, the citizen may resist, by
force if necessary, relying on the ordinary courts
of the land to sustain him. This is a consequence
of the English doctrine that all executive power
is strictly limited by the law, and is indeed a corner-
stone of English liberty.’ It is applied even as against
the dominant branch of the legislature. If the House
of Commons should act in excess of the power which
the law and custom of Parliament has secured to it, a
private individual may resist the officers of the House
and the courts will protect him by directing him
to be acquitted if he is prosecuted, or, if he is
plaintiff in a civil action, by giving judgment in his
favour.

An obvious instance of the way in which rules or
laws made by subordinate bodies are treated is afforded
by the bye-laws made by an English railway company
or municipal corporation under powers conferred by an
Act of Parliament. So long as these bye-laws are
within the scope of the authority which the Act of
Parliament has given, they are good, 7.e. they are laws,
just as much as if enacted in the Act. If they go
beyond it, they are bad, that is to say, they bind no-
body ‘and cannot be enforced. If a railway company

1 See as to the different doctrine and practice of the European con-
tinent, and particularly as to the “administrative law” of France, the
instructive remarks of Mr. Dicey in his Law of the Constitution. The
view he there takes of the relation of the Federal Coustitution to Con-
gress coincides in most points with that presented in the present chapter,
which, however, was written before his book appeared.

328 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

which has received power to make bye-laws imposing
fines up to the amount of forty shillings, makes a bye-
law punishing any person who enters or quits a train in
motion with a fine of fifty shillings or a week’s im-
prisonment, that bye-law is invalid, that is to say, it is
not law at all, and no magistrate can either imprison ‘or
impose a fine of fifty shillings on a person accused of
contravening it. If a municipal corporation has been
‘by statute empowered to enter into contracts for the
letting of lands vested in it, and directed to make
bye-laws, for the purpose of letting, which shall
provide, among other things, for the advertising of all
lands intended to be let, and if it makes a bye-law in
which no provision is made for advertising, and under
that bye-law contracts for the letting of a piece of land,
the letting made in pursuance of this bye-law is void,
and conveys no title to the purchaser. All this is obvious
to a lay as well as to a legal mind; and it is no less
obvious that the question of the validity of the bye-
law, and of what has been done under it, is one to be
decided not by the municipal corporation or company,
but by the courts of justice of the land.

Now, in the United States the position of Congress
may for this purpose be compared to that of an English
municipal corporation or railway company. The supreme
law-making power is the People, that is, the qualified
voters, acting in a prescribed way. The people have by
their supreme law, the Constitution, given to Congress
a delegated and limited power of legislation. Every
statute passed under that power conformably to the
Constitution has all the authority of the Constitution
behind it. Any statute passed which goes beyond that
power is invalid, and incapable of enforcement. It is in
fact not a statute at all, because Congress in passing it

cHap. xxii. THE COURTS AND THE CONSTITUTION. 329

was not really a law-making body, but a mere group
of private persons.

There is of course this enormous difference between
Congress and any subordinate law-making authority in
England, that Congress is supreme within its proper
sphere, the people having no higher permanent organ to
override or repeal such statutes as Congress may pass
within that sphere ; whereas in England “there exists in
Parliament a constantly present supervising authority,
which may at any moment cancel or modify what any sub-
ordinate body may have enacted, whether within or with-
out the scope of its delegated powers. This isa momentous
distinction. But it does not affect the special point
which I desire to illustrate, viz. that a statute passed
by Congress beyond the scope of its powers is of no
more effect than a bye-law made ultra wires by an
English municipality. There is no mystery so far:
there is merely an application of the ordinary principles
of the law of agency. But the question remains,
How and by whom, in case of dispute, is the validity
or invalidity of a statute to be determined ?

Such determination is to be effected by setting the
statute side by side with the Constitution, and consider-
ing whether there is any discrepancy between them.
Is the purpose of the statute one of the purposes men-
tioned or implied in the Constitution? Does it in
pursuing that purpose contain anything which violates
any clause of the Constitution? Sometimes this is a
simple question, which an intelligent layman may
answer. More frequently it is a difficult one, which
needs not only the subtlety of the trained lawyer, but
a knowledge of former cases which have thrown light
on the sarhe or a similar point. In any event it is an
important question, whose solution ought to proceed

330 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

from a weighty authority. It is a question of interpre-
tation, that ‘is, of determining the true meaning both
of the superior law and of the inferior law, so as to
discover whether they are inconsistent.

Now the interpretation of laws belongs to courts
of justice. A law implies a tribunal, not only in orderto
direct its enforcement against individuals, but to adjust
it to the facts, 2.e. to determine its precise meaning and
apply that meaning to the circumstances of the particular
ease. The legislature, which can only speak generally,
makes every law in reliance on this power of interpreta-
tion. It is therefore obvious that the question, whether a
congressional statute offends against the Constitution,
must be determined by the courts, not merely because it
is a question of legal construction, but because there is
nobody else to determine it. Congress cannot do so,
because Congress is a party interested. If such a body
as Congress were permitted to decide whether the acts
it had passed were constitutional, it would of course
decide in its own favour, and to allow it to decide would
be to put the Constitution at its mercy. The President
cannot, because he is not a lawyer, and he also may be
personally interested. There remain only the courts,
and these must be the National or Federal courts,
because no other courts can be relied on in such cases.
So far again there is no mystery about the matter.

Now, however, we arrive at a feature which compli-
cates the facts, though it introduces no new principle.
The United States is a federation of commonwealths,
each of which has its own constitution and laws. The
Federal Constitution not only gives certain powers to
Congress, as the national legislature, but recognizes
certain powers in the States, in virtue whereof their
respective peoples have enacted fundamental State laws

cuap.xxit THE COURTS AND THE CONSTITUTION — 331

(the State constitutions) and have enabled their respec-
tive legislatures to pass State statutes. However, as
the nation takes precedence of the States, the Federal
Constitution, which is the supreme law of the land
everywhere, and the statutes duly made by Congress
untler it, are preferred to all State constitutions and
statutes; and if any conflict arise between them, the
latter must give way. The same phenomenon therefore
occurs as in the case of an inconsistency between the
Constitution and a congressional statute. Where it is
shown that a State constitution or statute infringes either
the Federal Constitution or a Federal (7.c. congressional)
statute, the State constitution or statute must be held
and declared invalid. And this declaration must, of
course, proceed from the courts, nor solely from the
Federal courts; because when a State court decides
against its own statutes or constitution in favour of a
Federal law, its decision is final.’

It will be observed that in all this there is no con-
flict between the law courts and any legislative body.
The conflict is between different kinds of laws. The
duty of the judges is as strictly confined to the inter-
pretation of the laws cited to them as it is in England
or France; and the only difference is that in America
there are laws of four different degrees of authority,
whereas in England all laws (excluding mere bye-laws,
Privy Council ordinances, etc.) are equal because all pro-
ceed from Parliament. These four kinds of American
laws are :-—

I. The Federal Constitution.
II. Federal statutes.
1 When the State court decides against the applicability of a

Federal law the case may be removed to a Federal court. See above,
p- 311.

332 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

II. State constitutions.
“IV. State statutes.!

The American law court therefore does not itself enter
on any conflict with the legislature. It merely secures to
each kind of law its due authority. It does not even pre-
side over a conflict and decide it, for the relative strength
of each kind of law has been settled already. All the
court does is to point out that a conflict exists between
two laws of different degrees of authority. Then the
question is at an end, for the weaker law is extinct.

This is the abstract statement of the matter; but
there is also an historical one. Many of the American
colonies received charters from the British Crown,
which created or recognized colonial assemblies, and
endowed these with certain powers of making laws for
the colony. Such powers were of course limited, partly
by the charter, partly by usage, and were subject to the
superior authority of the Crown or of the British Parlia-
ment. Questions sometimes arose in colonial days
whether the statutes made by these assemblies were in
excess of the powers conferred by the charter; and if
the statutes were found to be in excess, they were held
invalid by the courts, that is to say, in the first instance,
by the colonial courts, or, if the matter was carried to
England, by the Privy Council.’ |

1 Of these, the Federal Constitution prevails agaimst all other laws.
Federal statutes, if made in pursuance of and conformably to the Consti-
tution, prevail against II].and IV. If in excess of the powers granted by
the Constitution, they are wholly invalid. A State Constitution yields to
I. and II., but prevails against the statutes of the State.

2 The same thing happens even now as regards the British colonies.
The question was lately argued before the Privy Council whether the
legislature of the Dominion of Canada, created by the British North
America Act of 1867 (an imperial statute), had power to extinguish the

right of appeal from the supreme court of Canada to the British Queen in
council.

cHAP. xx THE COURTS AND THE CONSTITUTION 333

When the thirteen American colonies asserted their |
independence in 1776, they replaced these old charters
by new'constitutions,’ and by these constitutions en-
trusted their respective legislative ‘assemblies with cer-
tain specified and limited legislative powers. The same
question was then liable to recur with regard to a statute
passed by one of these assemblies. If such a statute
was in excess of the power which the State constitution
conferred on the State legislature, or in any way
transgressed the provisions of that constitution, it
was invalid, and acts done under it were void. The
question, like any other question of law, came for de-
cision before the courts of the State. Thus, in 1786,
the supreme court of Rhode Island held a statute of the
legislature void, on the ground that it made a penalty
collectible on summary conviction, without trial by jury;
the colonial charter, which was then still in force as the
constitution of the State, having secured the right of
trial by jury in all cases.2 When the Constitution of °
the United States came into operation in 1789, and
was declared to be paramount to all State constitu-
tions and State statutes, no new principle was intro-
duced; there was merely a new application, as_be-
tween the nation and the States, of the old doctrine
that a subordinate and limited legislature cannot
pass beyond the limits fixed for it. It was clear,
on general principles, that a State law incompatible
with a Federal law must give way; the only question
was: What courts are to pronounce upon the ques-

1 Connecticut and Rhode Island, however, went on under the old
charters, with which they were well content. See as to this whole sub-
ject, Chapter XXXVIL in Vol. II, on State Constitutions.’

2 See as to this interesting case (Trevett v. Weedon), the first in which

a legislative act was declared unconstitutional for incompatibility with a
State constitution, Cooley’s Constitutional Limitations, p. 106 note.

334 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

tion whether such incompatibility exists? Who is to

‘decide whether or no the authority given to Congress

has been exceeded, and whether or no the State law
contravenes the Federal Constitution or a Federal
statute ?

In 1789 the only pre-existing courts were the State
courts. Ifa case coming before them raised the point
whether a State constitution or statute was inconsistent
with the Federal Constitution or a statute of Congress,
it was their duty to decide it, like any other point of
law. But their decision could not safely be accepted as
final, because, being themselves the offspring of, and
amenable to the State governments, they would natur-
ally tend to uphold State laws against the Federal Consti-
tution or statutes. Hence it became necessary to call
in courts created by the central Federal authority and co-
extensive with it—that is to say, those Federal courts
which have been already described. The matter seems
complicated, because we have to consider not only the
superiority of the Federal Constitution to the Federal
Congress, but also the superiority of both the Federal
Constitution and Federal statutes to all State laws,
But the principle is the same and equally simple in
both sets of cases. Both are merely instances of the
doctrine, that a law-making body must not exceed its
powers, and that when it has attempted to exceed its
powers, its so-called statutes are not laws at all, and
cannot be enforced.

In America the supreme law-making power resides
in the people. Whatever they enact binds all courts
whatsoever. All other law-making bodies are subordin-
ate, and the enactments of such bodies must conform to
the supreme law, else they will perish at its touch, as a
fishing smack goes down before an ocean steamer. And

CHAP, xxi THE COURTS AND THE CONSTITUTION — 335

these subordinate enactments, if at variance with the
supreme law, are invalid from the first, although their
invalidity may remain for years unnoticed or un-
proved. . It can be proved only by the*decision of a
court in a case which raises the point for determina-
tion. The phenomenon cannot arise in a country
whose legislature is‘ omnipotent, but naturally’ arises
wherever we find a legislature limited by a superior
authority, such as a constitution which the legislature
cannot alter

In England the judges interpret Acts of Parliament
exactly as American judges interpret statutes coming be-
fore them. If they find an Act conflicting with a decided
case, they prefer the Act to the case, as being of higher
authority. As between two conflicting Acts, they prefer
the later, because it is the last expression of the mind of
Parliament. If they misinterpret the mind of Parlia-
ment, t.¢. if they construe an Act in a sense which Parlia-
ment did not really intend, their decision is nevertheless’
valid, and will be followed by other courts? until Parlia-
ment speaks its mind again by another Act. The only
difference between their position and that of their
American brethren is that they have never to dis-
tinguish between the authority of one enactment and
of another, otherwise than by looking to the date, and
that they have therefore never to inquire whether an
Act of Parliament was invalid when first passed. In-

1 I do not say “necessarily,” because there are countries on the
European continent where, although there exists a constitution superior to
the legislature, the courts are not allowed to hold a legislative act in-
valid, because the legislature is deemed to have the right of taking its own
view of the constitution. This seems to be the case both in France and
in Switzerland.

2 That is, by other courts of the same or a lower degree of authority.
A court of the same authority will, however, sometimes differ from a
decision it thinks erroneous, and a higher court will not hesitate to do so.

336 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

valid it could not have been, because Parliament is
omnipotent, and Parliament is omnipotent because
Parliament is deemed to be the people. Parliament
is not a body with delegated or limited authority.
The whole fulness of popular power dwells in it. The
whole nation is supposed to be present within its walls.’
Its will is law; or, as Dante says in a famous line, “ its
will is power.”

There is a story told of an intelligent Englishman
who, having heard that the Supreme Federal Court was
ereated to protect the Constitution, and had authority
given it to annul bad laws, spent two days in hunting
up and down the Federal Constitution for the provisions
he had been told to admire. No wonder he did not
find them, for there is not a word in the Constitution
on the subject. The powers of the Federal courts are
the same as those of all other courts in civilized
‘countries, or rather they differ from those of other
courts by defect and not by excess, being limited to
certain classes of cases. The so-called “power of
annulling an, unconstitutional statute” is a duty rather
than a power, and a duty incumbent on the humblest
State court when a case raising the point comes before
it no less than on the Supreme Federal Court at
Washington. When therefore people talk, as they

1 The old writers say that the reason why an Act of Parliament
requires no public notification in the country is because it is deemed to
be made by the whole nation, so that every person is present at the
making of it. It is certainly true that the orthodox legal view of Parlia-
ment never regards it as exercising powers that can in any sense be called
delegated, A remarkable example of the power which Parliament can exert
as an ultimately and completely sovereign body is afforded by the Septen-
nial Act (1 Geo. I. st. 2, cap. 38). By this statute a Parliament in which
the House of Commons had been elected for three years only, under the
Triennial Act then in force, prolonged not only the possible duration of

future Parliaments but its own term to seven years, taking to itself four
years of power which the electors had not given it.

cHap.xxir THE COURTS AND THE CONSTITUTION 337,

sometimes do, even in the United States, of the
Supreme court as “the guardian of the Constitution,”
they mean nothing more than that it is the final court
of appeal, before which suits involving constitutional
questions may be brought up by the parties for decision.
In go far the phrase is legitimate. But the functions of
the Supreme court are the same in kind as those of all
other courts, State as well as Federal. Its duty and
theirs is simply to declare and apply the law; and
where any court, be it a State court of first instance,
or the Federal court of last instance, finds a law of
lower authority clashing with a law of higher authority,
it must reject the former, as being really no law, and
enforce the latter. ;

It is therefore no mere technicality to point out
that the American judges do not, as Europeans are apt
to say, “control the legislature,” but simply interpret
the law. The word “control” is misleading, because it
implies that the person or body of whom it is used
possesses and exerts discretionary personal Will. Now
the American judges have no will in the matter
any more than has an English court when it inter-
prets an Act of Parliament. The will that prevails
is the will of the people, expressed in the Constitution
which they have enacted. All that the judges have to
do is to discover from the enactments before them what
the will of the people is, and apply that will to the
facts of a given case. The more general or ambiguous
the language which the people have used, so much
the more difficult is the task of interpretation, so much
greater the need for ability and integrity in the judges.
But the task is always the same in its nature. The
Judges have no concern with the motives or the results
of an enactment, otherwise than as these may throw light

VOL. I z

338 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

on the sense in which the enacting authority intended
it. It would be a breach of duty for them to express,
I might almost say a breach of duty to entertain, an
opinion on its policy except so far as its policy explains
its meaning. They may think a statute excellent in
purpose and working, but if they cannot find in ¢he
Constitution a power for Congress to pass it, they must
brush it aside as invalid. They may deem another
statute pernicious, but if it is within the powers of
Congress, they must enforce it. To construe the
law, that is, to elucidate the will of the people as
supreme lawgiver, is the beginning and end of their
duty.’

To press this point is not to minimize the import-
ance of the functions exercised by the judiciary of the
United States, but to indicate their true nature. The
importance of those functions can hardly be exaggerated.
It arises from two facts. One is that as the Constitution
cannot easily be changed, a bad decision on its meaning,
z.e. a decision which the general opinion of the profes-
sion condemns, may go uncorrected. In England, if a
court has construed a statute.in a way unintended or
unexpected, Parliament sets things right next session
by amending the statute, and sp prevents future
decisions to the same effect. But American history shows
only one instance in which an unwelcome decision on the
meaning of the Constitution has been thus dealt with,
viz. the decision, that a State could be sued by a private

1 “Suppose, however,” some one may say, “that the court should go
beyond its duty and import its own views of what ought to be the law into
its decision as to what is the law. This would be an exercise of judicial
will.” Doubtless it would, but it would be a breach of duty, would
expose the court to the distrust of the people, and might, if repeated or
persisted in in a serious matter, provoke resistance tq the law as laid down
by the court. See Chapter XXXIII. post,

cuar.xxut THE COURTS AND THE CONSTITUTION — 339

citizen,’ which led to the eleventh amendment, whereby
it was declared that the Constitution should not cover
a case which the court had held it did cover.

The other fact which makes the function of an
American judge so momentous is the brevity, the laud-
able brevity, of the Constitution. The words of that
instrument are general, laying down a few large prin-
ciples. The cases which will arise as to the construc-
tion of these general words cannot be foreseen till they
arise. When they do arise the generality of the words
leaves open to the interpreting judges a far wider field
than is afforded by ordinary statutes which, since they
treat of one particular subject, contain enactments com-
paratively minute and precise. Hence, although the
duty of a court is only to interpret, the considerations
affecting interpretation are more numerous than in the
case of ordinary statutes, more delicate, larger in their
reach and scope. They sometimes need the exercise
not merely of legal acumen and judicial fairness, but
of a comprehension of the nature and methods of govern-
ment which one does not demand from the European
judge who walks in the narrow path traced for him by
ordinary statutes. It is therefore hardly an exaggera-
tion to say that the American Constitution as it now
stands, with the mass of fringing decisions which explain
it, is a far more complete and finished instrument than
it was when it came fire-new from the hands of the Con-
vention. It is not merely their work but the work of
the judges, and most of all of one man, the great Chief-
Justice Marshall.

The march of democracy in England has disposed

1 See above, p. 315, The doctrine of the Dred Scott case (of which

more anon) was set aside by the fourteenth amendment, but that amend-
ment was intended to effect much more than merely to correct the court.

340 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

English writers and politicians of the very school which
thirty or twenty years ago pointed to America as a
terrible example, now to discover that her republic
possesses elements of stability wanting in the monarchy
of the mother country. They lament that England
should have no “supreme court. Some have even.
suggested that England should create one. They. do
not seem to perceive that the dangers they discern
arise not from the want of a court but from the
omnipotence of the British Parliament. They ask for
a court to guard the British Constitution, forgetting
that Britain has no constitution, in the American sense,
and never had one, except for a short space under
Oliver Cromwell. The strongest court that might
be set up in England could effect nothing so long as
Parliament retains its power to change every part of the
law, including all the rules and doctrines that are called
constitutional. If Parliament were to lose that power
there would be no need to create a supreme court, be-
cause the existing judges of the land would necessarily
discharge the very functions which American judges
now discharge. If Parliament were to be split up into
four parliaments for England, Scotland, Ireland, and
Wales, and a new Federal Assembly were to be estab-
lished with limited legislative powers, powers defined
by an instrument which neither the Federal Assembly
nor any of the four parliaments could alter, questions
would forthwith arise as to the compatibility both of acts
passed by the Assembly with the provisions of the instru-
ment, and of acts passed by any of the four parliaments
with those ‘passed by the Assembly. These questions
would come before the courts and be determined by them
like any other question of law. The same thing would
happen. if Britain were to enter into a federal pact with

cuaP. xxur THE COURTS AND THE CONSTITUTION 341

her colonies, creating an imperial Council, and giving it
powers which, though restricted by the pact to certain
purposes, transcended those of the British Parliament.
The interpretation of the pact would belong to the
courts, and both Parliament and the supposed Council
wauld be bound by that interpretation.’ If a new
supreme court were created by Britain, it would be
created not because there do not already exist courts ,
capable of entertaining all the questions that could arise,
but because the parties to the new constitution enacted
for the United Kingdom, or the British Empire (as the
case might be), might insist that a tribunal composed
of persons chosen by some Federal authority would be
more certainly impartial. The preliminary therefore to
any such “ judicial safeguard” as has been suggested is
the extinction of the present British Parliament and the
erection of a wholly different body or bodies in its room.

These observations may suffice to show that there is
nothing strange or mysterious about the relation of the
Federal courts to the Constitution. The plan which the
Convention of 1787 adopted is- simple useful and con-
formable to general legal principles. Itis, in the original
sense of the word, an elegant plan. But it is not novel.
It was at work in the States before the Convention of 1787
met. It was at work in the thirteen colonies before they
revolted from England. It is an application of old and
familiar legal doctrines. Such novelty as there is be-
longs to the scheme of a Supreme or Rigid constitution,
reserving.the ultimate power to the people, and limiting
in the same measure the power of a legislature.?

It is nevertheless true that there is no part of the

1 Assuming of course that the power of altering the pact was reserved

to some authority superior to either the Council or Parliament.
2 This was clearly stated by James Wilson of Pennsylvania, one

342 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

F American system which reflects more credit on its authors
or has worked better in practice. It has had the ad-
vantage of relegating questions not only intricate and
delicate, but peculiarly liable to excite political passions,
to the cool, dry atmosphere of judicial determination.
The relations of the central Federal power to the States,
and the amount of authority which Congress and the

_ President are respectively entitled to exercise, have been
the most permanently grave questions in American
history, with which nearly every other political problem
has become entangled. If they had been left to be
settled by Congress, itself an interested party, or by any
dealings between Congress and the State legislatures, the
dangers of a conflict would have been extreme, and in-
stead of one civil war there might have been several.
But the universal respect felt for the Constitution, a
respect which grows the longer it stands, has disposed
men to defer to any decision which seems honestly and
logically to unfold the meaning of its terms. In obey-
ing- such a decision they are obeying, not the judges, but
the people who enacted the Constitution. To have fore-
seen that the power of interpreting the Federal Constitu-
tion and statutes, and of determining whether or no State
constitutious and statutes transgress Federal provisions,

of the deepest thinkers and most exact reasoners among the members
of the Convention of 1787. Speaking of the State constitutions,
he remarked in the Pennsylvania Convention of 1788: ‘Perhaps
some politician who has not considered with suffi¢tent accuracy opr
political systems would observe that in our governments the supreme
power was vested in the constitutions. This opinion approaches the
truth, but does not reach it. The truth is that in our governments the
supreme, absolute, and uncontrollable power remains in the people. As
our constitutions are superior to our legislatures, so the people are superior
to our constitutions,” —Elliot’s Debates, ii. 432,

Mr. M‘Kean, speaking in the same convention, quoted Locke’s Civil
Government (c. 2, § 140, and c. 13, § 152) as an authority for the proposi-
tion that the powers of Congress could be no greater than the positive
grant might convey.

car. xxi) THE COURTS AND THE CONSTITUTION 343

would be sufficient to prevent struggles between the
National government and the State governments, re-~
quired great insight and great faith in the soundness
and power of a principle. While the Constitution was
being framed the suggestion was made, and for a time
segmed likely to be adopted, that a veto on the acts of
State legislatures should be conferred upon the Federal
Congress. Discussion revealed the objections to such a
plan. Its introduction would have offended the senti-
ment of the-States, always jealous of their autonomy ;
‘its exercise would have provoked collisions with them.
The disallowance of a State statute, even if it did really
offend against the Federal Constitution, would’ have
seemed a political move, to be resented by a political
counter-move. And the veto would often have been
pronounced before it could have been ascertained exactly
how the State statute would work, sometimes, perhaps,
pronounced in cases where the statute was neither per-
nicious in itself nor opposed to the Federal Constitution.
But by the action of the courts the self-love of. the
States is not wounded, and the decision annulling their
laws is nothing but a tribute to the superior authority of
that supreme enactment to which they were themselves
parties, and which they may themselves desire to see
enforced against another State on some not remote
occasion. However, the idea of a veto by Congress was
most effectively demolished in the Convention by Roger
Sherman, who acutely remarked that a veto would seem
to recognize as valid the State statute objected to,
whereas if inconsistent with the Constitution it was
really invalid already and needed no veto.

By leaving constitutional questions to be settled by
the courts of law another advantage was incidentally
secured. The court does not go to meet the question ; it

344 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1

waits for the question to come to it. When the court
acts it acts at the instance of a party. Sometimes the
plaintiff or the defendant may be the National govern-
ment or a State government, but far more frequently
both are private persons, seeking to enforce or defend
their private rights. For instance, in the famoug cage!
which established the doctrine that a statute passed by
a State repealing a grant of land to an individual made
on certain terms by a previous statute is a law “ impair-
ing the obligation of a contract,” and therefore invalid,
under Art. i § 10 of the Federal Constitution; the
question came before the court on an action by one
Fletcher against one Peck on a covenant contained in a
deed made by the latter; and to do justice between
plaintiff and defendant it was necessary to examine the
validity of a statute passed by the legislature of Georgia.
This method has the merit of not hurrying a question
on, but leaving it to arise of itself. Full legal argument
on both sides is secured by the private interests which
the parties have in setting forth their contentions; and
the decision when pronounced, since it appears to be, as-
in fact it is, primarily a decision upon private rights,
obtains that respect and moral support which a private
plaintiff or defendant establishing his legal right is
entitled to from law-abiding citizens. A State might be
provoked to resistance if it saw, as soon as it had passed
a statute, the Federal government inviting the Supreme
court to declare that statute invalid. But when the
Federal authority stands silent, and a year after in an
ordinary action between Smith and Jones the court
decides in favour of Jones, who argued that the statute
on which the plaintiff relied was invalid because it
transgressed some provision of the Constitution, every-
? Fletcher v. Peck, 6 Cranch, p. 87.

cuap. xxit THE COURTS AND THE CONSTITUTION 345

“body feels that Jones was justified in sé arguing, and
that since judgment was given in his favour he must be
allowed to retain the money which the court has found
to be his, and the statute which violated his private
right must fall to the ground.

» This feature has particularly excited the admiration
of Continental critics. To an Englishman it seems
perfectly natural, because it is exactly in this way that
much of English constitutional law has been built up.
The English courts had indeed no rigid documentary
constitution by which to test the ordinances or the
executive acts of the Crown, and their decisions on
constitutional points have often been pronounced in
proceedings to which the Crown or its ministers were
parties, But they have repeatedly established principles
of the greatest moment by judgments delivered in cases
where a private interest was involved, grounding them-
selves either on a statute which they interpreted or on
some earlier decision.’ Lord Mansfield’s famous declara-
tion that slavery was legally impossible in England
was pronounced in such a private case. Stockdale v.
Hansard, in which the law regarding the publishing of
debates in Parliament was settled, was an action by a
private person against printers. The American method
of settling constitutional questions, like all other legal
questions, in actions between private parties, is there-
fore no new device, but a part of that priceless heritage
of the English Common Law which'the colonists carried
with them across the sea, and which they have preserved
and developed in a manner’ worthy of its own free
spirit and lofty traditions.

Europeans commonly suppose that the functions

1 The independence (since the Revolution) of the English judges and of
the American Federal judges has of course largely contributed to make
them trusted, and to make them act worthily of the trust reposed in them.

346 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

above described as pertaining to the Amcrican courts are
peculiar to and essential to a Federal government. This
is a mistake. They are not peculiar to a federation, be-
cause the distinction of fundamental laws and inferior
laws may exist equally well ina unified government, did
exist in each of the thirteen colonies up till 1776, did
exist in each of the thirteen States from 1776 till 1789,
does exist in every one of the thirty-eight States now.
Nor are they essential, because’ a federation may be
imagined in which the central or national legislature
should be theoretically sovereign in the same sense and
to the same full extent as is the British Parliament.!
The component parts of any confederacy will no doubt
be generally disposed to place their respective State
rights under the protection of a compact unchangeable
by the national legislature. But they need not do s0,
for they may rely on the command which as electors
they have over that legislature, and may prefer the
greater energy which a sovereign legislature promises to
the greater security for State rights which a limited
legislature implies. In the particular case of America
it is abundantly clear that if there had been in 1787 no
States jealous of their powers, but an united nation
creating for itself an improved frame of government, the
organs of that government would have been limited by
a fundamental law just as they-are now, because the
nation, fearing and distrusting the agents it was creating,
was resolved to, fetter them by reserving to itself the
ultimate and over-riding sovereignty.

1 It would appear that in the Achzan League the Assembly (which
voted by cities) was sovereign, and could by its vote vary the terms of the
federal arrangements between the cities forming the federation ; although
the scantiness of our data and what may be called the want of legal-
mindedness among the Greeks ‘make this and similar questions not easy
-of determination.

cuap. xxut. THE COURTS AND THE CONSTITUTION 347

The case of Switzerland shows that the American
plan is not the only one possible to a federation. The
Swiss Federal Court, while instituted in imitation of the
American, is not the only authority competent to deter-
mine whether a Cantonal law is void because inconsistent
with the Federal Constitution, for in some cases re-
course must be had not to the Court but to the Federal
Council, which is a sort of executive cabinet of the Con-
federation. And the Federal Court is bound to enforce
every law passed by the Federal legislature, even if it
violate the Constitution. In other words, the Swiss Con-
stitution has reserved some points of Cantonal law for
an authority not judicial but political, and has made
the Federal legislature the sole judge of its own powers,
the authorized interpreter of the Constitution, and an
interpreter not likely to proceed on purely legal grounds.’
To an English or American lawyer the Swiss copy seems
neither so consistent with sound theory nor so safe in
practice as the American original. But the statesmen
of Switzerland felt that a method fit for America might
be ill-fitted for their own country, where the latitude
given to the executive is greater ; and the Swiss habit of
constantly recurring to popular vote makes it less neces-
sary to restrain the legislature by a permanently enacted
instrument. The political traditions of the European
continent differ widely from those of England and
America; and the Federal Judicature is not the only
Anglo-American institution which might fail to thrive
anywhere but in its native soil.

1 See upon this fascinating subject, the provisions of the Swiss
Federal Constitution of 1874, arts. 102, 110, and 114; also Dubs,
Das oeffentliche Recht der Schweizerischen Eidgenossenschaft, and a valuable
pamphlet by M. Ch. Soldan, entitled Du recours de Drovt Public au
Tribunal Fédéral ; Bale, 1886. Dr, Dubs was himself the author of the
plan whereby the Federal legislature is made the arbiter of its own con-
stitutional powers.

CHAPTER XXIV
THE WORKING OF THE COURTS

THosE readers who have followed thus far the account
given of the Federal courts have probably asked them-
selves how judicial authorities can sustain the functions
which America requires them to discharge. It is plain
that judges, when sucked into the vortex of politics,
must lose dignity, impartiality, and influence. But
how can judges keep out of politics, when political
issues raising party passions come before them? Must
not constitutional questions, questions as to the rights
under the Constitution of the Federal government
against the States, and of the branches of the Federal
government against one another, frequently “involve
momentous political issues? In the troublous times’
during which the outlines of the English Constitution
were settled, controversy often. raged round the
courts, because the decision of contested points lay in
their hands. When Charles I. could not induce Par-
liament to admit the right of levying contributions
which he claimed, and Parliament relied on the power
of the purse as its defence against Charles I, the
question whether ship-money could lawfully be levied
was vital to both parties, and the judges held the
balance of power in their hands, At that moment

CHAP, XXIV THE .WORKING OF THE COURTS 349

the law could not be changed, because the Houses
and the king stood opposed: hence everything turned
on the interpretation of the existing law. In America
the .Constitution is at all times very hard to change:
much more then must political issues turn on its
interpretation. And if this be so, must not the inter-
preting court be led to assume a control over the
executive and legislative branches of the government,
since it has the power of declaring their acts illegal ?

There is ground for these criticisms. The evil they
point to has occurred and may recur. But it occurs
very rarely, and may be averted by the same prudence
which the courts have hitherto generally shown. The
causes which have enabled the Federal courts to avoid
it, and to maintain their dignity and influence almost
unshaken, are the following :—

The Supreme court—I speak of the Supreme court
because its conduct has governed that of inferior Federal
courts—has steadily refused to interfere in purely politi-
cal questions. Whenever it finds any discretion given
to the President, any executive duty imposed on him, it
considers the manner in which he exercises his discre-
tion and discharges the duty to be beyond its province.
Whenever the Constitution has conferred a power of
legislating upon Congress, the court declines to inquire
whether the use of the power was in the case of a par-
ticular statute passed by Congress either necessary or
desirable, or whether it was exerted in a prudent
manner, for it holds all such matters to be within the
exclusive province of Congress.

“In measures exclusively of a political, legislative, or executive
character, it is plain that as the supreme authority as to these ques-
tions belongs to the legislative and executive departments, they
cannot be re-examined elsewhere. Thus Congress, having the

350 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

power to declare war, to levy taxes, to appropriate money, to regu-
late intercourse and commerce with foreign nations, their mode of
executing these powers can never become the subject of re-examina-
tion in any other tribunal. So the power to make treaties being
confided to the President and Senate, when a treaty is properly
ratified, it becomes the law of the land, and no other tribunal can
gainsay its stipulations. Yet cases may readily be imagined in
which a tax may be laid, or a treaty made upon motives and
grounds wholly beside the intention of the Constitution. The
remedy, however, in such cases is solely by an appeal to the people
at the elections, or by the salutary power of amendment provided
by the Constitution itself.”

This may seem a vague statement of the principle
which the court has followed, but it could be rendered
more precise only by setting forth the instances in which
it has been applied. It has enabled the court to avoid
an immixture in political strife which must have de-
stroyed its credit, has deterred it from entering the
political arena, where it would have been weak, and
enabled it to act without fear in the sphere of pure law,
where it is strong. Occasionally, however, as I shall
explain presently, the court has come into collision with
the executive. Occasionally it has been required to
give decisions which have worked with tremendous force
on politics. The most famous of these was the Dred
Scott case,? in which the Supreme court, on an action by
a negro for assault and battery against the person claim-
ing to be his master, declared that a slave taken’ tem-
porarily to a free State and to a Territory in which
Congress had forbidden slavery, and afterwards return-
ing into a slave State and resuming residence there, was

1 Story, Commentaries on the Constitution, § 374.°

2 Scott v. Sandford, 19 How. 393. There is an immense literature
about this case, the legal points involved in which are too numerous and
technical to be here stated. It is noticeable that the sting of the decision
lay rather in the obiter dicta than in the determination of the main ques-
tion involved.

CHAP, XXIV THE WORKING OF THE COURTS 351

not a citizen capable of suing in the Federal courts if by
the law of the slave State he was still a slave. This
was the point which actually called for decision; but
the .majority of the court, for there was a dissentient
minority, went further, and delivered a variety of dicta
on, various other points touching the legal status of
negroes and the constitutional view of slavery. This
judgment, since the language used in it seemed to cut
off the hope of a settlement by the authority of Con-
gress of the then (1857) pending disputes over slavery
and its extension, did much to precipitate the Civil War.

Some questions, and among them many which in-
volve political issues, can never come before the Federal
courts, because they are not such as are raisable in an
action between parties. Of those which might be raised,
some never happen to arise, while others do not present
themselves in an action till some time after the statute
has been passed or act done on which the court is called
to pronounce. By that time it may happen that the
warmth of feeling which expressed itself during debate
in Congress or in the country has passed away, while the
judgment of the nation at large has been practically
pronounced upon the issue.

Looking upon itself as a pure organ of the law, com-
missioned to do justice between man and man, but to do
nothing more, the Supreme court has steadily refused to
decide abstract questions, or to give opinions in advance
by way of advice to the executive. When, in 1793,
President Washington requested its opinion on the con-
struction of the treaty of 1778 with France, the judges
declined to comply.’

This restriction of the court’s duty to the determina-

1 Story, Commentaries, § 1571; cf. Marshall’s Life of Washington,
vol. v. chap. vi. .

352 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

tion ‘of concrete cases arising in suits has excited so
much admiration from De Tocqueville and other writers,
that the corresponding disadvantages must be stated.
They are these :—

To settle at once and for ever a disputed point of
constitutional law would often be a gain both to private
citizens and to the organs of the government. Under
the present system there is no certainty when, if ever,
such a point will be settled. Nobody may care to incur
the trouble and expense of taking it before the court.
A suit which raises it may be compromised or dropped.

When such a question, after perhaps the lapse of
years, comes before the Supreme court and is determined,
the determination may be different from what the legal
profession has expected, may alter that which has been
believed to be the law, may shake or overthrow private
interests based upon views now declared to be’ erron-
eous.1 These are, no doubt, drawbacks incident to
every system in which the decisions of courts play a
great, part. There are many points in the law of Eng-
land which are uncertain even now, because they have
never come before a court of high authority, or, having
been decided in different ways by co-ordinate courts,
have not been carried to the final court of appeal? But
in England, if the inconvenience is great, it can be re-
moved by an Act of Parliament, and it can hardly be
so great as it may be in America, where, since the doubt-
ful point may be the true construction of the funda-

1 The Dred Scott decision in 1857 declared the Missouri compromise,
carried out by Act of Congress in 1820, to have been beyond the powers
of Congress, which, to be sure, had virtually repealed it a year or two before
by the Kansas-Nebraska legislation. Decisions have been given on the
fourteenth and fifteenth amendments upsetting or qualifying congressional
legislation passed years before.

2 The point at last settled in Martin v. Holgate by the House of
Lords will occur to English lawyers as a remarkable instance.

CHAP. XXIV THE WORKING OF THE COURTS 353

mental law of the Union, the President and Congress may

, be left in uncertainty as to how they shall shape their
course. With the best wish in the world to act con-
formably to the Constitution, these authorities have no
means of ascertaining before they act what, in the view
of its authorized interpreters, the true meaning of the
Constitution is. Moved by this consideration, five States
of the Union have by their constitutions empowered
the governor or legislature to require the written
opinions of the judges of the highest State court on
points submitted to them.! But the President of the
United States can only consult his attorney-general,?
and the Houses of Congress have no legal adviser,
though to be sure they are apt to receive a profusion of
advice from their own legal members.

I return to notice other causes which have sus-
tained the authority of the court by saving it from
immersion in the turbid pool of politics. These are
the strength of professional feeling among American
lawyers, the relation of the bench to the bar, the
power of the legal profession in the country. Pro-
posing to describe both bar and bench in’ subsequent
chapters, I will only now remark that the keen interest
which the profession takes in the law secures an unusually
large number of acute and competent critics of the inter-
pretation put upon the law by the judges. Such men

1 See Chapter XXXVII. in Vol. I]. There exists a similar provision
in the statutes creating some of the British colonial governments, and the
Government of Ireland Bill, introduced into the House of Commons in
1886 but defeated there, contained (§ 25) a proviso enabling the Lord-
Lieutenant of Ireland or a Secretary of State to refer a question for
opinion to the judicial committee of the Privy Council.

2 The President sometimes, for the benefit of the public, publishes the
Written opinion of the attorney-general on an important and doubtful
point ; but such an opinion has no more authority than what it may
derive from the professional eminence of the person who gives it.

VOL. I QA

354 THE NATIONAL! GOVERNMENT PART 1

$+
form a tribunal to whose opinion the judges are sensi-
tive, and all the more sensitive because the judges,
like those of England, but unlike those of continental
Europe, have been themselves practising counsel. The
better lawyers of the United States do not sink their
professional sentiment and opinion in their party sym-
pathies. They know good law even when it goes
against themselves, and privately condemn as bad law a
decision none the less because it benefits their party: or
their client. The Federal judge who has recently quitted
the ranks of the bar remains in sympathy with it,
respects its views, desires its approbation. Both his
inbred professional habits, and his respect for those tradi-
tions which the bar prizes, restrain him from prostituting
his office to party objects. Though he has usually
been a politician, and owes his promotion to his party,
his political trappings drop off him when he mounts
the Supreme bench. He has now nothing to fear from
party displeasure, because he is irremovable (except by
impeachment), nothing to hope from party favour,
because he is at the top of the tree and can climb no
higher. Virtue has all the external conditions in hér
favour. It is true that virtue is compatible with the
desire to extend the power and jurisdiction of the court.
But even allowing that this motive may occasionally
sway the judicial mind, the circumstances which sur-
round the action of a tribunal debarred from initiative,
capable of dealing only with concrete cases that come
before it at irregular intervals, unable to appropriate any
of the sweets of power other than power itself, make a
course of systematic usurpation more difficult and less
seductive than it would be to a legislative assembly or
an executive council, As the respect of the bench, for
the bar tends to keep the judges in the straight path, so

CHAP, XXIV THE WORKING OF THE COURTS 355

the respect and regard of the bar for the bench, a regard
grounded on the sense of professional brotherhood,
ensure the moral influence of the court in the country.
The bar has usually been very powerful in America,
not only as being the only class of educated men
who are at once men of affairs gnd skilled speakers,
but also because there has been no nobility or terri-
torial aristocracy to overshadow it.! Politics have been
largely in its hands, and must remain so as long as
political questions continue to be involved with the in-
terpretation of constitutions. For the first sixty or
seventy years of the Republic the leading statesmen
were lawyers, and the lawyers as a whole moulded and
led the public opinion of the country. Now to the better
class of American lawyers law was a sacred science, and
the highest court which dispensed it a sort of Mecca,
towards which the faces of the faithful turned. Hence
every constitutional case before the Supreme court was
closely watched, the reasonings of the court studied,
and its decisions appreciated as law apart from their
bearing on political doctrines. I have heard elderly
men describe the interest with which, in their youth,
‘a famous advocate who had gone to Washington to
argue a case before the Supreme court was welcomed
by the bar of his own city on his return, how the rising
men crowded round him to hear what he had to tell of
the combat in that arena where the best intellects of the
nation strove, how the respect which he never failed to
express for the ability and impartiality of the court com-
municated itself to them, how admiration bred acquies-
1 ‘This professional interest in law seems to have been stronger in the
last generation than it is now; it is even now stronger in America than
in England. Of course I do not speak of those sharpshooters who, while

calling themselves lawyers, are really politicians or lobbyists, but of the
regular army. of practitioners,

356 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

cence, and the whole profession accepted expositions of
the law unexpected by many, perhaps unwelcome to
most. When it was felt that the judges had honestly
sought to expound the Constitution, and when the cogency
of their reasonings was admitted, resentment, if any there
had been, passed away, and the support which the par
gave to the court ensured the obedience of the people.

That this factor in the maintenance of judicial
influence proved so potent was largely due to the per-
sonal eminence of the judges. One must not call that a
result of fortune which was the result of the wisdom of
successive Presidents in choosing capable men to sit on
the supreme Federal bench. Yet one man was so
singularly fitted for the office of chief justice, and
rendered such incomparable services in it, that the
Americans have been wont to regard him as a special
gift of favouring Providence. This was John Marshall,
who presided over the Supreme court from 1801 till his
death in 1835 at the age of seventy-seven, and whose
fame overtops that of all other American judges more
than Papinian overtops the jurists of Rome or Lord
Mansfield the jurists of England. No other man did
half so much either to develop the Constitution by
expounding it, or to secure for the judiciary its rightful
place in the government as the living voice of the Con-
stitution. No one vindicated more_strenuously the duty
of the court to establish the authority of the fundamental.
law of the land, no one abstained more scrupulously
from trespassing on the field of executive administration
or political controversy. The admiration and respect
which he and his colleagues won for the court remain its
bulwark: the traditions which were formed under him
and them have continued in general to guide the action
and elevate the sentiments of their successors,

CHAP, XXIV THE WORKING OF THE COURTS 357

Nevertheless, the court has not always had smooth
séas to navigate. It has more than once been shaken by
blasts of unpopularity. It has not infrequently found
itself in conflict with other authorities.

The first attacks arose out of its decision that it had
jurisdiction to entertain suits by private persons against
a State.’ This point was set at rest by the eleventh
amendment; but the States then first learnt to fear
the Supreme court as an antagonist. In 1801, in an
application requiring the secretary of state to deliver
& commission, it declared itself to have the power to
compel an executive officer to fulfil a ministerial duty
affecting the rights of individuals.? President Jefferson
protested angrily against this claim, but it has been
repeatedly re-asserted, and is now undoubted law. It
was in this same case that the court first explicitly
asserted its duty to treat as invalid an Act of Congress
inconsistent with the Constitution.* In 1806 it for the
first time pronounced a State statute void; in 1816 and
1821 it rendered decisions establishing its authority as a
supreme court of appeal from State courts on “federal
questions,” and unfolding the full meaning of the
doctrine that the Constitution and Acts of Congress duly
made in pursuance of the Constitution are the funda-
mental and supreme law of the land. This was a doc-
trine which had not been adequately apprehended even
by lawyers, and its development, legitimate as we now

1 Chisholm v. Georgia, see above, p. 315.

2 Marbury v. Madison, 1 Cranch, 137. In this case the court re-
fused to issue the mandamus asked for, but upon the gronnd that the
statute of Congress giving to the Supreme court original jurisdiction
to issue a mandamus was inconsistent with the Constitution. See also
naa = United. States, 12 Peters, 616; United States v. Schurz, 102

8 This however is a power which it has rarely been found necessary
to exert. See Dr. Andrews’ Manual of the Constitution, p. 196.

4

358 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART f

a a a ee
deem it, roused opposition. The Democratic party which

came into power under President Jackson in 1829, was
specially hostile to a construction of the Constitution
which seemed to trench upon State rights,’ and when in
1832 the Supreme court ordered the State of Georgia to
release persons imprisoned under a Georgian statute
which ‘the court declared to be invalid,? Jackson, whose
duty it was to enforce the decision by the executive
arm, remarked, “John Marshall has pronounced his
judgment: let him enforce it if he can.” The successful
resistance of Georgia in the Cherokee dispute? gave
a blow to the authority of the court, and marked the
beginning of a new period in its history, during which,
in the hands of judges mostly appointed by the Demo-
cratic party, it made no further advance in power.

In 1857 the Dred Scott judgment, pronounced by a
majority of the judges, excited the strongest outbreak
of displeasure yet witnessed. The Republican party,
then rising into strength, denounced this decision in the
resolutions of the convention which nominated Abraham
Lincoln in 1860, and its doctrine as to citizenship was
expressly negatived in the fourteenth constitutional
amendment adopted after the War of Secession.

It was feared that the political leanings of the judges

1 Martin van Buren (President 1837-41) expressed the feelings of the

bulk of his party when he complained bitterly of the encroachments of
. the Supreme court, and declared that it would never have been created
had the people foreseen the powers it would acquire.

2 This was only one act in the long struggle of the Cherokee Indians
against the oppressive conduct of Georgia, conduct which the court
emphatically condemned, though it proved powerless to help the unhappy
Cherokees.

3 The matter did not come to an absolute conflict, because before the
time arrived for the court to direct the United States marshal of the dis-
trict of Georgia to summon the posse comitatus and the President to render
assistance in liberating the prisoners, the prisoners submitted to the State
authorities, and were thereupon released. They probably believed that
the imperious Jackson would persist in his hostility to the Supreme court.

CHAP. XXIV THE WORKING OF THE COURTS 359

who formed the court at the outbreak of the war would
induce them to throw legal difficulties in the prosecution
of the measures needed for re-establishing the authority
of the Union. These fears proved ungrounded, although
some contests arose as to the right of officers in the
Federal army to disregard writs of habeas corpus issued
by the court.’ In 1868, having then become Republican
in its sympathies by the appointment of new members
as the older judges disappeared, it sustained the congres- |
sional plan of, reconstruction which President Johnson
was endeavouring to defeat, and in subsequent cases it
has given effect to most, though not to all, of the
statutes passed by Congress under the three amend-
ments which abolished slavery and secured the rights
of the negroes. In 1876 it refused to entertain pro-
ceedings instituted for the purpose of forbidding the
President to execute the Reconstruction Acts.

Two of its later acts are thought by some to
have affected public confidence. One of these was
the reversal, first in 1871, and again, upon broader
but not inconsistent grounds, in 1884, of the decision,
‘given in 1869, which declared invalid the Act of
Congress making government paper a legal tender for
debts. The original decision of 1869 was rendered by.
a majority of five to three. The court was afterwards
changed by the creation of an additional judgeship, and
by the appointment of a new member to fill a vacancy
which occurred after the settlement, though before the
delivery, of the first decision. Then the question was
brought up again in a new case between different parties,
and decided in the opposite sense (7.e. in favour of the

1 See as to these the article “ Habeas Corpus” by Mr. Alex. Johnston
in the American Cyclopedia of Political Science. And consider the very
important decision in Ex parte Milligan, 4 Wall. 129.

360 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

power of Congress to pass legal tender acts) by a majority
of five to four. Finally, in 1884, another suit having
brought up a point practically the same though under a
later statute passed by Congress, the court determined
with only one dissentient voice that the power existed.’ ”
This last decision excited some criticism, especially
among the more conservative lawyers, because it seemed.
to remove restrictions hitherto supposed to exist on the
authority of Congress, recognizing the right to establish
a forced paper currency as an attribute of the sovereignty
of the national government. But be the decision right
or wrong, a point on which high authorities are still
divided,? the reversal by the highest court in the land
of its own previous decision may have tended to unsettle
men’s reliance on the stability of the law, while the
manner of the earlier reversal, following as it did on the
creation of.a new judgeship and the appointment of two
justices, both known to be in favour of the view which
the majority of the court had just disapproved, disclosed
a weak point in the constitution of the tribunal which
may some day prove fatal to its usefulness.

The other misfortune was the interposition of the
court in the presidential electoral count dispute of 1877.8
Most people now admit that Mr. Tilden and not Mr.
Hayes ought to have been declared elected in that year.
But the five justices of the Supreme court who were
included in the electoral commission then appointed

1 The earlier decision in favour of the power deduced it from war
powers, the later from the general sovereignty of the national government.
‘See Hepburn v. Griswold, 8 Wall. 603 ; Legal Tender Cases, 12 Wall. 457 ;
Juilliard v. Greenman, 110 U.S. 421.

* See the pamphlets of Mr. George Bancroft and Mr. R. C. MacMurtrie,
an article in the Amer, Law Review, iv. 768, by Mr. (Justice) O. W. Holmes,
and an article in the Harvard Law Review for May 1887, by Me dene

B. Thayer, of the Harvard Law School,
8 See above, p. 60.

CHAP. XXIV THE WORKING OF THE COURTS 361

voted on party lines no less steadily than did the senators
and representatives who sat on it. A function scarcely
Judicial, and certainly not contemplated by the Constitu-
tion, was then for the first time thrown upon the judi-
“ ciary, and in discharging it the judiciary acted exactly
likg non-judicial persons.

Notwithstanding this occurrence, which after all was
quite exceptional, the credit and dignity of the Supreme
court stand very high. No one of its members has
ever been suspected of corruption, and comparatively
few have allowed their political sympathies to dis-
turb their official judgment. Though for many years
back every President has appointed only men of
his own party, and frequently leading politicians of his
own party,’ the new-made judge has left partisanship
behind him, while no doubt usually retaining that
bias or tendency of his mind which party training pro-
duces. At present all the judges but three belong to
the Republican party, but although the Democrats regret
this, and when they came into power welcomed the
prospect of putting in their own men as vacancies occur,
the circumstance does not affect their respect for the
court and their faith in its uprightness. The desire
for an equal representation of both parties is based, not
on any fear that suitors will suffer from the influence
of party spirit, but on the feeling that when any new
constitutional question arises it is right that the ten-
dencies which have characterized the Democratic view

1 I have heard American lawyers express surprise as well as admir-
ation at the occasional departures in England (as notably in the recent
case of Lord Justice Holker, who, having been Attorney-General of one
party, was, in respect of his eminent merits, appointed Lord Justice of
Appeal by the other) from the practice of political appointments to
judicial office. Such non-political appointments are however occasionally
made in the several States,by the governors, or even (as in the case of
Chief-Justice Redfield of Vermont) by the legislature.

362 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

of the Constitution should be duly represented over
against those supposed to influence the Republicans.

Apart from these constitutional questions, the value
of the Federal courts to the country at large has been
inestimable. They have done much to meet the evils
which an elective and ill-paid State judiciary inflicts
on some of the newer and a few even of the older
States. The Federal Circuit and District judges, small
as are their salaries, are in most States individually
‘superior men to the State judges, because the greater
security of tenure induces abler men to accept the
post. Being irremovable, they feel themselves inde-
pendent of parties and politicians, whom the elected
State judge, holding for a limited term, may be tempted
to conciliate with a view to re-election. Plaintiffs there-
‘fore, when they have a choice of suing in a State
court or a Federal court, frequently prefer the latter ;
and the litigant who belongs to a foreign country, or
to a different State from that in which his opponent
resides, may think his prospects of an unbiassed decision
better before it than before a State tribunal.

Federal judgeships of the second and third rank
(Circuit and District) are invariably given to the members
of the President’s party, and by an equally well-estab-
lished usage, to persons resident in the State or States
where the circuit or district court.is held. But cases
of corruption, or even of pronounced partisanship, are
practically unknown. The chief present defect is the in-
adequacy of the salaries of the District judges, and the
insufficiency of the staff in the more populous Eastern
States to grapple with the vast and increasing business
which flows in upon them. So too, in the Supreme court,
arrears have so accumulated that it is now more than
three years from the time when a cause is entered before

CHAP, XXIV THE WORKING OF THE COURTS 363

it can come on for hearing. Some have proposed to
nieet this evil by limiting the right of appeal to cases
involving a considerable sum of money; but a better
remedy would be to divide the Supreme court into
two divisional courts for the hearing of ordinary suits,
reserving for the full court points affecting the con-
struction of the Constitution.

One question remains to be put and answered.

The Supreme court is the living voice of the Constitu-
tion,’ that is, of the will of the people expressed in the
fundamental law they have enacted. It is, therefore, as
some one has said, the conscience of the people, who
have resolved to restrain themselves from hasty or un-
just action by placing their representatives under the
restriction of a permanent law. It is the guarantee of
the minority, who, when threatened by the impatient
vehemence of a majority, can appeal to this permanent
law, finding the interpreter and enforcer thereof in a
court set high above the assaults of faction.

To discharge these momentous functions, the court
must be stable even as the Constitution isstable. Its spirit
and tone must be that of the people at their best moments.
It must resist transitory impulses, and resist them the
more firmly the more vehement they are. Entrenched
behind impregnable ramparts, it must be able to defy at
once the open attacks of the other departments of the
government, and the more dangerous, because impalp-
able, seductions of popular sentiment.

Does it possess, has it displayed, this strength and
stability ?

1 The Romans called their chief judicial officer “the living voice of
the civil law”; but as this “civil law” consisted largely of custom, he
naturally enjoyed a wider discretion in moulding and expanding as well as

in expounding the law than do the American judges, who have a formally
enacted constitution to guide and restrain them.

364 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

It has not always followed its own former decisions.
This is natural in a court whose errors: cannot be
cured by the intervention of the legislature. The
English fina] Court of Appeal always follows its pre-
vious decisions, though high authorities have declared
that cases may be imagined in which it would refuse
to do so. And that court (the House of Lords) can
afford so to adhere, because, when an old decision
begins to be condemned, Parliament can forthwith
alter the law. But as nothing less than a constitu-
tional amendment can alter the law contained in the
Federal Constitution, the Supreme court must choose
between the evil of unsettling the law by reversing, and
the evil of perpetuating bad law by following, a former
decision. It may reasonably, in extreme cases, deem
the latter evil the greater.

The Supreme court feels the touch of public opinion.
Opinion is stronger in America than anywhere else in
the world, and judges are only men. To yield a little
may be prudent, for the tree that cannot bend to the
blast may be broken. There is, moreover, this ground
at least for presuming public opinion to be right,
that through it the progressive judgment of the world
is expressed. Of course, whenever the law is clear,
because’ the words of the Constitution are plain or the
cases interpreting them decisive on the point raised,
the court must look solely to those words and cases,
and cannot permit any other consideration to affect its
mind. But when the terms of the Constitution admit
of more than one construction, and when previous de-
cisions have left the true construction so far open that
the point in question may be deemed new, is a court
to be blamed if it prefers the construction which the
bulk of the people deem suited to the needs of the

CHAP, XXIV THE WORKING OF THE COURTS 365

time? A court is sometimes so swayed consciously,
more often unconsciously, because ‘the pervasive sym-
pathy of numbers is irresistible even by elderly
lawyers. A remarkable example is furnished by the
decisions (in 1876) of the Supreme court in the
80- -called Granger cases, suits involving the power of a
State to subject railways and other corporations or
persons exercising what are called “public trades” to
restrictive legislation without making pecuniary com-
pensation. I do not presume to doubt the correctness
of these decisions; but they evidently represent a
‘different view of the sacredness of private rights and
of the powers of a legislature from that entertained by
Chief-Justice Marshall and his contemporaries. They
reveal that current of opinion which now runs strongly
in America against what are called monopolies and the
powers of incorporated companies.

The Supreme court has changed its colour, 7.e. its
temper and tendencies, from time to time, according to
the political proclivities of the men who composed it.
It changes very slowly, because the vacancies in a small
body happen rarely, and its composition therefore often

_ represents the predominance of a past and not of the
presently ruling party. From 1789 down till the
death of Chief-Justice Marshall in 1835 its tendency
was to the extension of the powers of the Federal govern-
ment and therewith of its own jurisdiction, because
the ruling spirits in it were men who belonged to the
old Federalist party, though that party fell in 1800,

1 See Munn v. Illinois, and the following cases in 94 U.S. Rep. 193.
This was one of those cases in which the cuurt felt bound to regard not
only the view which it took itself of the meaning of the Constitution
but that which a.legislature might reasonably take.—See Chapter XXXIV.
post, As to the non-liability to make compensation where licences for
the sale of intoxicants are forbidden, see Mugler v. Kansas, decided in
the Supreme court of the United States, 5th December 1887.

366 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

and'disappeared in 1814. From 1835 till the War of
Secession its sympathies were with the doctrines of the
Democratic party. Without actually abandoning the posi-
tions of the previous period, the court, during these years
when Chief-Justice Taney presided over it, leant against
any further extension of Federal power or of its own juris-
diction. During and after the war, when the ascendency
of the Republican party had begun to change the composi-
tion of the court, a third period opened. Centralizing ideas
were again powerful: the vast war powers asserted by
Congress were in most instances supported by judicial
decision, the rights of States while maintained (as in
the Granger cases) as against private persons or bodies,
were for a time regarded with less favour whenever they
seemed to conflict with those of the Federal government.
In none of these three periods can the judges be charged
with any prostitution of their functions to party purposes.
Their action flowed naturally from the habits of thought
they had formed before their accession to the bench, and
from the sympathy they could not but feel with the
doctrines on whose behalf they had contended.’ Even
on the proverbially upright and impartial bench of
England the same tendencies may be discerned. There
are constitutional questions, and questions touching what
may be called the policy of the law, which would be
decided differently by one English judge or by another,
not from any conscious wish to favour a party or a class,
but because the views which a man holds as a citizen
cannot fail to colour his judgment even on legal points.
The Fathers of the Constitution studied nothing
more than to secure the complete independence of the
judiciary. The President was not permitted to remove
the judges, nor Congress to diminish their salaries. One
thing only was either forgotten or deemed undesirable,

CHAP, XXIV THE WORKING OF THE COURTS 367

because highly inconvenient, to determine,—the number
of judges in the Supreme court. Here was a weak point,
a joint in the court's armour through which a weapon
might some day penetrate. Congress having in 1801,
pursuant to a power contained in the Constitution,
established ‘sixteen Circuit courts, President Adams,
immediately before he quitted office, appointed members
of his own party to the justiceships thus created.
When President Jefferson came in, he refused to
admit the validity of the appointments; and the
newly elected Congress, which was in sympathy with
him, abolished the Circuit courts themselves, since it
could find no other means of ousting the new justices,
- This method of attack, whose constitutionality has been
much doubted, cannot be used against the Supreme
court, because that tribunal is directly created by the
Constitution. But as the Constitution does not pre-
scribe the number of justices, a statute may increase
or diminish the number as Congress thinks fit. In
1866, when Congress was in fierce antagonism to
President Johnson, and desired to prevent him from
appointing any judges, it reduced the number, which
was then ten, by a statute providing that no vacancy
should be filled up till the number was reduced to
seven. In 1869, when Johnson had been succeeded
by Grant, the number was raised to nine, and the
legal tender decision given just before -was presently
reversed by the altered court. This method is plainly
susceptible of further and possibly dangerous applica-
tion. Suppose a Congress and President bent on doing
something which the Supreme court deems contrary to
the Constitution. They pass a statute. A case arises
under it. The court on the hearing of the case unani-
mously declares the statute to be null, as being beyond

368 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1

the powers of Congress. Congress forthwith passes and
the President signs another statute more than doubling
the number of the justices. The President appoints to
the new justiceships men who are pledged to hold the
former statute constitutional. The Senate confirms his
appointments, Another case raising the validity of the
disputed statute is brought up to the court. The hew
justices outvote the old ones: the statute is held valid:
the security provided for the protection of the Consti-
tution is gone like a morning mist.

What prevents such assaults on the fundamental
law, assaults which, however immoral in substance,
would be perfectly legal in form? Not the mechanism
of government, for all its checks have been evaded.
Not the conscience of the legislature and the President,
for heated combatants seldom shrink from justifying the
means by the end. Nothing but the fear of the people,
whose broad good sense and attachment to the great
principles of the Constitution may generally be relied on
to condemn such a perversion of its forms. Yet if
excitement has risen high over the country, a majority of
the people may acquiesce; and then it matters little
whether what is really a revolution be accomplished by
openly violating or by merely distorting the forms of
law. -To the people we come sooner or later: it is upon
their wisdom and self-restraint thatthe stability of the
most cunningly devised scheme of government will in
the last resort depend.

CHAPTER XXV
COMPARISON OF THE AMERICAN AND EUROPEAN SYSTEMS

THE relations to one another of the different branches
of the government in the United States are so remark-
able and so full of instruction for other countries,
that it seems desirable, even at the risk of a little
repetition, to show by a comparison with the Cabinet or
parliamentary system of European countries how this
complex American machinery actually works.

The English system on which have been modelled,
of course with many variations, the systems of France,
Belgium, Holland, Italy, Germany, Hungary (where,
however, the English scheme has been compounded
with an ancient and very interesting native - born
constitution), Sweden, Norway, Denmark, Spain, and
Portugal, as well as the constitutions of the great self-
governing English colonies in North America and
Australia—this English system places at the head of
the state a person in whose name all executive acts are
done, and who is (except in France) irresponsible and
irremovable.? His acts are done by the advice and on the

1 In Denmark constitutional government seems still to subsist in
theory, though for a good many years it has been suspended in practice.

2 In the British colonies the governor is irremovable by the colony,

and irresponsible to its legislature, though responsible to and removable
by the home government,

VOL. I 2B

370 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

responsibility of ministers chosen nominally by him,

but really by the representatives of the people, usually,

but not necessarily, from among the members of the

legislature. The representatives are, therefore, through

the agents whom they sclect, the true government of
the country. When the representative assembly ceases

to trust these agents, the latter resign, and a new set

are appointed. Thus the executive as well as the legis-

lative power really belongs to the majority of the re-

presentative chamber, though in appointing agents, an

expedient which its size makes needful, it is forced

to leave in the hands of these agents a measure of
discretion sufficient to make them appear distinct

from it, and sometimes to tempt them to acts which

their masters disapprove. As the legislature is thus in
a sense executive, so the executive government, the

council of ministers or cabinet, is in so far legislative

that the initiation of measures rests very largely with

them, and the carrying of measures through the Chamber

demands their advocacy and counter pressure upon the

majority of the representatives. They are not merely

executive agents but also legislative leaders. One may

say, indeed, that the legislative and executive functions

are interwoven as closely under this system as under

absolute monarchies, such as Imperial Rome or modern

Russia; and the fact that taxation, while effected by

means of legislation, is the indispensable engine of

administration, shows how inseparable are these two

apparently distinct powers.

Under this system the sovereignty of the legislature
may be more or less complete. It is most complete in
France; least complete in Germany and Prussia, where
the power of, the Emperor and King is great and not
declining. But in all these countries not only are the

cHar. xxv AMERICAN AND EUROPEAN SYSTEMS 37!

legislature and executive in close touch with one
another, but they settle their disputes without refer-
ence to the judiciary. The courts of law cannot be
invoked by the executive against the legislature, be-
cause questions involving the validity of a legisla-
tive act do not come before it, since the legislature is
either completely sovereign, as in England, or the
judge of its own competence, as in Belotan, The
judiciary, in other words, does not enter into the
consideration of the political part of the machinery of
government,

This system of so-called cabinet government seems to
Europeans now, who observe it at work over a large part
of the world, an obvious and simple system. We are
apt to forget that it was never seen anywhere till the
English developed it by slow degrees, and that it is a
very delicate system, depending on habits, traditions,
and understandings which are not easily set forth in
words, much less transplanted to a new soil.

We are also prone to forget how very recent it is.
People commonly date it from the reign of King William
the Third; but it worked very irregularly till the Hano-
verian kings came to the throne, and even then it at
first worked by means of a monstrous system of bribery
and place-mongering. In the days of George the
Third the personal power of the Crown for a while
revived and corruption declined. The executive head

1 Corruption was possible, because the House of Commons did not
look for support to the nation, its debates were scantily reported, it had
little sense of responsibility. An active king was therefore able to assert
himself against it, and to form a party in it, as well as outside of it, which
regarded him as its head. This forced the Whigs to throw themselves
upon the nation at large ; the Tories did the same; corruption withered

away ; and as Parliament came more and more under the watchful eye

of the people, and responsible to it, the influence of the king declined ana
vanished,

372 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

of the' state was, during the latter decades of the century,
a factor apart from his ministers. They were not then,
as now, a mere committee of Parliament dependent
upon Parliament, but rather a compromise between
the king’s will and ‘the will of the parliamentary
majority. They deemed and declared themselves to
owe a duty to the king conflicting with, sometfmes
overriding, their duty to, Parliament. Those phrases
of abasement before the Crown which when now
employed by prime ministers amuse us by their
remoteness from the realities of the case, then
expressed realities. In 1787, when the Constitutional
Convention met at Philadelphia, the Cabinet system
of government was in England still immature. It was
so immature that its true nature had not been per-
ceived.1_ And although we now can see that the tend-
ency was really towards the depression of the Crown
and the exaltation of Parliament, men might well,
when they compared the influence of George III. with
that exercised by George I.’ argue in the terms of
Dunning’s famous resolution, that “the power of the
Crown has increased, is increasing, and ought to be
diminished.” ®

1 Gouverneur Morris, however, one of the acutest minds in the Con-
vention of 1787, remarked there, “Our President will be the British
(Prime) Minister. If Mr. Fox had carried his India Bill, he would have
made the Minister the King in form almost..as well as in substance.”
—Elliot’s Debates, i, 361.

2 George IIL had the advantage of being @ national king, whereas his
two predecessors had been Germans by language and habits as well as by
blood. His popularity contributed to his influence .in politics, Mrs.
Papendiek’s Diary contains some amusing illustrations of the exuberant
demonstrations of “loyalty” which he excited. When he went to Wey-
mouth for sea-bathing after his recovery from the first serious attack
of lunacy, crowds gathered along the shore, and bands of music struck
up “God save the King” when he ducked his head beneath the brine.

8 It is not easy to say when the principle of the absolute dependence
of ministers on a parliamentary majority without regard to the wishes of

cuap. xxv AMERICAN AND EUROPEAN SYSTEMS 373

The greatest problem that free peoples have to solve
is how to enable the citizens at large to conduct or
control the executive business of the state. England
was in 1787 the only nation (the cantons of Switzer-
land were so small as scarcely to be thought of)
that had solved this problem, firstly, by the develop-
ment of a representative system, secondly, by giving to
her representatives a large authority over the execu-
tive. The Constitutional Convention, therefore, turned °
its eyes to her when it sought to constitute a free govern-
ment for the new nation which the “ more perfect union”
of the States was calling into conscious being.

Very few of the members of the Convention had
been in England so as to know her constitution, such as
it then was, at first hand. Yet there were three sources
whence light fell upon it, and for that light they were
grateful. One was their experience in dealing with
the mother country sincé the quarrel began. They
saw in Britain an executive largely influenced by the
personal volitions of the king, and in its conduct of
colonial and foreign affairs largely detached from and
independent of Parliament, since it was able to take
tyrannical steps without the previous knowledge or
consent of Parliament, and able afterwards to defend

the Crown passed into a settled doctrine. (Needless to say that it has
received no formally legal recognition, but is merely usage.) The long
coincidence during the dominance of Pitt and his Tory successors down
till 1827 of the wishes and interests of the Crown with those of the
parliamentary majority prevented the question from arising in a practical
shape. Even in 1827 Mr. Canning writes to J. W. Croker :—

* Am I to understand, then, that you consider the King [George IV.]
as completely in the hands of the Tory aristocracy 4s his father, or rather
as George II. was in the hands of the Whigs? If so, George III. reigned
and Mr. Pitt (both father and son) administered the Government in vain.
I have a better opinion of the real vigour of the Crown when it chooses to
put forth its own strength, and I am not without some reliance on the
body of the people”! —Croker Correspondence, vol. i. p. 368.

374 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

those steps by alleging a necessity whereof Parliament,
wanting confidential information, could imperfectly
judge. It was in these colonial and foreign affairs that
the power of the Crown chiefly lay (as, indeed, to this
day the authority of Parliament over the executive is
smaller here than in any other department, because
secrecy and promptitude are more essential), so they
could not be expected to know for how much less the
‘king counted in domestic affairs. Moreover, there was
believed to be often a secret junto which really con-
trolled the ministry, because acting in concert with the
Crown ; and the Crown had powerful engines at its dis-
posal, bribes and honours, pensions and places, engines
irresistible by the average virtue of representatives
whose words and votes were not reported, and nearly
half of whom were the nominees of some magnate.’

The second source was the legal presentation of the
English Constitution in scientific text-books, and par-
ticularly in Blackstone, whose famous Commentaries,
first published in 1765 (their substance having been
delivered as professorial lectures at Oxford in 1758 and
several succeeding years), had quickly become the standard
authority on the subject. Now Blackstone, as is natural
in a lawyer who looks rather to the strict letter of the
law than to the practice which had grown up modifying
it, describes the royal prerogative in.terms more appro-
' priate to the days of the Stuarts than to those in
which he wrote, and dwells on the independence of the
executive, while also declaring the withholding from it
of legislative power to be essential to freedom.?

1 The Crown itself had pocket boroughs. Hamilton doubted whether
the British Constitution could be worked without corruption.

2 See Blackstone, Commentaries, bk. i. chap. iii—‘“ Whenever the
power of making and that of enforcing the laws are united together, there
can be no public liberty. . . . Where the legislative and executive
authority are in distinct hands, the former will take care not to en-

cHap, xxv AAZTERICAN AND EUROPEAN SYSTEMS 375

The third source was the view of the English Con-
stitution given by the political philosophers of the
eighteenth century, among whom, since he was by far
the most important, we need look at Montesquieu alone.

When the famous treatise on The Spirit of Laws
appeared in 1748, a treatise belonging to the small
class of books which permanently turn the course of
human thought, and which, unlike St. Augustine’s
City of God, turned it immediately instead of hav-
ing to wait for centuries till the hour of its power

“arrived, it dwelt upon the separation of the executive,
legislative, and judicial powers in the British Constitu-
tion as the most remarkable feature of that system.
Accustomed to see the two former powers, and to some
extent the third also, exercised by or under the direct
control of the French monarch, Montesquieu attributed
English freedom to their separation.’ . The King of Great
Britain then possessed: a larger prerogative than he has
now, and as even then it seemed on paper much larger
than it really was, it was natural that a foreign observer

trust the latter with so large a power as may tend to the subversion
of its own independence, and therewith of the liberty of the subject.
. » The Crown cannot of itself begin any alteration in the present
established law ; but it may approve or disapprove of the alterations
suggested and consented to by the two Houses. The legislative, there-
fore, cannot abridge the executive power of any rights which it now
has by law without its own consent.” There is no hint here, or
in chap. vii. on the royal prerogative, that the royal power of dis-
approval had not been in fact exercised for some fifty years. Black-
stone does not quote Montesquieu for the particular proposition that
the powers must be separated, but has evidently been influenced by
him, A little later he cites a famous dictum, “The President Mon-
tesquieu, though I trust too hastily, presages that as Rome, Sparta, and
Carthage have lost their liberty and perished, sv the Constitution of
England will in time lose its liberty—will perish : it will perish whenever
the legislative power shall become more corrupt than the executive.”
1 Locke had already remarked (On Civil Government, chap. xiv.) that
“the legislative and executive powers are in distinct hands in all moder-
ated monarchies and well-framed governments.”

376 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1

should underrate the executive character of the British
Parliament and overrate the executive authority of
the monarch as g person. Now Montesquieu’s treatise
was taken by the thinkers of the next generation as a
sort of Bible of political philosophy. Hamilton and
Madison, the two earliest exponents of the American
Constitution they had done so much to create, cite it
in the Federalist much as the schoolmen cite Aristotle,

that is, they cite it as an authority which everybody
will recognize to be binding; and Madison in particular
constantly refers to this separation of the legislative,
executive, and judicial powers as the distinguishing
note of a free government.

These views of the British Constitution tallied with
and were strengthened by the ideas and habits formed
in the Americans by their experience of representative
government in the colonies, ideas and. habits which
were after all the dominant factor in the construc-
tion of their political system. In these colonies the
executive power had been vested either in a governor °
sent from England by the Crown, or in certain pro-
prietors, as they were called, persons to whom the
English Crown had granted hereditary rights in a
province.” Along with these authorities there had
existed representative assemblies, who made laws and
voted money for the purposes of their respective
commonwealths. They did not control the governor
because his commission issued from the British
Crown, and he was responsible thereto and not to
the Colonial Government. A governor had no pazrlia-
mentary cabinet, but only officials responsible to himself
and the Crown. His veto on acts of the colonial legis-
lature was frequently used; and that body, with no

1 Maryland under Lord Baltimore is the familiar example.

cHar. xxv AMERICAN AND EUROPEAN SYSTEMS 377

means of controlling his conduct other than the refusal
to' vote money, was a legislature and nothing more.
Thus the Americans found and admired in their colonial
(or State) systems, a separation of the legislative from
the executive branch, more complete than in England,
because in the colonies no ministers sat in the legisla-
ture. And being already proud of their freedom, they
attributed its amplitude chiefly to this cause.

From their colonial experience, coupled with these
notions of the British Constitution, the men of 1787
drew three conclusions: Firstly, that the vesting of
the executive and the legislative powérs in different ,
hands was the normal and natural feature of a free
government. Secondly, that the power of the executive
was dangerous to liberty, and must be kept within well-
defined boundaries. Thirdly, that in order to check
the head of the state it was necessary not only to define
his powers, and appoint him for a limited period, but
also to destroy his opportunities of influencing the
‘ legislature. Conceiving that ministers, as named by
and acting under the orders of the President, would be
his instruments rather than faithful representatives of
the people, they resolved to prevent them from holding
this double character, and therefore forbade “ any person
holding office under the United States” to be a member
of either House. They deemed that in this way
they had rendered their legislature pure, independent,
vigilant, the servant of the people, the foe of arbi-
trary power. Omnipotent, however, the framers of

1 In 1700 the English Act of Settlement enacted that “‘no person
who has an office or a place of profit under the King shall be capable of
serving a8 a member of the House of Commons.” ‘This provision never
took effect, having been repealed by the Act 4 Anne, c, 8, But the hold-
ing of the great majority of offices under the Crown is now, by statute,
a disqualification for sitting in the House of Commons. See Anson, Law
and Custom of the Constitution, vol. i. p. 174.

378 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

the Constitution did not mean to make it. They
were sensible of the opposite dangers which might
flow from a feeble and dependent executive. The
proposal made in the first draft of the Constitution that
Congress should elect the President, was abandoned,
lest ‘he should be merely its creature and unable to
check it. To strengthen his position, and prevent
intrigues among members of Congress for this supreme
office, it was settled that the people should themselves,
through certain electors appointed for the purpose,
choose the President. By giving him the better status
of a popular, though indirect, mandate, he became
independent of Congress, and was encouraged to use his
veto, which a mere nominee of Congress might have
hesitated to do. Thus it was believed in 1787 that a
due balance had been arrived at, the independence of
Congress being secured on the one side and the inde-
pendence of the President on the other. Each power
holding the other in check, the people, jealous of their
hardly-won liberties, would be courted by each, and
safe from the encroachments of either.

There was of course the risk that controversies as to
their respective rights and powers would arise between
these two departments. “But the creation of a court
entitled to place an authoritative interpretation upon
the Constitution in which the supreme will of the
people was expressed, provided a remedy available in
many, if not in all, of such cases, and a security for
the faithful observance of the Constitution which Eng-
land did not, and under her system of an omnipotent
Parliament could not, possess.

“They builded better than they knew.” They
divided the legislature from the executive so com-
pletely as to make each not only independent, but weak

cHaPp. xxv AMERICAN AND EUROPEAN SYSTEMS 379
even in its own proper sphere. The President was
debarred from carrying Congress along with him, asa
popular prime minister may carry Parliament in Eng-
land, to effect some sweeping change. He is fettered in
foreign policy, and in appointments, by the concurrent -
rights of the Senate. He is forbidden to appeal at a
crisis from Congress to the country. Nevertheless his
office retains a measure of solid independence in the fact
that the nation regards him as a direct representative
and embodiment of its majesty, while the circumstance
that he holds office for four years only makes it possible
for him to do acts of power during those four years
which would excite alarm from a permanent sovereign.
Entrenched behind the ramparts of a rigid Constitution,
he has retained rights of which his prototype the English
king has been gradually stripped. Congress on the
other hand was weakened, as compared with the British
Parliament in which one House has become dominant,
by its division into two co-equal houses, whose disagree-
ment paralyses legislative action. And it lost that
direct control over the executive which the presence of
ministers in the legislature, and their dependence upon
a majority of the popular House, give to the Parlia-
ments of Britain and her colonies. It has diverged
widely from the English original which it seemed likely,
with only a slight difference, to reproduce.

The British House of Commons has grown to the
stature of a supreme executive as well as legislative
council, acting not only by its properly legislative
power, but through its right to displace ministers
by a resolution of want of confidence, and to compel
the sovereign to employ such servants as it ap-
proves. Congress remains a pure legislature, unable:
to displace a minister, unable to choose the agents

380 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

by whom its laws are to be carried out, and having
hitherto failed to develop that internal organization
which a large assembly needs in order to frame and
successfully pursue definite schemes of policy. Never-
theless, so far-reaching is the power of legislation, Con-
gregs has encroached, and may encroach still farther,
upon the sphere of the executive. It encroaches’ not
merely with a conscious purpose, but because the law of
its being has forced it to create in its committees bodies
whose expansion necessarily presses on the executive.
It encroaches because it is restless, unwearied, always
drawn by the progress of events into new fields of labour.

These observations may suffice to show why the
Fathers of the Constitution did not adopt the English
, parliamentary or Cabinet system. They could not adopt
it because they did not know of its existence. They
did not know of it because it was still immature, because
Englishmen themselves had not understood it, because
the recognized authorities did not mention it.’ There is
not a word in Blackstone, much less in Montesquieu, as
to the duty of ministers to resign at the bidding of the
House of Commons, nor anything to indicate that the
whole life of the House of Commons was destined to
centre in the leadership of ministers. Whether the
Fathers would have imitated the cabinet system had
it been proposed to them as a madel may be doubted.

1 Roger Sherman saw the importance of the English Cabinet, though
he looked on it as a mere engine in the Crown’s hands. “The nation,”
he observed, in the Convention of 1787, ‘‘is in fact governed by the
Cabinet council, who are the creatures of the Crown. The consent of
Parliament is necessary to give sanction to their measures, and this they
easily obtain by the influence of the Crown in appointing to all offices of
honour and profit.” It must be remembered that the House of Lords
was far more powerful in 1787 than it is now, not only as a branch of the
legislature, but in respect of the boroughs owned by the leading peers:
and therefore the dependence of the ministry on the House of Commons
was a less prominent feature of the Constitution than it is now,

cuap. xxv AJLZERICAN AND EUROPEAN SYSTEMS 381

They would probably have thought that the creation of
a frame of government so unified, so strong, so capable
of swiftly and irresistibly accomplishing the purposes
of a transitory majority as we now perceive it to be,
might prove dangerous to those liberties of the several
States, as well as of individual citizens, which filled the
whdle background of their landscape. But as the idea
never presented itself, we cannot say that it was rejected,
nor cite the course they took as an expression of their
judgment against the system under which England and
her colonies have so far prospered.

That system could not be deemed to have reached
its maturity till the power of the people at large had
been established by the Reform Act of 1832. For its
essence resides in the delicate equipoise it creates be-
tween the three powers, the ministry, the House of
Commons, and the people. The House is strong, because
it can call the ministry to account for every act, and
can, by refusing supplies, compel their resignation, The
ministry are not defenceless, because they can dissolve
Parliament, and ask the people to judge between it and
them. Parliament, when it displaces a ministry, does
not strike at executive authority: it merely changes its
agents. The ministry, when they dissolve Parliament,
do not attack Parliament as an institution: they recog-
nize the supremacy of the body in asking the country to
change the individuals who compose it. Both the House
of Commons and the ministry act and move in the full
view of the people, who sit as arbiters, prepared to judge
in any controversy that may arise. The House is in
touch with the people, because every member must
watch the lights and shadows of sentiment which play
over his own constituency. The ministry are in touch
with the people, because they are not only themselves

382 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

representatives, but are heads of a great party, sensitive
to its feelings, forced to weigh the effect of every act
they do upon the confidence which their party places
in them. The only conjuncture which this system of
“checks and balances” does not provide for is that of a
ministry supported by a parliamentary majority pursuing
a policy which was not presented to the people at the
last general election, and of which the bulk of the people
in fact disapprove.’ This is a real danger, yet one which
can seldom last long enough to work grave mischief, for
the organs of public opinion are now so potent, and the
opportunities for its expression so numerous, that the
anger of a popular majority, perhaps even of a very strong
minority, is almost certain to alarm both the ministry and
the House, and to arrest them in their course.’

The drawback to this system of exquisite equipoise
is the liability of its equilibrium to be frequently dis-
turbed, each disturbance involving either a change of
government, with immense temporary inconvenience to
the departments, or a general election, with immense
expenditure of money and trouble in the country. It is

1 The recent leading case on this subject is that of Lord Beaconsfield’s
Government from 1876 till 1880. It followed, during the years 1877
and 1878, a foreign policy which the bulk of the electors apparently dis-
approved (though some persons hold that there was not a disapproving
majority in the country till 1879), but which Parliament sanctioned by
large majorities, But the vehement popular agitation of 1876-78 seems
to have had the effect of considerably modifying the policy of the ministry,
though it could not wholly change its direction.

2 “The dangers arising from a party spirit in Parliament exceeding
that of the nation, and of a selfishness in Parliament contradicting the true
interest of the nation, are not great dangers in a country where the mind
of the nation is steadily political, and where its control over its representa-
tives is constant. A steady opposition to a formed public opinion is hardly
possible in our House of Commons, so incessant is the national attention
to politics, and so keen the fear in the mind of each member that he may
lose his valued seat.”-——Walter Bagehot, English Constitution, p. 241. 'These

| remarks of the most acute of English political writers are even more true
now than they were in 1872,

cHap, xxv AJZERICAN AND EUROPEAN SYSTEMS 383

a system whose successful working presupposes the
existence of two great parties and no more, parties
each strong enough to restrain the violence of the other,
yet one of them steadily preponderant in any given
House of. Commons. Where a third, perhaps a fourth,
party appears, the conditions are changed. ‘The scales
of Parliament oscillate as the weight of this detached
group is thrown on one side or the other; dissolutions
become more frequent, and even dissolutions may fail
to restore stability. The recent history of the French
Republic shows the difficulties of working a Chamber
composed of groups: nor is the same source of difficulty
unknown in England.

It is worth while to compare the form which a con-
stitutional struggle takes under the Cabinet system and
under that of America.

In England, if the executive ministry displeases the
House of Commons, the House passes an adverse vote.
The ministry have their choice to resign or to dissolve
Parliament. If they resign, a new ministry is appointed
from the party which has proved itself strongest in the
House of Commons; and co-operation being restored
between the legislature and the executive, public

_business proceeds. If, on the other hand, the ministry
dissolve Parliament, a new Parliament is sent up which,
if favourable to the existing cabinet, keeps them in
office, if unfavourable, dismisses them forthwith.’
Accord is in either case restored. Should the difference
arise between the House of Lords and a ministry sup-

1 Recent instances, dating from Mr. Disraeli’s resignation in December
1868, when the results of the election of that year were ascertained, have
established the usage that a ministry quits office, without waiting to be
turned out, when they know that the election has gone against them.
Mr. Gladstone resigned forthwith after the General Elections of 1874 and
1886, Lord Beaconsfield after that of 1880. The usage, however, is not
yet a rule of the Constitution, though it seems on the way to become one,

384 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

ported by the House of Commons, and the former
persist in rejecting” a bill which the Commons send
up, 2 dissolition is the constitutional remedy : and
if the newly-elected House of Commons reasserts
the view of its predecessor, the Lords, according
to the now recognized constitutional practice, yield
at once. Should they, however, still stand. out, there
remains the extreme expedient, threatened in 1832,
but never yet resorted to, of a creation by the sove-
reign (ze. the ministry) of new peers sufficient to turn
the balance of votes im the Upper House. Practically
the ultimate decision always rests with the people, that
is to say, with the party which for the moment com-
mands a majority of electoral votes. This method of
cutting knots applies to all differences that can arise
between executive and legislature. It is a swift and
effective method; in this swiftness and effectiveness lie
its dangers as well as its merits.

In America a dispute between the President and
Congress may arise over an executive act or over a bill.
If over an executive act, an appointment or a treaty,
one branch of Congress, the Senate, can check the
President, that is, can prevent him from doing what he
wishes, but cannot make him do what they wish. If
over a bill which the President has returned to Congress
unsigned, the two Houses can, by a two-thirds majority,
pass it over his veto, and so end the quarrel; though
the carrying out of the bill in its details must be left to
him and his ministers, whose dislike of it may render
them unwilling and therefore unsuitable agents, Should
there not be a two-thirds majority, the bill drops;
and however important the question may be, however
essential to the country some prompt dealing with it,
either in the sense desired by the majority of Congress

cuap. xxv AMERICAN AND EUROPEAN SYSTEMS 385

“or in that preferred, by the President, nothing can
be. done till the current terta of Congress expires.
The matter- is then remitted to, the people. If the
President has still two more years in office, the people
may signify their approval of his policy by electing a
House in political agreement with him, or disapprove
it by re-electing a hostile House. If the election of a
new President coincides with that of the new House,
the people have a second means provided of expressing
their judgment. They may choose not only a House
of the same or an opposite complexion to the last, but
a President of the same or an opposite complexion.
Anyhow they can now establish accord between one
house of Congress and the executive.’ The Senate, how-
ever, may still remain opposed to the President, and may
not be brought into harmony with him until a sufficient
time has elapsed for the majority in it to be changed
by the choice of new senators by the State legislatures.
This is a slower method than that of Britain. It may
fail in a crisis needing immediate action ; but-it escapes
the danger of, a hurried and perhaps irrevocable decision.

Theye exists between England and the United States
a difference which is full of interest. In England the
legislative branch has become supreme, and it is con-
sidered by Englishmen a merit in their system that the
practical executive of the country is directly responsible
to the House of Commons. In the United States, how-
ever, not only in the national government, but in every

1 It is of course possible that the people may elect at the same time a
President belonging to one party and a House the majority whereof belongs
to the other party. This happened in 1876, when, however, the presi-
dential election was disputed. It is rendered possible by the fact that the
President is elected on a different plan from the House, the smaller States
having relatively more w eight i in a presidential election, and the presidential
electors being now chosen, ine ach State, by “general ticket,” not in
districts.

voL.I 2¢

386 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

one of the States, the exactly opposite theory is proceeded
upon—that the executive should be wholly independent
of the legislative branch. Americans understand that this
scherhe involves a loss of power and efficiency, but they
believe that it makes greatly for safety in a popular
government. They expect the executive and the legis-
lature to work together as well as they can, and piblic
opinion does usually compel a degree of co-operation
and efficiency which perhaps could not be expected
theoretically. It is an interesting commentary on the
tendencies of democratic government, that in America
reliance is coming to be placed more and more, in the
nation, in the State, and in the city, upon the veto of the
‘Executive as a protection to the community against: the
legislative branch. Weak Executives frequently do
-harm, but a strong Executive has rarely abused popular
confidence. On the other hand, instances where the
Executive, by the use of his veto power, has arrested
mischiefs due to the action of the legislature are by no
means rare. This circumstance leads some Americans
to believe that the day is not far distant when in’
England some sort of veto power, or other qonstitu-
tional safeguard, must be interposed to protect the
people against their Parliament.’

While some bid England borrow from her daughter,
other Americans conceive that the separation of the
legislature from the executive has been carried too far
in the United States, and suggest that it would be an
improvement if the ministers of the President were
permitted to appear in both Houses of Congress to
answer questions, perhaps even to join in debate. I
have no space to discuss the merits of this proposal,
but must observe that it might lead to changes more

1 See Note to Chapter XXXYV. at the end of this volume,

cHar, xxv AMERICAN AND EUROPEAN SYSTEMS 387

extensive than its advocates seem to contemplate. The
more the President’s ministers come into contact with
Congress, the more difficult will it be to maintain the
independence of Congress which he and they now pos-
sess. When not long ago the Norwegian Stor Thing
forced the King of Sweden and Norway to consent
to ‘his ministers appearing in that legislature, the king,
perceiving the import of the concession, resolved to
choose in future ministers in accord with the party
holding a majority in the Stor Thing. It is hard to say,
when. one begins to make alterations in an old house,
how far one will be led on in rebuilding, and I doubt
whether this change in the present American system,
possibly in itself desirable, might not be found to involve
a reconstruction large enough to put a new face upon
several parts of that system.

In the history of the United States there have been
four serious conflicts between the legislature and the
executive. The first was that between President
Jackson and Congress. It ended in Jackson’s favour,
for he got his way ; but he prevailed because during the
time when both Houses were against him, his opponents
had not a two-thirds majority. In the latter part of the
struggle the (re-elected) House was with him ; and before
he had quitted office his friends obtained a majority
in the always-changing Senate. But his success was
not so much the success of the executive office as of
a particular President popular with the masses. The
second contest, which was between President Tyler and
both Houses of Congress, was a drawn battle, because the
majority in the Houses fell short of two-thirds. In the
third, between President Johnson and Congress, Congress
prevailed ; the enemies of the President having, owing
to the disfranchisement of most Southern States, an over-

388 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

powering majority in both Houses, and by that majority
carrying over his veto a series of Acts so peremptory
that even his reluctance to obey them could not destroy,
though it sometimes marred, their efficiency. . In the
fourth case, referred to in a previous chapter, the
victory remained with the President, because the Con-
gressional majority against him was slender. But a
presidential victory is usually a negative victory. It
consists not in his getting what he wants, but in his
preventing Congress from getting what it wants." The
practical result of the American arrangements thus comes
to be that when one party possesses a large majority in
Congress it can overpower the President, taking from
him all but a few strictly reserved functions, suchas
those of pardoning, of making promotions in the army
and navy, and of negotiating (not of concluding treaties,
for these require the assent of the Senate) with foreign
states. Where parties are pretty equally divided, we.
when the majority is one way in the Senate, the other
way in the House, or when there is only a small majority
against the President in both Houses, the President is
in so far free that new fetters cannot be laid upon him ;
but he must move under those which previous legisla-
tion has imposed, and can take no step for which new
legislation is needed. — :
It is another and a remarkable.~consequence of the
absence of cabinet government in America, that there
Sis also no party government in the European sense.
Party government in France, Italy, and England
means, that one set of men, united, or professing to
1 In the famous case of President Jackson’s removal of the government
deposits of money from the United States Bank, the President did accom-
plish his object. But this was a very exceptional case, because one which

had remained within the executive discretion of the President since no
statute had happened to provide for it.

cuap. xxv AALTERICAN AND EUROPEAN SYSTEMS 389

be united, by holding one set of opinions, have
obtained control of the whole machinery of govern-
ment, and are working it in conformity with those
opinions. Their majority in the country is represented
by a majority in the legislature, and to this majority
the ministry of necessity belongs. The ministry is the
supreme committee of the party, and controls all the
foreign as well as domestic affairs of the nation, because
the majority is deemed to be the nation. It is other-
wise in America. Men do, no doubt, talk of one party
as being “in power,” meaning thereby the party to which
the then President belongs. But they do so because
that party enjoys the spoils of office, in which to so many
politicians the value of power consists. They do so also
because in the early days the party which prevailed
in the legislative usually prevailed also in the executive
department, and because the presidential election was,
and still is, the main struggle which proclaimed the pre-
dominance of one or other party.

But the Americans, when they speak of the adminis-
tration party as the party in power, have, in borrowing
an English phrase, applied it to utterly different facts.
Their “ party in power” need have no “ power” beyond
that of securing places for its adherents. It may be
in a minority in one House of Congress, in which
event it accomplishes nothing, but can at most merely
arrest adverse legislation, or in a small minority in
both Houses of Congress, in which event it must submit
to see many things done which it dislikes. And if

1 The history of the Republic divides itself in the mind of most
Americans into a succession of Presidents and Administrations, just as old-
fashioned historians divided the history of England by the reigns of kings,
a tolerable way of reckoning in the days of Edward the Third and Richard
the Second, when the personal gifts of the sovereign were a chief factor in
ee but absurd in the days of George the Fourth and William the

ourth.

390 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

its enemies control the Senate, even its executive arm
is paralysed. Though party feeling has generally been
‘stronger in America than in England, and even now
covers a larger proportion of the voters, and enforces a
stricter discipline, party government is distinctly weaker.
Those who lament the violence of European factions
goay fancy America an Elysium where legislation’ is
just and reasonable, because free from bias, where pure
and enlarged views of national interest override the
selfish designs of politicians. It would be nearer the
truth to say that the absence of party control operates
chiefly to make laws less consistent, and to prevent
extended schemes of policy from being framed, because
the chance of giving continuous effect to them is small.
The natural history of the party system belongs to a
later part of this book. I will only here observe that,
while this system is complete and well compacted in
- every other respect, the Constitution has denied to it
some of the means which European methods afford of
acting through both the legislature and the executive at
once on the direct and daily government of the country.
We are now in a position to sum up the practical
results of the system which purports to separate Congress
from the executive, instead of uniting them as they are
united under a cabinet government. I say “ purports
to. separate,” because it is plain tbat the separation,
significant as it is, is less complete than current language
imports, or than the Fathers of the Constitution would
seem to have intended. The necessary coherence of the
two powers baffled them. These results are five :—
The President and his ministers have no initiative
in Congress, little influence over Congress, except
what they can exert upon individual members
through the bestowal of patronage.

cuap. xxv AMERICAN AND EUROPEAN SYSTEMS 391

Congress has, together with unlimited powers of
inquiry, imperfect powers of control over the
administrative departments. |

The nation does not always know how or where to fix
responsibility for misfeasance or neglect. The
person and bodies concerned in making and
executing the laws are so related to one another
that each can generally shift the burden of
blame on some one else, and no one acts under
the full sense of direct accountability.

There is a loss of force by friction—z.e. part of the
energy, force, and time of the men and bodies
that make up the government is dissipated in
struggles with one another, This belongs to
all free governments, because all free govern-
ments rely upon checks. But the more checks,
the more friction.

There is a risk that executive vigour and promptitude
may be found wanting at critical moments.

We may include these defects in one general expres-

sion. There is in the American government, considered
as a whole, a want of unity. Its branches are uncon-
nected ; their efforts are not directed to one aim, do not
produce one harmonious result. The sailors, the helms-
man, the engineer, do not seem to have one purpose or
obey one will, so that instead of making steady way the
vessel may pursue a devious or zigzag course, and some-
times merely turn round and round in the water. The
more closely any one watches from year to year the history
of free governments, and himself swims in the deep-eddy-
ing time current, the more does he feel that current’s force,
so that human foresight and purpose seem to count for
little, and ministers and parliaments to be swept along
they know not whither by some overmastering fate or

392 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

overruling providence. But this feeling is stronger in
America than in Europe, because in America gnch powers
as exist act, with little concert and resign themselves
to a conscious impotence. Clouds arise, blot out the
sun overhead, and burst in a tempest; the tempest
passes, and leaves the blue above bright as before, but
at the same moment other clouds are already bef#in-
ning to peer over the horizon. Parties are formed
an. dissolved, compromises are settled and assailed and
violated, wars break out and are- fought throngh and
forgotten, new problems begin to show themselves,
and the civil powers, Presidents, and Cabinets, and State
governments, and Houses of Congress, seem to have as
little to do with all these changes, as little ability to
foresee or avert or resist them, as the farmer, who sees
approaching the tornado which will uproot his crop, has
power to stay its devastating course.‘

A President can do little, for he does not lead either
Congress or the nation. Congress cannot guide or stimu-
late the President, nor replace him by a man fitter for
the emergency. The Cabinet neither receive a policy
from Congress nor give one to it. Each power in the
state goes its own way, or wastes precious moments in
discussing which way it shall go, and that which comes
to pass seems to be a result not of the action of the
legal organs of the state, but of some larger force which
at one time uses their discord as its means, at another
neglects them altogether. This at least is the impres-
sion which the history of the greatest problem and
greatest struggle that America has seen, the struggle of
the slaveholders against the Free Soil and Union party,
culminating in the war of the rebellion, makes upon one
who looking back on its events sees them all as parts of
one drama. The carefully devised machinery of the

ecHar. xxv AMERICAN AND EUROPEAN SYSTEMS 393

Constitution. did little to solve that problem or avert
that struggle. The nation asserted itself at last, hut
not till this machinery had failed to furnish a peaceful
means of trying the real strength of the parties, so as
to give the victory to one or to settle a compromise
between them. .

Not wholly dissimilar was the course of events in
the first years of the French Revolution. The Constitu-
tion framed by the National Assembly in 1791 so limited
the functions and authority of each power in the state
that no one person, no one body, was capable of leading
either the nation or the legislature, or of framing and
maintaining a constructive policy. Things were left to
take their-own course. The boat drifted to the rapids,
and the rapids hurried her over the precipice.?

This want of unity is painfully felt in a crisis. When
a sudden crisis comes upon a free state, the executive
needs two things, a large command of money and powers
in excess of those allowed at ordinary tinies. Under the
European system the duty of meeting such a crisis is felt
to devolve as much on the representative Chamber as
on the ministers who are its agents. The Chamber is
therefore at once appealed to for supplies, and for such
legislation as the occasion demands. When these have
been given,-the ministry moves on with the weight of the
people behind it; and as it is accustomed to work at all,
times with the Chamber, and the Chamber with it, the
piston plays smoothly and quickly in the cylinder. In
America the President has at ordinary times little to do
with Congress, while Congress is unaccustomed to deal

1 This Constitution of 1791 was framed under the same idea of the
need for separating the executive and legislative departments which pre-
vailed at Philadelphia in 1787. For want of a legitimate supreme power,

power at last fell into the hands of the Committee of Public Safety, and
afterwards of the Directory. |

394 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

with executive questions. Its machinery, and especi-
ally the absence of ministerial leaders and consequent
want of organization, unfit it for promptly confronting
practical troubles. It is apt to be sparing of supplies,
and of that confidence which doubles the value of sup-
plies. Jealousies of the executive, which are proper in
quiet times and natural towards those with whom Con-
gress has little direct intercourse, may now be perilous,
yet how is Congress to trust persons not members of
its own body nor directly amenable to its control ?
When dangers thicken the only device may be the Roman
one of a temporary dictatorship. Something like this
happened in the War of Secession, for the powers then
conferred upon President Lincoln, or exercised without
congressional censure by him, were almost as much in
excess of those enjoyed under the ordinary law as the
authority of a Roman dictator exceeded that of a Roman
consul.! Fortunately the habits of legality, which lie
lees in the American as they did in the Roman people,
reasserted themselves after the war was over, as they
were wont to do at Rome in her earlier and better days.
When the squall had passed the ship righted, and she
has pursued her subsequent course on as even a keel as
before.

The defects of the tools are the glory of the work-
man. The more completely self-acting is the machine,

1 There is a story that President Lincoln said to Salmon P. Chase,
his secretary of the treasury, in the early days of the war: “These rebels
are violating the Constitution to destroy the Union. I will violate the
Constitution if necessary to save the Union ; and I suspect, Chase, that
our Constitution is going to have a rough time of it before we get done
with this row.” Mr. Hay, however, the distinguished biographer of Lin-
coln, to whom I have applied for information, doubts the authenticity of
the anecdote, as does also Mr. Robert T. Lincoln, President Lincoln
usually argued that his use of extraordinary powers was provided for in
the Constitution. See, however, the passage in his so-called: Hodges
Letter, quoted in a note to Chapter XXXIV.

cuar. xxv AMERICAN AND EUROPEAN SYSTEMS 395

the smaller is the intelligence needed to work it; the
more liable it is to derangement, so much greater must
be the skill and care applied by one who tends it. The
English Constitution, which we admire as a masterpiece
of delicate equipoises and complicated mechanism, would
anywhere but in England be full of difficulties and
dangers. It stands and’ prospers in virtue of the
traditions that still live among English statesmen
and the reverence that has ruled English citizens.
It works by a body of understandings which no writer
can formulate, and of habits which centuries have
been needed to instil, So the American people have a
practical aptitude for politics, a clearness of vision and
capacity for self-control never equalled by any other!
nation. _In 1861 they brushed aside their darling
legalities, allowed the executive to exert novel powers,
passed lightly laws whose constitutionality remains
doubtful, raised an enormous army, and contracted
a prodigious debt. Romans could not have been
more energetic in their sense of civic duty, nor more
trustful to their magistrates. When the emergency
had passed away the torrent which had overspread the
plain fell back at once into its safe and well-worn
channel. The reign of legality returned ; and only four
years after the power of the executive had reached its
highest point in the hands of President Lingoln, it was.
reduced to its lowest point in those of President John-
son. .Such a people can work any Constitution. Thel
danger for them is that this reliance on their skill and
their star may make them heedless of the faults of their
political machinery, slow to devise improvements which
are best applied in quiet times.

CHAPTER XXVI

GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ‘ON THE FRAME OF NATIONAL
GOVERNMENT

Tue account which has been so far given of the working
of the American Government has been necessarily ,an
account rather of its méchanism than of its spirit. Its
practical character, its temper and colour, so to speak,
largely depend on the party system by which it is
worked, and on what may be called the political habits
of the people. These will be described in later chapters.
Here, however, before quitting the study of the constitu-
tional organs of government, it is well to sum up the
criticisms we have been led to make, and to add a few
remarks, for which no fitting place could be found in
preceding chapters, on the general features of the
national government.

I. No part of the Constitution, cost its framers so
much time and trouble as the method of choosing the
President. They saw the evils of a popular vote. ,They
saw also the objections to placing in the hands of
Congress the election of a person whosé chief duty it
was to hold Congress in check. ‘The plan of having him
selected by judicious persons, specially chosen by the
people for that purpose, seemed to meet both difficulties,
and was therefore recommended with confidence. The

cu. xxvi REFLECTIONS ON FRAME OF GOVERNMENT 397

result has, however, so completely falsified these expecta-
tions that it is hard to comprehend how they,came to be
entertained. The presidential electors are mere ciphers,
who vote, as a matter of course, for the candidate of the
party which names them; and the President is practi-
cally chosen by the people at large. The only importance
whi¢h the elaborate machinery provided in the Constitu-
tion retains, is that it prevents a simple popular vote in
which the majority of the nation should prevail, and
makes the issue of the election turn on the voting in
certain “ pivotal” States.

II. The choice of the President, by what is now
practically a simultaneous popular vote, not only involves
once in every four years a tremendous expenditure of
energy, time, and money, but induces of necessity a
crisis which, if it happens to coincide with any passion
powerfully agitating the people, may be dangerous to
the commonwealth.

III. There is always a risk that the result of a presi- -
dential election may be doubtful or disputed on the
ground of error, fraud, or violence. When such a case
arises, the difficulty of finding an authority competent to
deal with it, and likely to be trusted, is extreme. More-
over, the question may not be settled until the pre-exist-
ing executive has, by effluxion of time, ceased to have
a right to the obedience of the citizens. The experience
of the election of 1876 illustrates these dangers. Such
a risk of interregna is incidental to all systems, mon-
archic or republican, which make the executive head
elective, as witness the Romano-Germanic Empire of the
Middle Ages, and the Papacy. But it is more serious
where he is elected by the people than where, as in
France or Switzerland, he is chosen by the Chambers.’

1 In Switzerland the Federal Council of seven are elected by the two

:

398 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

IV. The change of the higher executive officers,
and of many of the lower executive officers also,
which usually takes place once in four years, gives
a jerk to the machinery, and causes a discontinuity
of policy, unless, of course, the President has served
only one term, and is re-elected. Moreover, there
is generally a loss either of responsibility or of* effi-
ciency in the executive chief magistrate during the
last part of his term. An outgoing President may
possibly be a reckless President, because he has little
to lose by misconduct, little to hope from good con-
duct. He may therefore abuse his patronage, or gratify
his whims with impunity. But more often he is a weak
President. He has little influence with Congress,
because his patronage will soon come to an end,
little hold on the people, who are already speculating
on the policy of his successor. His secretary of state
cannot treat boldly with foreign powers, who perceive
that he has a diminished influence in the Senate, and
know that the next secretary may have different views.

The above considerations suggest the inquiry whether
the United States, which no doubt needed a President
in 1789 to typify the then created political unity of the
nation, might not now dispense with one. This question,
however, has never been raised in a practical form in

Chambers, and then elect one of their own riiimber to be their President,
and therewith also President of the Confederation (Constit. of 1874, art.
98). In some British colonies it has been provided that, in case of the
absence or death or incapacity of the Governor, the Chief Justice shall act
as Governor. In India the senior member of Council acts in similar cases
for the Viceroy.

1 A British House of Commons in the last few months before its im-
pending dissolution usually presents the same alternations of recklessness
(generally taking the form of electioneering bids to powérful sections of
opinion in the country) and feebleness which shrinks from entering on
any large scheme of policy, or giving any important decision. ‘This was
marked in the latter part of the session of 1885.

cu. xxvi REFLECTIONS ON FRAILE OF GOVERNMENT 399

America, where the people approve the office, though
dissatisfied with the method of choice.

The strength and worth of the office reside in its
independence of Congress and direct responsibility to the
people. Americans condemn any plan under which, as
lately befell in France, the legislature can drive a Presi-
dexft from power and itself proceed to choose a new one.

V. The Vice-President’s office is ill-conceived. His
only ordinary function is to act as Chairman of the
Senate, but as he does not appoint the Committees
of that House, and has not even a vote (except a cast-
ing vote) in it, this function is of little moment. If,
however, the President dies, or becomes incapable of
acting, or is removed from office, the Vice-President
succeeds to the Presidency. What is the result? The
place being in itself unimportant, the choice of a
candidate for it excites little interest, and is chiefly
used by the party managers as a means of conciliating
a section of their party. It becomes what is called “a
complimentary nomination.” The man elected Vice-
President is therefore never a man in the front rank.
But when the President dies during his term of office,
which has happened to four out of the seventeen Presi-
dents, this second-class man steps into a great place for
which he was never intended. Sometimes, as in the
case of Mr. Arthur, he fills the place respectably. Some-
times, as in that of Andrew Johnson, he throws the
country into confusion.?

He is aut nullus aut Cesar.

1 The question of replacing the President by a ministerial council is
rarely discussed in America. It has recently been mooted in France.

2 Mr. James G. Blaine observes that a Vice-President having honour
but no power is usually the malcontent centre of disappointed and dis-

contented men, as the heir-presumptive to the throne is apt to be in
monarchies—Twenty Years in Congress, vol. ii. p. 57.

400 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT . PART I

VI. The defects in the structure and working of
Congress, and in its relations to the executive, have
been so fully dwelt on already that it is enough to refer
summarily to them. They are—

The discontinuity of Congressional policy.

The want of adequate control over officials.

The want of opportunities for the executive t& in-

fluence the legislature.’

The want of any authority charged to secure the
passing of such legislation as the country needs.

The frequency of disputes between three co-ordinate
powers, the President, the Senate, and the House.

The maintenance of a continuous policy is a difii-
culty in all popular governments. In the United States
it is specially so, because—

The executive htad and his ministers are neces-
sarily (unless when a President is re-elected)
changed once every four years.

One House of Congress is changed every two years.

Neither House recognizes permanent leaders.

No accord need exist between Congress and the
executive.

There is (as already explained) no such thing asa
party in power, in the European sense of the term.
The Americans use it to denote the party to which the
President belongs. But this party may be in a minority
in one or both Houses of Congress, in which case-it can-

1 It is remarked by Mr. Horace White (Fortnightly Review, 1879) that
the quality of the President’s cabinet suffers by the exclusion of ministers
from Congress, because if they had to hold their own and defend their
master’s policy in the House, the President would be driven to select able
men instead of, as has sometimes happened, his own personal friends.
This is true; though Europeans may answer that under the English
system it sometimes happens that men are placed in great administrative
office only because they are able speakers, and persons of higher adminis-
trative gifts passed over because they have not a seat in Parliament or are
unready in debate.

cu. xxvi REFLECTIONS ON FRAME OF GOVERNMENT 401,

not do anything which requires fresh legislation,—may
be in a minority in the Senate, in which case it can take
no executive act of importance.

There is no true leadership in political action, because
the most prominent man has no recognized party
‘authority. Congress was not elected to support him.
He cannot threaten disobedient followers with a
dissolution of Parliament like an English prime
minister. He has not; even the French president’s
right of dissolving the House with the consent of the
Senate.

There is often no general and continuous cabinet
policy, because the cabinet has no authority over Con-
gress, may perhaps have no influence with it.

There is no general or continuous legislative policy,
because the legislature, having no recognized leaders,
and no one guiding committee, acts through a large
number of committees, independent of one another,
and seldom able to bring their measures to maturity.
What continuity exists is due to the general accept-
ance of a few broad maxims, such as that of non-
intervention in the affairs of the Old’ World, and to
the fact that a large nation does not frequently or
lightly change its views upon leading principles. In
minor matters of legislation and administration there is
little settled policy. The Houses trifle with questions,
take them up in one session and drop them the next,
seem insensible to the duty of completing work once
begun. It is no one’s business to press this duty on them.

There is no security that Congress will attend to
such minor defects in the administrative system of
the country as may need a statute to correct them.
In Europe the daily experience of the administrative
departments discloses small faults or omissions in

VoL, I 2D

402 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

the law which involve needless trouble to officials, need-
less cost to the treasury, needless injustice to classes
of the people. Sometimes for their own sakes, some-
times from that desire to see things well done which
is the life-breath of a good public servant, the perma-
nent officials call the attention of their parliamentary
chief, the minister, to the defective state of the ‘aw,
and submit to him the draft of a bill to amend it.
He brings in this bill, and if it involves no matter of
political controversy (which it rarely does), he gets it
passed,? As an American minister does not sit in Con-
gress, and has no means of getting anything he proposes
attended to there, it is a mere chance if such amending
statutes as these are introduced or pass into law.

These defects are all reducible to two. There is an
excessive friction in the American system, a waste of
force in the strife of various bodies and persons created
to check and balance one another. There is a want
of executive unity, and therefore a possible want of
executive vigour. Power is.so much subdivided that
it is hard at a given moment to concentrate it for
prompt and effective action. In fact, this happens only
when a distinet majority of the people are so clearly of one
mind that the several co-ordinate organs of government
obey this majority, uniting their efforts to serve its will.

VII. The relations of the people to the legislature are
far from perfect. These relations are in every free country
so much the most refined and delicate, as well as so
much the most important part of the whole scheme and
doctrine of government, that we must not expect to find

1 This remark applies rather to France, Germany, and Italy, than to
England, because of late years the rules of the English House of Commons
have enabled a single private member so to retard as usually to defeat

any measure which the Government does not put forth its full. strength
to carry.

cu. xxvi REFLECTIONS ON FRAME OF GOVERNMENT 403

perfection anywhere. But comparing America with
Great Britain from 1832 to 1885, for it is still too soon
to judge the condition of things created by the Reform
Acts of that year, the working of the representative
system in America seems somewhat inferior.

There are four essentials to the excellence of a
representative system :—

That the representatives shall be chosen from among
the best men of the country, and, if possible,
from its natural leaders.

That they shall be strictly and palpably responsible
to their constituents for their speeches and votes.

That they shall have courage enough to resist a
momentary impulse of their constituents which
they think mischievous, 7.e. shall be representa-
tives rather than mere delegates.

That they individually, and the Chamber they form,
shall have a reflex action on the people, ze.
that while they derive authority from the
people, they shall also give the people the
benefit of the experience they acquire in the
Chamber, as well as of the superior knowledge
and capacity they may be presumed to possess.

Americans declare, and no doubt correctly, that of
these four requisites, the first, third, and fourth are not
attained in their country. Congressmen are not chosen
from among the best citizens. They mostly deem
themselves mere delegates. They do not pretend to
lead the people, being indeed seldom specially qualified
to do so.

But one also learns in-America ‘that the second
requisite, responsibility, is not fully realized. This
seems surprising in a democratic country, and indeed
almost inconsistent with that conception of the repre-

404 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

sentative as a delegate, which is supposed, perhaps erron-
eously, to be characteristic of democracies. Still the
fact is there. One cause, on which I have already dwelt,
is to be found in the committee system. Another
is the want of organized leadership in Congress. An
English member's responsibility usually takes the
form of his being bound to support the leader of *his
party on all important divisions. In America, this
obligation attaches only when the party has “ gone into
caucus,” and there resolved upon its course. Seeing
that the member need not obey the leader, the leader
cannot be held responsible for the action of the rank
and file. As a third cause we may note the fact that
owing to the restricted competence of Congress many, of
the questions which chiefly interest the voter do not come
before Congress at all, so that its proceedings are not
followed with that close and keen attention which the
debates and divisions of European Chambers excite.

One may say in general that the reciprocal action and
reaction between the electors and Congress, what is
commonly called the “touch” of the people with their
agents, is not sufficiently’ close, quick, and delicate. Re-
presentatives ought to give light and leading to the
people, just as the people give stimulus and momentum
to their representatives. This incidental merit of the
parliamentary system is among its greatest merits.
But in America the action of the voter fails to tell
upon Congress. He votes for a candidate of his own
party, but he does not convey to that candidate an
impulse towards the carrying of particular measures,
because the candidate when in Congress will be prac-
tically unable. to promote those measures, unless he
happens to be placed on the committee to which they
are referred. Hence the citizen, when he casts his

cu. xxvi REFLECTIONS ON FRAME OF GOVERNMENT 405

ballot, can seldom feel that he is advancing any measure
or policy, except the vague and general policy indi-
cated in his party platform. He is voting for a party,
but he does not know what the party will do, and for
a man, but a man whom chance may deprive of the oppor-
tunity of advocating the measures he cares most for.

oConversely, Congress does not guide and illuminate
its constituents. It is amorphous, and has little in-
itiative. It does not focus the light of the nation,
does not warm its imagination, does not dramatize
principles in the deeds and characters of men.’ This‘
happens because, in ordinary times, it lacks great
leaders, and the most obvious cause why it lacks
them, is its disconnection from the executive. As
it is often devoid of such men, so neither does the
country habitually come to it to look for them. In
the old days, neither Hamilton, nor Jefferson, nor John
Adams, in our own time, neither Stanton, nor Grant,
nor ‘Tilden, nor Cleveland, ever sat in Congress.
Lincoln sat for two years only, and owed little of his
subsequent eminence to his career there.

VIII. The independence of. the judiciary, due to
its holding for life, has been a conspicuous merit of
the Federal system, as compared with the popular
election and short terms of judges in most of the States.
Yet even the Federal judiciary is not secure from the
attacks of the two other powers, if combined. For
the legislature may by statute increase the number of

1 As an illustration of the want of the dramatic element in Con-
gress, I may mention that some at least of the parliamentary debating
societies in the American colleges (colleges» for women included) take for
their model not either House of Congress but the British House of
Commons, the students conducting their debates under the names of
prominent members of that assembly. They say that they do this
because Congress has no Ministry and no leaders of the Opposition.

406 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

Federal justices, increase it to any extent, since the
Constitution leaves the number undetermined, and the
President may appoint persons whom he knows to be
actuated by a particular political bias, perhaps even
prepared to decide specific questions in a particular
sense. Thus he and Congress together may, if not
afraid of popular displeasure, obtain such a judicial
determination of any constitutional question as they join
in desiring, even although that question has been hereto-
fore differently decided by the Supreme court. The
only safeguard is {n the disapproval of the people.

It is worth remarking that the points in which the
American frame of national government has proved least
successful are those which are most distinctly artificial,
1.€. those which are not the natural outgrowth of old
institutions and well-formed habits, but devices con-
sciously introduced to attain specific ends.’ The elec-
tion of the President and Vice-President by electors
appointed ad hoc is such a device. The functions of
the judiciary do not belong to this category ; they are
the natural outgrowth of common law doctrines and
of the previous history of the colonies and States ; all

1 See Chapter IV. ante, and Note thereto, in which it is shown that
most of the provisions of the Federal Constitution which have worked
well were drawn from the Constitutions of the several States. ;

This may seem to be another way of saying that nature, 4. his-
torical development, is wiser than the wisest men. Yet if must be
remembered that what we call historical develépment is really the result
of a great many small expedients invented by men during many genera-
tions for curing the particular evils in their government which from time
to time had to be cured. The moral therefore is that a succession of
small improvements, each made conformably to existing conditions and
habits, is more likely to succeed than a large scheme, made all at once in
what may be called the spirit of conscious experiment. The Federal Con-
stitution has been generally supposed in Europe to have been such a
scheme, and its success has encouraged other countries to attempt similar
bold and large experiments. This is an error, The Constitution of the
United States is almost as truly the matured result of long and ‘gradual
historical development as the English Constitution itself.

cu.xxvi REFLECTIONS ON FRAME OF GOVERNMENT 407

that is novel in them, for it can hardly be called
artificial, is the creation of Courts co-extensive with
the sphere of the national government.

All the main features of American government may

be deduced from two principles. One is the sovereignty
of the people, which expresses itself in the fact that the
supreme law—the Constitution—is the direct utterance
of their will, that they alone can amend it, that it pre-
vails against every other law, that whatever powers it
does not delegate are deemed to be reserved to it, that
every power in the State draws its anthority, whether
directly, like the House of Representatives, or in the
second degree, like the President and the Senate, or in
the third degree, like the Federal judiciary, from the
people, and is legally responsible to the people, and not
to any one of the other powers.
_ The second principle, itself a consequence of this
first one, is the distrust of the various organs and
agents of government. The States are carefully safe-
guarded against aggression by the central government,
So are the individual citizens. Hach organ of govern-
ment, the executive, the legislature, the judiciary, is made
a jealous observer and restrainer of the others. Since the
people, being too nimerous, cannot directly manage their
affairs, but must commit them to agents, they have re-
solved to prevent abuses by trusting each agent as little
as possible, and subjecting him to the oversight of other
agents, who will harass and check him if he attempts to
overstep his instructions.

Some one has said that the American Government
and Constitution are based on the theology of Calvin
and the philosophy of Hobbes. This at least is true,
that there is a hearty Puritanism in the view of human
nature which pervades the instrument of 1787. It is

408 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

the work of men who believed in original sin, and were
resolved to leave open for transgressors no door which
they could possibly shut.! Compare this spirit with the
enthusiastic optimism of the Frenchmen of 1789. It is
not merely a difference of race temperaments; it is a
difference of fundamental ideas.

With the spirit of Puritanism there is blent a double
portion of the spirit of legalism. Not only is there
no reliance on ethical forces to help the government to
work-: there is an elaborate machinery of law to pre-
serve the equilibrium of each of its organs. The aim
of the Constitution seems to be not so much to attain
great common ends by securing a good government as
to avert the evils which will flow, not merely from
a bad government, but from any government strong
enough to threaten the pre-existing communities or
the individual. citizen.

The spirit of 1787 was an English spirit, and there-
fore a conservative spirit, tinged, no doubt, by the
hatred to tyranny developed in the revolutionary
struggle, tinged also by the nascent dislike to in-
equality, but in the main an English spirit, which
desired to walk in the old paths of precedent, which
thought of government as a means of maintaining
order and securing to every one his rights, rather
than as a great ideal power, capable of guiding and
developing a nation’s life. And thus, though the
Constitution of 1789 represented a great advance on

‘the still oligarchic system of contemporary England, it
was yet, if we regard simply its legal provisions, the least
democratic of democracies. Had the points which it
left undetermined been dealt with in an aristocratic

1 “That power might be abused,” says Marshall in his Life of Wash-
ington, “was deemed a conclusive reason why it should not be conferred.”

cu. xxvi REFLECTIONS ON FRAME OF GOVERNMENT 409

spirit, had the legislation of Congress and of the several
States taken an aristocratic turn, it might have grown
into an aristocratic system.’ The democratic character
which it now possesses is largely the result of subsequent
events, which have changed the conditions under which
it had to work, and have delivered its development into
theshands of that passion for equality which has become
a powerful factor in the modern world everywhere.

He who should desire to draw an indictment against
the American scheme of government might make it a
long one, and might for every count in it cite high
American authority and adduce evidence from American
history. Yet a European reader would greatly err were
he to conclude that this scheme of government is a
failure, or is, indeed, for the purposes of the country,
inferior to the political system of any of the great nations
of the Old World.

All governments are faulty ; and an equally minute
analysis of the constitutions of England, or France,
or Germany would disclose mischiefs as serious, rela-
tively to the problems with which those states have to

deal, as those we have noted in the American system.
To any one familiar with the practical working of free
governments it is a standing wonder that they work at
all. The first impulse of mankind is to follow and
obey ; servitude rather than freedom is their natural
state. With freedom, when it emerges among the more
progressive races, there come dissension and faction ; and |
it takes many centuries to form those habits of compro-
mise, that love of order, and that respect for public
opinion which make democracy tolerable. What keeps

1 The point most vital for determining the character of Congress, viz.
the qualification of the electors, was left to the States. They have deter-
mined it by establishing manhood suffrage.

410 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

a fred government going is the good sense and patriot-
ism of the people, or of the guiding class, embodied in
usages and traditions which it is hard to describe, but
which find, in moments of difficulty, remedies for the in-
evitable faults of the system. Now, this good sense and
that power of subordinating sectional to national in-
terests which we call patriotism, exist in higher measure
in America than in any of the great states of Europe.
And the United States, more than any other country,
are governed by public opinion, that is to say, by the
general sentiment of the mass of the nation, which all’
the organs of the national government and of the State
governments look to and obey.’

A philosopher from Jupiter or Saturn who should
examine the constitution of England or that of America
would probably pronounce that such a body of com-
plicated devices, full of opportunities for conflict and
deadlock, could not work at all. Many of those who
examined the American constitution when it was
launched did point to a multitude of difficulties, and
confidently predicted its failure. Still more confidently
did the European enemies of free government declare in
the crisis of the War of Secession that ‘the republican
bubble had burst.” Some of these censures were well
grounded, though there were also defects which had
escaped criticism, and were first disclosed by experience.
But the Constitution has lived on in spite of all defects,
and seems stronger now than at any previous epoch.

Every Constitution, like every man, has “the de-
fects of its good qualities.” Ifa nation desires perfect
stability it must put up with a certain slowness and
cumbrousness ; it must face the possibility of a want of

1 The nature of public opinion and the way in which it governs are
discussed in Part IV,

cu. xxvi REFLECTIONS ON FRAME OF GOVERNMENT 411

action where action is called for. If, on the other hand,
it seeks to obtain executive speed and vigour by a com-
plete concentration of power, it must run the risk that
power will be abused and irrevocable steps too hastily
taken. Those faults on which I have laid stress, the
waste of power by friction, the want of unity and vigour
in the conduct of affairs by executive and legislature, are
the price which the Americans pay for the autonomy of
their States, and for the permanence of the equilibrium
among the various branches of their government. They
pay this price willingly, because these defects are far
less dangerous to the body politic than they would
be in a European country. Take for instance the
shortcomings of Congress as a legislative authority.
Every European country is surrounded by difficulties
which legislation must deal with, and that promptly.
But in America, where those relics of medizval privi-
lege and injustice that still cumber most parts of
the Old World either never existed, or were long ago
abolished, where all the conditions of material pros-
perity exist in ample measure, and the development
of material resources occupies men’s minds, where nearly
all social reforms lie within the sphere of State action,
—in America there is less need and less desire than
in Europe for a perennial stream of federal legisla-
tion. .People are contented if things go on fairly
well as they are. Political philosophers, or philan-
thropists, perceive some improvements which federal
statutes might effect, but the mass of the nation does
not complain. The barrenness of session after session
is no such crying evil as the less conspicuous barren-
ness deplored by reformers in England,

“In matters of government,” says Judge Cooley,’

1 Address to the South Carolina Bar Association, Dec. 1886.

412 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1

“ Anterica has become the leader and the example for
all enlightened nations. England and France alike
look across the ocean for lessons which may form and
guide their people. Italy and Spain follow more dis-
tantly ; and the liberty-loving people of every country
take courage from American freedom, and find augury
of better days for themselves from American prosperity.
But America is not so much an example in her liberty
as in the covenanted and enduring securities which are
intended to prevent liberty degenerating into licence,
and to establish a feeling of trust and repose under a
beneficent government, whose excellence, so obvious in
its freedom, is still more cons picious in its careful pro-
vision for permanence and stability.”

Every European state has to fear not only ‘the
rivalry but the aggression of its neighbours, Even
Britain, so long safe in her insular home. has lost some of
her security by the growth of steam navies, and has in her
Indian and colonial possessions given pledges to Fortune
all over the globe. She, like the Powers of the European
Continent, must maintain her system of government in
full efficiency for war as well as for peace, and cannot
afford to let her armaments decline, her finances become
disordered, the vigour of her executive authority be
impaired, sources of internal discord continue to prey
upon her vitals. But America liveg in a world. of her
own, ipsa suis pollens opibus, nihil indiga nostri. Safe
from attack, safe even from menace, she hears from
afar the warring cries of European races and faiths, as
the gods of Epicurus listened to the murmurs of the
unhappy earth spread out beneath their golden dwellings,

“Sejuncta a rebus nostris semotaque longe.”

Had Canada or Mexico grown to be a great power,

cu. xxvi REFLECTIONS ON FRAME OF GOVERNMENT 413

had France not sold Louisiana, or had England, rooted
on: the American continent, become a military despotism,
the United States could not indulge the easy optimism
which makes them tolerate the faults of their government.
As it is, that which might prove to a European state a
mortal disease is here nothing worse than a teasing ail-
ment. Since the War of Secession ended, no serious danger
has arisen either from within or from without to alarm
transatlantic statesmen. Social convulsions from within,
warlike assaults from without, seem now as unlikely to
try the fabric of the American Constitution, as an earth-
quake to rend the walls of the Capitol. This is why
the Americans submit, not merely patiently but hope-
fully, to the defects of their government. The vessel
may not be any better built, or found, or rigged than are
those which carry the fortunes of the great nations of
Europe. She is certainly not better navigated. But
for the present at least—it may not always be so—she
sails upon a summer sea.

It must never be forgotten that the main object
which the framers of the Constitution set before them-
selves has been achieved. When Siéyes was asked what
he had done during the Reign of Terror, he answered,
“T lived.” The Constitution as a whole has stood and
stands unshaken. The scales of power have continued to
hang fairly even. The President has not corrupted and
enslaved Congress: Congress has not paralysed and
cowed the President. The legislative may have gained
somewhat on the executive department; yet were
George Washington to return to earth, he might be as
great and useful a President as he was a century ago.
Neither the legislature nor the executive has for a
moment threatened the liberties of the people. The,
States have not broken up the Union, and the Union

414 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1

has not absorbed the States. No wonder that the
Americans are proud of an instrument under which this
great result has been attained, which has passed un-
scathed through the furnace of civil war, which has been
found capable of embracing a body of commonwealths
three times as numerous, and with twenty-fold the
population of the original States, which has cultivated
the political intelligence of the masses to a point reached
in no other country, which has fostered and been found
compatible with a larger measure of local self-govern-
ment than has existed elsewhere. Nor is it the least
of its merits to have made itself beloved. Objections
may be taken to particular features, and these objec-
tions point, as most American thinkers are agreed, to
practicable improvements which would preserve the
excellences and remove some of the inconveniences,
But reverence for the Constitution has become so potent
a conservative influence, that no proposal of fundamental
change seems likely to be entertained. And this
reverence is itself one of the most wholesome and hope-
ful elements in the character of the American people.

CHAPTER XXVII

THE FEDERAL SYSTEM

Having examined the several branches of the
National government and the manner in which they
work together, we may now proceed to examine the
American Commonwealth as a Federation of States.
The present chapter is intended to state concisely the
main features which distinguish the Federal system,
and from which it derives its peculiar character. Three
other chapters will describe its practical working, and
summarize the criticisms that may be passed upon it.
The contests in the Convention of 1787 over the
framing of the Constitution, and in the country over its
adoption, turned upon two points: the extent to which
the several States should be recognized as independent
and separate factors in the construction of the National
government, and the quantity and nature of the powers
which should be withdrawn from the States to be
vested in that government. It has been well remarked
that ‘the first of these, the definition of the structural
powers, gave more trouble at the time than the second,
because the line of partition between the powers of the
States and the Federal government had been already
fixed by the whole experience of the country.”* But ,

1 I quote from an acute and concise essay on this subject by Mr,

416 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

since 1791 there has been practically.no dispute as to
‘the former point, and little as to the propriety of the
provisions which define the latter. On the interpre-
tation of these provisions there has, of course, been
endless debate, some deeming the Constitution to have
taken more from the States, some less; while still
warmer controversies have raged as to the matters
which the instrument does not expressly deal with,
and particularly whether the States retain their sove-
reignty, and with it the right of nullifying or refusing
to be bound by certain acts of the national government,
and in the last resort of withdrawing from the Union.
As these latter questions (nullification and secession)
have now been settled by the Civil War, we may say
that in the America of to-day there exists a general
agreement—

That every State on entering the Union finally re-
nounced its sovereignty, and is now for ever subject to
the Federal authority as defined by the Constitution.

That the functions of the States as factors of the
national government are satisfactory, 2.¢e. sufficiently
secure its strength and the dignity of these communities.

That the delimitation of powers between the national
government and the States, contained in the Constitu-
tion, is convenient, and needs no fundamental alteration.!

The ground which we have to tread during the re-
mainder of this chapter is therefore no longer controversial
ground, but that of well-established law and practice.*

Richard M. Venable of Baltimore, entitled ‘The Partition of Powers
between the Federal and State Governments,” being a paper read at the
1885 meeting of the American Bar Association.

1 The view that the power of Congress to legislate might properly be
extended, by a constitutional amendment, to such a subject as marriage
and divorce, is of course compatible with an acquiescence in the general
scheme of delimitation of powers.

2 A remarkably clear view of the limits of Federal and State authority

CHAP. XXVII THE FEDERAL SYSTEM © 417

I. The distribution of powers between the National
and the State governments is effected in two ways,
Positively, by conferring certain powers on the National
government, Negatively, by imposing certain restric-
tions on the States. It would have been superfluous
to confer any powers on the States, because they
retaén all powers not actually taken from them. A
lawyer may think that it was equally unnecessary
and, so to speak, inartistic, to lay any prohibitions on
thé National government, because it could ex hypothesi
exercise no powers not expressly granted. However,
the anxiety of the States to fetter the master they were
giving themselves caused the introduction of provisions
qualifying the grant of express powers, and interdicting
the National government from various kinds of action
on which it might otherwise have been tempted to
enter. The matter is further complicated by the fact
that the grant of power to the National government is
not in all cases an exclusive grant: 7.e. there are matters
which both, or either, the States and the National
government may deal with. “The mere grant of a
power to Congress does not of itself, in most cases,
imply a prohibition upon the States to exercise the like
power. . . . It is not the mere existence of the National

may be found in the treatise of Mr. C. S. Patterson (published since this
chapter was written), Federal Restraints on State Action : Philadelphia, 1888.

1 Judge Cooley observes to me, “The prohibitions imposed by the
Federal Constitution on the exercise of power by the general government
were not, for the most part, to prevent its encroaching on the powers left
with the States, but to preclude tyrannical exercise of powers which were
unquestionably given to the Federal government. Thus Congress was
forbidden to pass any bill of attainder ; this was tq prevent its dealing
with Federal offences by legislative conviction and sentence, It was for-
bidden to pass ex post facto laws, and this undoubtedly is a limitation
“upon power granted ; for with the same complete power in respect to
offences against the general government which a sovereignty possesses, it
might have passed such laws if not prohibited.”

VOL. I 25

418 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

power but its exercise which is incompatible with the
exercise of the same power by the States.” Thus we
may distinguish the following classes of governmental
powers :—

Powers vested in the National government alone.

Powers vested in the States alone.

Powers exercisable by either the National govern-

ment or the States.

Powers forbidden to the National government.

Powers forbidden to the State governments,

It might be thought that the two latter classes are
superfluous, because whatever is forbidden to the National
government is permitted to the States, and conversely,
whatever is forbidden to the States is permitted to the
National government, But thisisnotso. ‘For instance,
Congress can grant no title of nobility (Art. i. § 9).
But neither can a State do so (Art. i § 10). The
National government cannot take private property for
public use without just compensation (Amendment v.)
Apparently neither can any State do so (Amendment
xiv. a8 interpreted in several cases). So no State can
pass any law impairing the obligation of 4 contract
(Art. i. § 10). But the National government, although
not subject to a similar direct prohibition, has received
no general power to legislate as regards ordinary con-
tracts, and might therefore in some cases find itself
equally unable to pass a law which a State eeelature,
though for a different reason, could not pass.? So no
State can pass any ex post facto law. Neither can
Congress.

1 Cooley, Principles, p. 35; cf. Sturges v. Crowninshield, 4 Wheat.
122.
2 Of course Congress can legislate regarding some contracts, and can
impair their obligation. It has power to regulate commerce, it can pass
bankrupt laws, it can make paper money legal tender.

CHAP, XXVII THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 419

What the Constitution has done—and this is to
Englishmen one of its most singular features—is not to
cut in half the totality of governmental functions and
powers, giving part to the national government and
leaving all: the rest to the States, but to divide up this
totality of authority into a number of parts which do
not exhaust the whole, but leave a residuum of powers
neither granted to the Union nor continued to the States
but reserved to the people, who, however, can put them
-in force only by the difficult process of amending the
Constitution. In other words, there are things in
America which there exists no organized and per-
manent authority capable of legally doing, not a State,
because it is expressly forbidden, not the national gov-
ernment, because it either has not received the com-
petence or has been expressly forbidden. Suppose,
for instance, that there should arise a wish to pass
for California such a measure as the Irish Land Act
passed by the British Parliament in 1881, or the Irish
Land Act passed by that body in 1887. Neither
the State legislature of California, nor the people
of California assembled in a constitutional convention,
could pass such a measure, because it would violate
the obligation of contracts, and thereby transgress
Art. i. § 10 of the Federal Constitution. Whether
the Federal Congress could pass such a measure is at
least extremely doubtful, because the Constitution,
though it has imposed no prohibition such as that
which restricts a State, does not seem to have conferred
on. Congress the right of legislating’on such a matter at
all. If, therefore, an absolute and overwhelming neces-

1 It may of course be suggested that in case of urgent public neces-

sity, such as the existence of war or insurrection, Congress might extinguish
debis either generally or in 4 particular district. No such legislative power

420 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

sity for the enactment of such a measure should arise,
the safer if not the only course would be to.amend the
Federal Constitution, either by striking out the probibi-
tion on the States or by conferring the requisite power
on Congress, a process which would probably occupy
more than a year, and which requires the concurrence
of two-thirds of both Houses of Congress and of thnee-
fourths of the thirty-eight States.

II.-The powers vested in the National government
‘alone are such as relate to the conduct of the foreign
relations of the country and to such common national
purposes as the army and navy, internal commerce,
currency, weights and measures, and the post-office,
with provisions for the management of the machinery,
legislative executive and judicial, charged with these
purposes,?

The powers which remain vested in the States alone
are all the other ordinary powers of internal government,
such as legislation on private law, civil and criminal,
the maintenance of law and order, the creation of local
institutions, the provision for education and the relief
of the poor, together with taxation for the above pur-
poses.

III. The powers which are exercisable concurrently
by the National government and by the States are—

Powers of legislation on some specified subjects,
such, as bankruptcy and certain commercial matters
(e.g. pilot laws and harbour regulations), but so that
State legislation shall take effect only in thé absence of
Federal legislation.
seems, however, to have been exerted or declared by the courts to exist,
unless the principles of the last Legal Tender decision can be thought to
reach so far.

1 See Art. i § 8, Art. ii.§ 2, Art. iii. § 2, Art. iv. §§ 3 and 4; Amend-
ments xiii, xiv. xv. of the Constitution.

CHAP. XXVIL THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 421

Powers of taxation, direct or indirect, but so
that neither Congress nor a State shall tax exports
from any State, ee so that neither any State shall,
except with the consent of Congress, tax any cor-
poration or other agency created for Federal purposes
or any act done under Federal authority, nor the
National’ government tax any State or its agencies or
property.

Judicial powers in certain classes of cases’ where
Congress might have legislated, but has not, or where
a party to'a suit has a choice to proceed either in a
Federal or a State court.

Powers of determining matters relating to the elec-
tion of representatives and senators (but if Congress
determines, the State law gives way).

IV. The prohibitions imposed on the National
government are set forth in Art. i. § 9, and in the first
ten amendments. The most important are—

Writ of habeas corpus may not be suspended, nor
bill of attainder or ex post facto law passed.’

No commercial preference shall be given to one State
over another.

No title of nobility shall be granted.

No law shall be passed establishing or prohibiting
any religion, or abridging the freedom of speech or of
the press, or of public meeting, or of bearing arms.

No religious test shall be required as a qualification
for any office under the United States.

No person shall be tried for a capital crime unless
on the presentment of a grand jury, or be subjected to a
second capital trial for the same offence, or be compelled

1 Limitations of a nature generally similar to these are now pretty

frequent in recent European Constitutions, eg. in that of Belgium.
The term ex post facto law is deemed to refer to criminal laws only,

422 ‘THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

to be'a witness against himself, or be tried otherwise
than by a jury of his State and district.

No common law action shall be decided except by a
jury where the value in dispute exceeds $20, and no
fact determined by a jury shall be re-examined other-
wise than by the rules of the common law.!

V. The prohibitions imposed on the States are ¢on-
tained in Art. i. § 10, and in the three last amendments.
They are intended to secure the National government
against attempts by the States to trespass on its domain,
and to protect individuals against oppressive legisla-
tion.

No State shall make any treaty or alliance: coin
money: make anything but gold and silver coin a legal
tender: pass any bill of attainder, ex post facto law, or
law impairing the obligation of contracts: grant any
titles of nobility. .

No State shall without the consent of Congress—
Lay duties on exports or imports (the produce of such,
if laid, going to the national treasury): keep troops or
ships of war in peace time: enter into an agreement
with another State or with any foreign power: engage
in war, unless actually invaded or in imminent danger.

Every State must—Give credit to the records and
judicial proceedings of every other State: extend the
privileges and immunities of citizens, to the citizens of
other States: deliver up fugitives from justice to the
State entitled to claim them.

No State shall have any but a republican form of
government.

No State shall maintain slavery : abridge the privi-
leges of any citizen of the United States, or deny to

1 Chiefly intended to prevent the methods of courts of equity from
being applied in the Federal courts as against the findings of a jury.

CHAP, XXVII THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 423

him the right of voting, in respect of race, colour, or
previous servitude: deprive any person of life, liberty,
or property without due process of law: deny to any
person the equal protection of the laws.

Note that this list contains no prohibition to a
State to do any of the following things :—Establish a
particular form of religion: endow a particular form of
religion, or educational or charitable establishments con-
nected therewith: abolish trial by jury in criminal or
civil cases: suppress the freedom of speaking, writing,
and meeting (provided that this be done equally as
between different classes of citizens, and provided also
that it be not done to such an extent as to amount to
a deprivation of liberty without due process of law):
limit the electoral franchise to any extent: extend
the electoral franchise to women, minors, aliens.

These omissions are significant. They show that the
framers of the Constitution had no wish to produce uni-
formity among the States in government or institutions,
and little care to protect the citizens against abuses
of State power.1 Their chief aim was to secure the
National government against encroachments on the part
of the States, and to prevent causes of quarrel both
between the central and State authorities and between
the several States, The result has, on the whole, justified.
their action. So far from abusing their power of making
themselves unlike one another, the States have tended
to be too uniform, and have made fewer experiments in
institutions than one could wish.

VI. The powers vested in each State are all of them

1 The fourteenth and fifteenth amendments are in this.respect a
novelty. The only restrictions of this kind to be found in the instrument
of 1789 are those relating to contracts and ex post facto laws. Of course

the rights of State citizens were adequately protected already by the pro-
visions of State constitutions,

424 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1

original and inherent powers, which belonged to the
State before it entered the Union.1 Hence they are
prima facie unlimited, and if a question arises as to any
particular power, it is presumed to be enjoyed by the
State, unless it can be shown to have been taken away
by the Federal Constitution ; or, in other words, a State
is not deemed to be subject to any restriction which ¢he
Constitution has not distinctly imposed.

The powers granted to the National government are
delegated powers, enumerated in and defined by the
instrument which has created the Union. Hence the
rule that when a question arises whether the national
government possesses a particular power, proof must be
given that the power was positively granted. If not
granted, it is not possessed, because the Union is an
artificial creation, whose government can have nothing
but what the people have by the Constitution conferred.
The presumption is therefore against the national
government in such a case, just as it is for the State
in a like case.”

VIE. The authority of the National government over
the citizens of every State is direct and immediate, not
exerted through the State organization, and not requir-
ing the co-operation of the State government. For most
purposes the National government ignores the States ;

1 When I speak of a State, I do not mean merely a State legislature,
because that body is usually restrained by the State constitution from
exercising the totality of the powers which the State possesses, but include
the people of the State assembled in convention, or voting on a State
constitution or on an amendment proposed thereto.

2 Congress must not attempt to interfere with the so-called “ police
power” of the States within their own limits. So when ‘a statute
of Congress had made it punishable to sell certain illuminating fluids
inflammable at less than a certain specified temperature, it was held that
this statute could not operate within a State, but only in the District of

Columbia and the Territories, and a person convicted under it in Detroit
was discharged (United States v, De Witt, 9 Wall. 41).

CHAP. XXVII THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 425

and it treats the citizens of different States as being
simply its own citizens, equally bound by its laws.
The Federal courts, revenue officers, and post-office
draw no help from any State officials, but depend
directly on Washington. Hence, too, of course, there
is no local self-government in Federal matters. No
Federal official is elected by the people of any local area.
Local government is purely a State affair. ~

On the other hand, the State in no wise depends on
the National government for its organization or its effec-
tive working. It is the creation of its own inhabitants.
They have given it its constitution. They administer its
government. It goes on its own way, touching the
national government at but few points. That the two
should touch at the fewest possible points was the intent
of those who framed the Federal Constitution, for they
saw that the less contact, the less danger of collision.
Their aim was to keep the two mechanisms as distinct
and independent of each other as was compatible with
the still higher need of subordinating, for national pur-
poses, the State to the Central government.’

VIIL. It is a further consequence of this principle
that the National government has but little to do with the
States as States. Its relations are with their citizens,
who are also its citizens, rather than with them as ruling
commonwealths. In the following points, however, the
Constitution does require certain services of the States :—

It requires each State government to direct the
choice of, and accredit to the seat of the national
government, two senators and so many representatives
as the State is entitled to send.

1 For a comparison of the Federal system of the United States
with the Federal system of the two ancient English Universities, see note
to this chapter printed at the end of the volume, .

426 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1

It requires similarly that presidential electors be
chosen meet and vote in the States, and that their
votes be transmitted to the national capital.

It requires each State to organize and arm its militia,
which, when duly summoned for active service, are
placed under the command of the President.

It requires each State to maintain a republican form
of governmnent.'

Note in particular that the National government
does not, as in some other federations—

Call upon the States, as commonwealths, to con-
tribute funds to its support :

Issue (save in so far as may be needed in order to
secure a republican form of government) administrative
orders to the States, directing their authorities to carry
out its laws or commands:

Require the States to submit their laws to it, and
veto such as it disapproves.

The first two things it is not necessary for the
National government to do, because it levies its taxes
directly by its own collectors, and enforces its laws,
commands, and judicial decrees by the hands of its own
servants. The last can be dispensed with because the
State laws are ipso jure invalid, if they conflict with the
Constitution or any treaty or law duly made under it
(Art. vi. § 2), while if they do not so conflict they
are valid whether the National government should
approve of them or not.

Neither does the National government allow its
structure to be dependent on the action of the States.
‘To make it impossible for a State or group of States to
jeopard by inaction or hostile action the existence of the

1 Conversely, the National government may be required by any State
to afford protection against invasion and against domestic violence.

CHAP, XXVII THE FEDERAL SYST. Eat 427
central government,” was a prime object with the men
of 1787, and has greatly contributed to the solidity of
the fabric they reared. The de facto secession of eleven
States in 1860-61 interfered with the regular legal con-
duct neither of the presidential election of 1864 nor of
the congressional elections from 1861 to 1865. Those
States were not represented in Congress; but Congress
itself went on diminished in numbers yet with its full
legal powers, as the British Parliament would go on
though all the peers and representatives from Scotland
might be absent.

IX. A State is, within its proper sphere, just as legally
supreme, just as well entitled to give effect to its own
will, as is the National government within its sphere ;
and for the same reason. All authority flows from the
people. The people have given part of their supreme
authority to the Central, part to the State governments.
Both hold by the same title, and therefore the National
government, although superior wherever there is a con-
currence of powers, has no more right to trespass upon
the domain of a State than a State has upon the domain
of Federal action. ‘When a particular power,” says
Judge Cooley, “is found to belong to the States, they
are entitled to the same complete independence in its
exercise as is the National government in wielding its.
own authority.” That the course which a State is
following is pernicious, that its motives are bad and its
sentiments disloyal to the Union, makes no difference
until or unless it infringes on the sphere of Federal
authority. It may be thought that however distinctly
this may have been laid down as a matter of theory, in
practice the State will not obtain the same justice as the
National government, because the court which decides

1 Venable, ué supra.

428 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1

points of law in dispute between the two is in the last
resort a Federal court, and therefore biassed in favour of
the Federal government. In practice, however, little or
no unfairness has arisen from this cause." The Supreme
court may, as happened for twenty years before the
War of Secession, be chiefly composed of States’ Rights
men. In any case the court cannot stray far front the
path which previous decisions have marked out.

X. There are several remarkable omissions in the
constitution of the American federation.

One is that there is no grant of power to the
National government to coerce a recalcitrant or rebellious
State. Another is that nothing is said as to the right
of secession. Any one can understand why this right
should not have been granted. But neither is it men-
tioned to be negatived.

There is no abstract or theoretic declaration regard-
ing the nature of the federation and its government,
nothing as to the ultimate supremacy of the central
authority outside the particular sphere allotted to it,
nothing as to the so-called sovereign rights of the States. -
As if with a prescience of the dangers to follow, the wise —
men of 1787 resolved to give no opening for abstract
inquiry and metaphysical dialectic. But in vain. The
.human mind is not to be so restrained. If the New
Testament had consisted of no other writings than the
Gospel of St. Matthew and the Epistle of St. James,
there would have been scarcely the less a crop of specu-

1 “Whatever fluctuations may be seen in the history of public opinion
during the period of our national existence, we think it will be found
that the Supreme court, so far as its functions required, has always held
with a steady and even hand the balance between State and Federal
power, and we trust that such may continue to be the history of its
relation to that subject so long as it shall have duties to perform which
demand of it a construction of the Constitution.”_—Judgment of the
Supreme court in The Slaughter House Cases, 16 Wall. 82.

CHAP, XXVII THE FEDERAL SYSTEM ‘ 429

lative theology. The drily legal and practical character
of.the Constitution did not prevent the growth of a mass
of subtle and, so to speak, scholastic metaphysics regard-
ing the nature of the government it created. The inex-
tricable knots which American lawyers and publicists
went on tying, down till 1861, were cut by the sword
of the North in the Civil War, and need concern us
no longer. It is now admitted that the Union is not
a mere compact between commonwealths, dissoluble
at pleasure, but an instrument of perpetual efficacy,’

1 This view received judicial sanction in the famous case of Texas v.
White (7 Wall. 700) decided by the Supreme court after the war. It is.
there said by Chief-Justice Chase, “The Union of the States never was a
purely artificial and arbitrary relation. . . . It received definite form and
character and sanction by the Articles of Confederation. By these the
Union was solemnly declared to be ‘perpetual.’ And where these articles
were found to be inadequate to the exigencies of the country, the Constitu-
tion was ordained ‘to form a more perfect Union.’ It is difficult to convey
the idea of indissoluble unity more clearly than by these words. What
can be indissoluble if a perpetual union, made more perfect, is not? But
the perpetuity and indissolubility of the Union by no means implies the
loss of distinct and individual existence, or of the right of self-government,
by the States, . . . It may be not unreasonably said that the preservation
of the States and the maintenance of their governments are as much within
the design and care of the Constitution as the preservation of the Union
and the inaintenance of the national government. The Constitution, in all
its provisions, looks to an indestructible Union composed of indestructible
States. When, therefore, Texas became one of the United States she
entered into an indissoluble relation. . . . There was no place for recon-
sideration or revocation except through revolution or through consent of
the States. Considered therefore as transactions under the Constitution,
the ordinance of secession adopted by the Convention, and ratified by a
majority of the citizens of Texas, was absolutely null and utterly without
operation in law. The obligations of the State as a member of the Union,
and of every citizen of the State as a citizen of the United States, remained
perfect and unimpaired.” The State did not cease to be a State, nor her
citizens to be citizens of the Union. See also the cases of White v. Hart
(18 Wall. 646) and Keith v. Clark (97 U. S. 451).

As respects the argument that the Union established by the Constitution
of 1789 must be perpetual, because it is declared to have been designed to
make 2 previous perpetual Union more perfect, it may be remarked, as matter
of history, that this previous Union (that resting on the Articles of Con-
federation) had not proved perpetual, but was in fact put an end to by the
acceptance in 1788 of the new Constitution by the nine States who first

430 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART !

emanating from the whole people, and alterable by them
only in the manner which its own terms prescribe. It
is “an indestructible Union of indestructible States.”

It follows from the recognition of the indestructibility
of the Union that there must somewhere exist a force
capable of preserving it. The National government is
now admitted to be such a force. “It can exercise all
powers essential to preserve and protect its own existence
and that of the States, and the constitutional relation of
the States to itself, and to one another,”?

“May it not,” some one will ask, “abuse these
powers, abuse them so as to extinguish the States them-
selves, and turn the federation into a unified govern-
ment. What is there but the Federal judiciary to
prevent this catastrophe ? and the Federal judiciary has
only moral and not also physical force at its command.”

No doubt it may, but not until public opinion
supports it in so doing, that is to say, not until the
mass of the nation which now maintains, because it
values, the Federal system, is possessed by a desire to
overthrow that system. Such a desire may express
ratified that instrument, After that ratification the Confederation was
dead, and the States of North Carolina and Rhode Island, which for some
months refused to come into the new Union, were clearly out of the old one,
and stood alone in the world. May it not then be said that those who
destroyed a Union purporting to be perpetual were thereafter estopped from
holding it to have been perpetual,and from founding on the word ‘perpetual’
an argument against those who tried to upset the new Union in 1861, as the
old one had been upset in 1788, The answer to this way of putting the point
seems to be to admit that the proceedings of 1788 were in fact revolutionary.
In ratifying their new Constitution in that year, the nine States broke
through and flung away their previous compact which purported to have
been made for ever. But they did so for the sake of forming a better and
more enduring compact, and their extra-legal action'was amply justified
by the necessities of the case,

An elaborate discussion of the legal relation of the States to the Union
will be found in the learned treatise of Mr. Hurd, The aEey of our

National Existence: Boston, 1881.
1 Venable, ut supra.

CHAP, XXVII THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 43t

itself in proper legal form by carrying amendments to
the Constitution which will entirely change the nature
of the government. Or if the minority be numerous
enough to prevent the passing of such amendments, and
if the desire of the majority be sufficiently vehement,
the majority which sways the National government may
disregard legal sanctions and effect its object by a
revolution. In either event—and both are improbable—
the change which will have passed upon the sentiments
of the American people will be a sign that Federalism
has done its work, and that the time has arrived for new
forms of political life.

CHAPTER XXVIII

WORKING RELATIONS OF THE NATIONAL AND THE
STATE GOVERNMENTS

Tue characteristic feature and special interest of the
American Union is that it shows us two governments
covering the same ground yet distinct and separate in
their action. It is like a great factory wherein two
sets of machinery are at work, their revolving wheels
apparently intermixed, their bands crossing one another,
yet each set doing its own work without touching or
hampering the other. To keep the National government
and the State governments each in the allotted sphere,
preventing collision and friction betwee them, was the
primary aim of those who formed the Constitution, a
task the more needful and the more delicate because the
States had been until then almost independent and there-
fore jealous of their privileges, and because, if friction
should arise, the National government could not remove it
by correcting defects in the machinery. For the National
government had not been made supreme and omnipotent..
It was itself the creature of the Constitution. It was not
permitted to amend the Constitution, but could only
refer it back for amendment to the people of the States
.or to their legislatures. Hence the men of 1787, feeling
the cardinal importance of anticipating and avoiding

cHap. xxvuf WORKING OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 433

occasions of collision, sought to accomplish their object
by the concurrent application of two devices. One was
.to restrict the functions of the National government to
the irreducible minimum of functions absolutely needed
for the national welfare, so that everything else should
be left to the States. The other was to give that govern-
mend, so far as those functions extended, a direct and
immediate relation to the citizens, so that it should act
on them not through the States but of its own authority
and by its own officers. These are fundamental principles
whose soundness experience has approved, and which
well deserve to be considered by those who in time
to come may have in other countries to frame federal or
quasi-federal constitutions. They were studied, and to
a large extent, though in no slavish spirit, adopted by
the founders of the present constitution of the Swiss
Confederation, a constitution whose success bears further
witness, to the soundness of the American doctrines.

The working relations of the National government to
the States may be considered under two heads, viz. its
relations to the States as corporate bodies, and its
relations to the citizens of the States as individuals,
they being also citizens of the Union. :

The National government touches the States as cor-
porate commonwealths in three points. One is their func-
tion in helping to form the National government ; another
is the control exercised over them by the Federal Con-
stitution through the Federal courts; the third is the
control exercised over them by the Federal Legislature
and Executive in the discharge of the governing functions
which these latter authorities possess.

I. The States serve to form the National government
by choosing presidential electors, by choosing senators,
and by fixing the franchise which qualifies citizens to vote

VOL. I 2F

434 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

for. members of the House of Representatives.1 No
difficulty has ever arisen (except during the Civil War)
from any unwillingness of the States to discharge these
duties, for each State is eager to exercise as much influence
as it can on the national executive and Congress. But
note how much latitude has been left to the States. A
State may appoint its presidential electors in any way it
pleases. All States now do appoint them by popular
vote. But during the first thirty years of the Union
many States left the choice of electors to their respective
legislatures. So a State may, by its power of prescribing
the franchise for its State elections, prescribe whatever
franchise it pleases for the election of its members of the
Federal House of Representatives, and may thus admit
persons who would in other States be excluded from the
suffrage, or exclude persons who would in other States
be admitted. For instance, thirteen States now allow
aliens, (2.e. foreigners not yet naturalized) to vote; and
any State which should admit women to vote at its own
State elections would thereby admit them also to vote at
congressional elections.? The only restriction imposed on
State discretion in this respect is that of the fifteenth
amendment, which forbids any person to be deprived of
suffrage, on ‘‘ account of race, colour, or previous condition
of servitude.” °

II. The Federal Constitution deprives the States of
certain powers they would otherwise enjoy. Some of

1 Congress may, if it pleases, regulate by statute the times, places,
and manner of holding elections for representatives (Const. Art. i. § 4.)

2 So in some States tribal Indians are permitted to vote, It is odd
that the votes of persons who are not citizens of the United States might,
in a State where parties are nearly equal, turn the choice of presidential
electors in that State, and therely perhaps turn the presidential election
in the Union.

8 The Constitutions of some States retain the old exclusion of negroes
from the suffrage, and two exclude natives of China; but these pro-
visions are overridden by the fifteenth constitutional amendment.

CHAP. xxvii WORKING OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 435

these, such as that of making treaties, are obviously
-unpermissible, and such as the State need not regret.’
Others, however, seriously restrain their daily action.
They are liable to be sued in the Federal courts by another
State or by a foreign Power. They cannot, except with
the consent of Congress, tax exports or imports, or in
anyecase pass a law impairing the obligation of a con-
tract. They must surrender fugitives from the justice of
any other State. Whether they have transgressed any
of these restrictions is a question for the courts of law,
and, if not in the first instance, yet always in the last
resort a question for the Federal Supreme court. If it
is decided that they have transgressed, their act, be it
legislative or executive, is null and void.?

The President as national executive, and Congress
as national legislature, have also received from the
Constitution the right of interfering in certain specified
matters with the governments of the States. Congress
of course does this by way of legislation, and when an
Act of Congress, made within the powers conferred by
the Constitution, conflicts with a State statute, the

1 As the States had not been accustomed to act as sovereign common-
wealths in international affairs, they yielded this right to the National
government without demur; whereas Swiss history shows the larger
cantons to have been unwilling to drop the practice of sending their own
envoys to foreign powers and making bargains on their own behalf.

2 Mr. Justice Miller observes (Centennial Address at Philadelphia)
that “at no time since the formation of the Union has there been a
period when there were not to be found on the statute books of some
of the States acts passed in violation of the provisions of the Con-
stitution regarding commerce, acts imposing taxes and other burdens
upon the free interchange of commodities, discriminating against the
productions of other States, and attempting to establish regulations
of commerce, which the Constitution says shall only be done by Con-
gress.” All such acts are of course held invalid by the courts when
questioned. before them.

It has very recently been heldAthat a State cannot forbid a common
carrier to bring into its jurisdiction intoxicating liquors from another
State (Bowman v. 0. dN. W. Rly. 125 US.)

436 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

former prevails against the latter. It prevails by mak-
ing the latter null and void, so that if a State statute
has been duly passed upon a matter not forbidden to a
State by the Constitution, and subsequently Congress
passes an act on the same matter, being one whereon
Congress has received the right to legislate, the State
statute, which was previously valid, now becomes vin-
valid to the extent to which it conflicts with the Act of
Congress. For instance, Congress has power to establish a
uniform law of bankruptcy over the whole Union. It has
formerly, in the exercise of this power, passed bankruptcy
laws; but these have been repealed, and at present the
subject is left to the State laws, which are accordingly in
full force in the several States.! Were Congress again
to legislate on the subject, these State laws would lose
their force;? and if the law passed by Congress were
again repealed, they would again spring into life. The
field of this so-called concurrent legislation is large, for
Congress has not yet exercised all the powers vested in
it of superseding State action.

It was remarked in last chapter that in determining
the powers of Congress on the one hand and of a State
government on the other, opposite methods have to be
- followed. The presumption is always in favour of the
State; and in order to show that it cannot legislate on
a subject, there must be pointed out within the four
corners of the Constitution some express prohibition of
the right which it prima facie possesses, or some implied
prohibition arising from the fact that legislation by it

1 The lawyer may refer on this subject to the interesting case of
Sturges v. Crowninshteld, 4 Wheat, 196.

2 And in this instance they would lose their force altogether, because
the power of Congress being to establisg a “ uniform” law, the continued
existence of statutes differing in the different States would prevent the
law of bankruptcy from being uniform over the Union.

cHap. xxvil WORKING OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 437

would conflict with legitimate federal authority.’ On
the other hand, the presumption is always against ¢
Congress, and to show that it can legislate, some
positive grant of power to Congress in the Constitu-
tion must be pointed out.? When the grant is
shown, then the Act of Congress has, so long as
it «remains on the statute book, all the force of
the Constitution itself. In some instances the grant
of power to Congress to legislate is auxiliary to
a prohibition imposed on the States. This is notably
the case as regards the amendments to the Constitu-
tion, passed for the protection of the lately liberated
negroes. They interdict the States from either re-
cognizing slavery, or discriminating in any way against
any class of citizens; they go even beyond citizens in
their care, and declare that ‘‘no State shall deny to
any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection
of the laws.” Now, by each of these amendments,
Congress is also empowered, which practically means
enjoined, to “enforce by appropriate legislation” the
prohibitions laid upon the States. Congress has done
so, but some of its-efforts have been held to go beyond
the directions of the amendments, and to be therefore
void.* The grant of power has not covered them.

Where the President interferes with a State, he does
so either under his duty to give effect to the legislation of
Congress, or under the discretionary executive functions

1 Otherwise in the Federal Constitution of Canada, See Note to
Chapter XXX.

- 2 The grant need not, however, be express, for it has frequently been
held that a power incidental or instrumental to a power expressly given
may be conferred upon Congress by necessary implication, See Af‘Cudloch
v. Maryland, 4 Wheat. p. 316, and post, Chapter XXXIII.

3 See the Appendix (by Judge Cooley) to the last edition of Story’s

Commentaries, and the cases on the three last amendments collected in
Desty’s Constitution of the United States Annotated.

438 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

which ‘the Constitution has entrusted to him. Soif any
State were to depart from a republican form of govern-
ment, it would be his duty to bring the fact to the
notice of Congress in order that the guarantee of that
form contained in the Constitution might be made
effective. If an insurrection broke out against the
authority of the Union, he would (as in 1861) send
Federal troops to suppress it. If there should be rival
State governments, each claiming to be legitimate, the
President might, especially if Congress were not sitting,
recognize and support the one which he deemed regular
and constitutional.’

Are these, it may be asked, the only cases in
which Federal authority can interfere within the limits
of a State to maintain order? Are law and order,
ae, the punishment of crimes and the enforcement
of civil rights, left entirely to State authorities? The
answer is :— é

‘Offences against Federal statutes are justiciable in
Federal courts, and punishable under Federal authority.
There is no Federal common law of crimes.

Resistance offered to the enforcement of a Federal
statute may be suppresséd by Federal authority.

Attacks on the property of the Federal government
may be repelled, and disturbances thence arising may be.
quelled by Federal authority.

‘The judgments pronounced in civil causes by Federal
courts are executed by the officers of these courts.

All other offences and disorders whatsoever are left

1 In 1874-75 a contest having arisen in Louisiana between two
governments each claiming to be the legal government of the State,
Federal military aid was supplied to one of them by the President
and his action was afterwards approved by Congress. It has been
doubted, however, whether the case could properly’ be deemed one of
“domestic violence” within the meaning of Art. iv. § 4 of the Constitu-
tion. :

cuap. xxvitt. WORKING OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 439

to be dealt with by the duly constituted authorities of
the State, who are, however, entitled in one case to
summon the power of the Union to their aid.

This case is that of the breaking out in a State of
serious disturbances. The President is bound on the
application of the State legislature or executive to quell
such disturbances by the armed forces. of the Union, or
by directing the militia of another State to enter. Thus
in 1794 Washington suppressed the so-called Whisky
Insurrection in Pennsylvania by the militia of Pennsy]-
vania, New Jersey, Virginia, and Maryland.’ President
Grant was obliged to use military force during the
troubles which disturbed several of the Southern States
after the Civil War; as was President Hayes, during the
tumults in Pennsylvania caused by the great railway
strikes: of 1877. .There have, however, been cases,
such as the Dorr rebellion in Rhode Island in 1842,?
in whjch a State has itself suppressed an insurrec-
tion against its legitimate government. It is the duty
of a State to do so if it can, and to seek Federal
aid only in extreme cases, when resistance is formid-

‘able.

So far we have been eagededng the relations of the
National government to the States as political communi-
ties. . Let us now see what are its relations to the indi-
vidual citizens of these States. They are citizens of the
Union as well as of the States, and owe allegiance to
both powers. Each power has a right to command

1 See Hildreth’s History of the United States, iv. p. 504. This was
the first assertion by arms of the supreme authority of the Union, and
produced an enormous effect upon opinion.

2 President Tyler ordered the militia of Connecticut and Massachusetts
to be prepared to enter Rhode Island and suppress the rebellion, but the
Rhode Island militia proved equal to the occasion and succeeded in
suppressing Dorr. Instances of Federal intervention have been very
rare.

440 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART!

their bbedience. To which then, in case of conflict, is
obedience due ?

The right of the State to obedience is wider in the
area of matters which it covers. Prima facie, every
State law, every order of a competent State authority,
binds the citizen, whereas the National government has
but a limited power: it can legislate or command enly
for certain purposes or on certain subjects: But within
the limits of its power, its authority is higher than that
of the State, and must be obeyed even at the risk of
disobeying the State. A recent instance in which a
State official suffered for obeying his State where
its directions clashed with a provision of the Federal
Constitution may set the point in a clear light,
A statute of California had committed to the city
and county authority of San Francisco the power of
making regulations for the management of gaols.
This authority had in 1876 passed an ordinance direct-
ing that every. male imprisoned in the county gaol
should “immediately on his arrival have his hair clipped
to a uniform length of one inch from the scalp.” The
sheriff having, under this ordinance, cut off the queue
of a Chinese prisoner, Ho Ah Kow, was sued for damages
by the prisoner, and the court, holding that the ordinance
had been passed with a special view to the injury of the
Chinese, who consider the preservation of their queue a
matter of religion as well as of honour, and that it
operated unequally and oppressively upon them, in
contravention of the fourteenth amendment to the Con-
stitution of the United States, declared the ordinance
invalid, and gave judgment against the sheriff.1 Similar

1 Case of Ho Ah Kow v. Matthew Nunan (July 1879), 5 Sawyer,
Circuit Court Reports, p. 552, A similar ordinance had been some years
before courageously vetoed by Mr. Alvord, then mayor of San Francisco,

char. xxvii. WORKING OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 441

subsequent attempts against the Chinese, made under
. cover of the constitution of California of 1879 and divers
statutes passed thereunder, have been defeated by the
courts.

The safe rule for the private citizen may be thus
expressed: “ Ascertain whether the Federal law is con-
stitutional (7.2, such as Congress has power to pass). If
it is, conform your conduct to it at all hazards. If it
is not, disregard it, and obey the law of your State.”
This may seem hard on the private citizen. How shall
he settle for himself such a delicate point of law as
whether Congress had power to pass a particular statute,
seeing that the question may be doubtful and not have
come before the courts? But in practice little incon-
venience arises, for Congress and the State legislatures
have learnt to keep within their respective spheres, and
the questions that arise between them are seldom such
as need disturb an ordinary man.

The same remarks apply to conflicts between the
commands of executive officers ‘of the National govern-
ment on the one hand, and those of State officials on
the other. If the national officer is acting within his
constitutional powers, he is entitled to be obeyed in
preference to a State official, and conversely, if the
State official is within his powers, and the national
officer acting in excess of those which the Federal Con-
stitution confers, the State official is to be obeyed.

The limits of judicial power are more difficult of
definition. Every citizen can sue and be sued or in-
dicted both in the courts of his State and in the
Federal courts, but in some classes of cases the former,
in others the latter, is the proper tribunal, while in
many it is left to the choice of the parties before which
tribunal they will proceed. Sometimes a plaintiff who has

442 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

brought his action in a State court finds when the case
has gone a certain length that.a point of Federal law
turns up which entitles either himself or the defendant
to transfer it to a Federal court, or to appeal to such a
court should the decision have gone against the appli-
eability of the Federal law. Suits are thus constantly
transferred from State courts to Federal courts, buteyou
can never reverse the process and carry a suit from a
Federal court to a State court. Within its proper sphere
of pure State law, and of course the great bulk of the
cases turn on pure State law, there is no appeal from a
State court to a Federal court; and though the point of
law on which the case turns may be one which has arisen
and been decided in the Supreme court of the Union, a
State judge, in a State case, is not bound to regard
that decision. It has only a moral weight, such as
might be given to the decision of an English court,
and where the question is one of State law, whether
common law or statute law, in which State courts have
decided one way and a Federal court the other way, the
State judge ought to follow his own courts. So far
does this go, that a Federal court in administering State
law, ought to reverse its own previous decision rather
than depart from the view which the highest State court
has taken.’ All this seems extremely complex. I can
only say that it is less troublesome, in practice than
could have been expected, because American lawyers are
accustomed to the intricacies of their system.

When a plaintiff has the choice of proceeding in a
State court or in a Federal court, he is sometimes,

1 This is especially the rule in cases involving the title to land. See
Cooley, Principles, p..131. But though the theory is as stated in the
text, the Federal courts not unfrequently act upon their own view of the

State law, and have sometimes been accused of going so far as to create a
sort of Federal common law,

cHap, xxvii. WORKING OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 443

especially if he has a strong case, inclined to select the
latter, because the Federal judges are more independent
than those of most of the States, and less likely to be
influenced by any bias. So, too, if he thinks that local
prejudice may tell against him, he will prefer a Federal
court, because the jurors are summoned from a wider
areas and because the judges are accustomed to exert a
larger authority in guiding and controlling the jury.
But it is usually more convenient to sue in a State
court, seeing that there is such a court in every county,
whereas Federal courts are comparatively few ; in many
States there is but one.

How does the Federal authority, be it executive or
judicial, act upon the citizens of a State? It acts on
them directly by means of its own officers, who are
quite distinct from and independent of the State
officials. Federal indirect taxes, for instance, are levied
all along the coast and over the country by Federal
custom-house collectors and excisemen, acting under the
orders of the treasury department at Washington. The
judgments of Federal courts are carried out by United
States marshals, likewise dispersed over the country
and supplied with a staff of assistants. This is a pro-
vision of the utmost importance, for it enables the
central national government to keep its finger upon
the people everywhere, and make its laws and the
commands of its duly constituted authorities respected
whether the State within whose territory it acts be
heartily loyal or not, and whether the law which is
being enforced be popular or obnoxious. The machinery
of the National government ramifies over the whole

1 Of course a plaintiff who thinks local prejudice will befriend him
will choose the State court, but the defendant may have the cause removed
to a Federal court if he be a citizen of another State or an alien, or if the
question at issue is such as to give Federal jurisdiction.

444 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1

Union as the nerves do over the human body, placing
every point in direct connection with the central execu-
tive. The same is, of course, true of the army; but the
army is so small and stationed in so few spots, mostly
in the Far West where Indian raids are feared, that it
scarcely comes into a view of the ordinary working of
the system. v

What happens if the authority of the ‘National
government is opposed, if, for instance, an executiox
levied in pursuance of a judgment of a Federal court is
resisted, or Federal excisemen are impeded in the seizure
of an illicit distillery?

Supposing the United States marshal or other Fede-
ral officer to be unable to overcome the physical force
opposed to him, he may summon all good citizens to
assist him, just as the sheriff may summon the posse
comitatus. If this appeal proves insufficient, he must
call upon the President, who may either order national
troops to his aid or may require the militia of the State
in which resistance is offered to overcome that resistance.
Inferior Federal officers are not entitled to make. re-
quisitions for State force. The common law principle
that all citizens are bound to assist the ministers of the
law holds good in America as in England, but it is as
true in the one country as in the other, that what is
everybody’s business is nobody’s business. Practically,
the Federal authorities are not resisted in the more
orderly States and more civilized districts. In such
regions, however, as the mountains of Tennessee and
North Carolina the inland revenue officials find it very
hard to enforce the excise laws, because the country is
wild, concealment is easy among the woods and rocks,
and the population sides.with the smugglers. And in
some of the western States an injunction granted by a

cHap. xxvii WORKING OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 445

court, whether a Federal or a State court, is occasionally
disregarded.’ Things were, of course, much worse before
the War of Secession had established the authority of
the central government on an immovable basis. Federal
law did not prove an ‘unquestioned protection either
to persons who became in some districts unpopular
frome preaching Abolitionism, or who, like the Southern
slave-catchers, endeavoured, under the Fugitive Slave
laws, to recapture in the northern States slaves who
had escaped from their masters? Passion ran high, and
great as is the respect for law, passion in America, as
everywhere else in the world, will have its way.

If the duly constituted authorities of a State resist
the laws and orders of the National government, a
more difficult question arises. This has several times
happened.

In 1798 the legislatures of Kentucky and Virginia
adopted, resolutions whereby they declared that the
Constitution was not a submission of the States to a
general government, but a mere compact between the
States vesting in such a government certain strictly
specified powers, that the general government had not been
made the final and exclusive judge of the extent of its
own powers, and that when it went beyond the powers
actually granted, its assumptions were unauthoritative
and its acts invalid. They then went on to declare that
certain statutes recently passed by Congress were void,
and asked the other States to join in this pronounce-

1 The attacks upon the Chinese which Federal authorities have had
to check have mostly taken place not in States but in Territories, such as
Washington Territory and Montana, where the direct power of the
Federal Government is greater than in a State. See Chapter XLVII.

2 It was held that a State could not authorize its courts to enforce the
Fugitive Slave laws. Being Federal statutes, they must be left to be en-
forced by the National government only. See Prigg v. Pennsylvania, 16
Pet. 539. :

*

446 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1

ment and to co-operate in securing the repeal of the
statutes.”

In 1808 the legislatures of some of the New England
States passed resolutions condemning the embargo which
the National government had laid upon shipping by an
Act of that year. The State judges, emboldened by these
resolutions, “took an attitude consistently hostile te the
embargo,” holding it to be unconstitutional; and the
Federal courts in New England “seldom succeeded in
finding juries which would convict even for the most
flagrant violation of its provisions.”? In 1812 the
governors of Massachusetts and Connecticut refused to
allow the State militia to leave their State in pursuance
to a requisition made by the President under the
authority of an Act of Congress, alleging the requisition
to be unconstitutional. In 1828-30 Georgia refused’ to
obey an Act of Congress regarding the Cherokee Indians,
and to respect the treaties which the United States had
made with this tribe and the Creeks. The Georgian legis-
lature passed and enforced Acts in contempt of Federal
authority, and disregarded the orders of the Supreme
court, President Jackson, who had an old frontiersman’s
hatred to the Indians, declining to interfere.

Finally, in 1832, South Carolina, first in a State con-
vention and then by her legislature, amplified while pro-

1 There have been endless discussions in America as to the true mean-
ing and intent of these famous resolutions, a lucid account of which may
be found in the article (by Mr. Alex. Johnston) “ Kentucky Resolutions,”
in the American Cyclopedia of Political Science. The Kentucky resolutions
were drafted by Jefferson, who however did not acknowledge his author-
ship till long afterwards, the Virginia resolutions by Madison.

Judge Cooley observes to me, The most authoritative exponents of
the States’ Rights creed would probably have said that ‘the nullification
by the States of all unauthorized acts done under cover of the Constitution ° :
intended by the Resolutions, was a nullification by constitutional means.”

2 See article “Embargo” (by Mr. Alex. Johnston) in the American
Cyclopedia of Political Science.

cHap, xxvil WORKING OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM = 447

fessing to repeat the claim of the Kentucky resolutions
‘of 1798, declared the tariff imposed by Congress to be
null and void as regarded herself, and proceeded to
prepare for secession and war. In none of these cases
was the dispute fought out either in the courts or in the
field; and the questions as to the right of a State
to yesist Federal authority, and as to the means
whereby she could be coerced, were left over for future
settlement. Settled they finally were by the Civil
War of 1861-65, since which time the following doctrines
may be deemed established :—

No State has a right to declare an act of the
Federal government invalid.?

No State has a right to secede from the Union.

The only authority competent to decide finally on the
constitutionality of an act of Congress or of the national
executive is the Federal judiciary.®

?

1 The Acts complained of by Kentucky and Virginia provoked a reaction
which led to the overthrow of the Federalist party which had passed them.
Of the most important among thein, one was repealed and the other, the
Sedition Act, expired in 1801 by effluxion of time. Jefferson, when he
became President in that year, showed his disapproval of it by pardoning
persons convicted under it. The Embargo was raised by Congress in
consequence of the strong opposition of New England. In these cases,
therefore, it may be thought that the victory substantially remained with
the protesting States, while the resistance of South Carolina to the tariff
was settled by a compromise.

2 Of course, as already observed, a State officer or a private citizen
may disregard an act of the Federal government if he holds it unconsti-
tional. But he does so at his peril.

8 Any court, State or Federal, may decide on such a question in the
first instance. But if the question be a purely political one, it may be
incapable of being decided by any court whatever (see Chapter XXIV.), and
in such cases the decision of the political departments (Congress or the
President, as the case may be) of the Federal government is necessarily
final, though, of course, liable to be reversed by a subsequent Congress
or President. ‘The cases which arose on the Reconstruction Acts, after
the War of Secession, afford an illustration. The attempts made to bring
these before the courts failed, and the acts were enforced. See Georgia y,
Stanton, 6 Wall. p. 67 ; and Cooley, Principles, pp. 138, 198.

448 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART

Any act of a State legislature or State executive
conflicting with the Constitution, or with an act of the
National government done under the Constitution, is
really an act not of the State government, which cannot
legally act against the Constitution, but of persons
falsely assuming to act as such government, and is there-
fore wpso jure void.' Those who disobey Federal
authority on the ground of the commands of a State
authority are therefore insurgents against the Union
who must be coerced by its power. The coercion of
such insurgents is directed not against the State but
against them as individual though combined wrong-
doers. A State cannot secede and cannot rebel. Simi-
larly, it cannot be coerced.

This view of the matter, which seems on the whole
to be that taken by the Supreme court in the cases
that arose after the Civil War, disposes, as has been
well observed by Judge Hare,” of the difficulty which
President Buchanan felt (see his message of 3d December
1860) as to the coercion of a State by the Union. He
argued that because the Constitution did not pro-
vide for such coercion, a proposal in the Convention of
1787 to authorize it having been ultimately dropped,
it was legally impossible. The best answer to this
contention is that such a provision would have been
superfluous, because a State cannot legally act against
the Constitution. All that is needed is the power, un-
questionably contained in the Constitution (Art. iii. § 3),

1 It may, however, happen that a State law is unconstitutional in
part only, perhaps in some trifling details, and in such cases that part
only will be invalid, and the rest of the law will be upheld. For instance, a
criminal statute might be framed so as to apply retrospectively as well as
prospectively, So far as retrospective it would be bad, but good for all
future cases. (See Constit., Art. i. § 10, par. 1.)

2 Lectures on American Constitutional Law, p. 45.

cHap, xxvii WORKING OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM — 449

to subdue and punish individuals guilty of treason
against the Union.’

Except in the cases which have been already

specified, the National government has no right what-
ever of interfering either with a State as a common-
wealth or with the individual citizens thereof, and may
be lawfully resisted should it attempt to do so.
- «What then?” the European reader may ask. “Is
the National government without the power and the
duty of correcting the social and political evils which it
may find to exist in a particular State, and which a vast
majority of the nation may condemn. Suppose wide-
spread brigandage to exist in one of the States, endanger-
ing life and property. Suppose contracts to be habitually
broken, and no redress to be obtainable in the State
courts. Suppose the police to be in league with the
assassins. Suppose the most mischievous laws to be
enacted, laws, for instance, which recognize polygamy,
leave homicide unpunished, drive away capital by im-
posing upon it an intolerable load of taxation. Is the
nation obliged to stand by with folded arms while it sees
a meritorious minority oppressed, the prosperity of the
State ruined, a pernicious example set to other States?
Is it to be debarred from using its supreme authority to
rectify these mischiefs ?”

The answer is, Yes. oe Unless the legislation or ad-
ministration of such a State transgresses some provision
of the Federal Constitution (such as that forbidding ex
post facto laws, or laws impairing the obligation of a
contract), the National government not only ought not
to interfere but cannot interfere. The State must go

1 The Swiss Constitution allows the Federal government to coerce a
disobedient canton. This is commonly done by quartering Federal
troops in it at its expense till its government yields—a form of coercion
which Swiss frugality dislikes, or by withholding its share of Federal grants,

VOL. I 2G

°

450 THE VA TIONAL GOVERNMENT PART |

i
its own way, with whatever injury to private rights and

common interests its folly or perversity may cause.

Such a case is not imaginary. In the Slave States
before the war, although the negroes were not generally
ill treated, many shocking laws were passed, and society
was going from bad to worse. In parts of a few of
the western, and especially of the south-western States
at this moment, the roads and even the railways are
infested by robbers, justice is uncertain and may
be unattainable when popular sentiment does not
support the law. Homicide often goes unpunished by
the courts, though sometimes punished by Judge Lynch.
So, too, in a few of these States statutes opposed to
sound principles of legislation have been passed, and
have brought manifold evils in their train. But
the Federal government looks on unperturbed, with no
remorse for neglected duty.

The obvious explanation of this phenomenon is that
the large measure of independence left to the States
under the Federal system makes it necessary to tolerate
their misdoings in some directions. As a distinguished
authority ? observes, “‘ The Federal Constitution provided
for the protection of contracts, and against those oppres-
sions most likely to result from popular passion and de-
moralization ; and if it had been proposed to go further
and give to the Federal authority a power to intervene
in still more extreme cases, the answer would probably
have been that such cases were far less likely to arise
than was the Federal power to intervene improperly under
the pressure of party passion or policy, if its intervention
were permitted. To have authorized such intervention
would have been to run counter to the whole spirit of the
Constitution, which kept steadily in view as the wisest

1 Judge Cooley, in a letter to the author.

cHap. xxvii WORKING OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 451

policy local government for local affairs, general govern-
ment for general affairs only. Evils would unquestion-
ably arise. But the Philadelphia Convention believed
that they would be kept at a minimum and most quickly
cured. by strict adherence to this policy. The scope for
Federal interference was considerably enlarged after the
Civi] War, but the general division of authority between
the States and the nation was not disturbed.”

So far from lamenting as a fault, though an unavoid-
able fault, of their Federal system, the State independ-
ence | have described, the Americans are inclined to praise
itas a merit. They argue, not merely that the best way
on the whole is to leave a State to itself, but that this
is the only way in which a permanent cure of its diseases
will be effected. They are consistent not only in their
Federal principles but in their democratic principles.
“As laissez aller,” they say, “‘is the necessary course
in a Federal government, so it is the right course in all
free governments. Law will never be strong or re-
spected unless it has the sentiment of the people behind
it. If the people of a State make bad laws, they will
suffer forit. They will be the first to suffer. Let them
suffer. Suffering, and nothing else, will implant that
sense of responsibility which is the first step to reform.
Therefore let them stew in their own juice: let them
make their bed and lie upon it. If they drive capital
away, there will be less work for the artisans: if they
do not enforce contracts, trade will decline, and the evil
will work out its remedy sooner or later. Perhaps it
will be later rather than sooner: if. so, the experience
will be all the more conclusive. Is it said that the
minority of wise and peaceable citizens may suffer? Let
them exert themselves to bring their fellows round to a
better mind. Reason and experience will be on their

452 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

side. We cannot be democrats by halves ; and where
self-government is given, the majority of the community
must rule. Its rule will in the end be better than that
of any external power.” No doctrine more completely
pervades the American people, the instructed as well as
the uninstructed. Philosophers will tell you that it is
the method by which Nature governs, in whose economy
error is followed by pain and suffering, whose laws carry
their own sanction with them. Divines will tell you
that it is the method by which God governs: God is a
righteous Judge and God is provoked every day, yet
He makes His sun to rise on the evil and the good, and
sends His rain upon the just and the unjust. He does
not directly intervene to punish faults, but leaves sin to
bring its own appointed penalty. Statesmen will point to
the troubles which followed the attempt to govern the re-
conquered seceding States, first by military force and then
by keeping a great part of their population disfrapchised,
and will declare that such evils as still exist in the South
are far less grave than those which the denial of ordinary
self-government involved. “So,” they pursue, “Texas
and California will in time unlearn their bad habits and
come out right if we leave them alone: Federal inter-
ference, even had we the machinery needed for prose-
cuting it, would check the natural process by which the
better elements in these raw communities are purging
away the maladies of youth, and reaching the settled
health of manhood.”

A European may say that there is a dangerous side
to this application of democratic faith in local majorities
and. in laissez aller. Doubtless there is: yet those
who have learnt to know the Americans will answer that
no nation so well understands its own business.

CHAPTER XXIxX
CRITICISM OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM

Aut Americans have long been agreed that the only
possible form of government for their country is a
Federal one. All have perceived that a centralized
system would be inexpedient, if not unworkable, over so
large an area, and have still more strongly felt that to
cut up the continent into absolutely independent States
would ,not only involve risks of war but injure com-
merce ‘and retard in a thousand ways the material de-
velopment of every part of the country. But regarding
the nature of the Federal tie that ought to exist there
have been keen and frequent controversies, dormant at
present, but which might break out afresh should there
arise a new question of social or economic change capable
of bringing the powers of Congress into collision with
the wishes of any State or group of States. The general
suitability to the country of a Federal system is there-
fore accepted, and need not be discussed. I pass to
consider the strong and weak points of that which
exists.

The faults’ generally charged on federations as com-
pared with unified governments are the following :—

I. Weakness in the conduct of foreign affairs.

Il. Weakness in home government, that is to say,

454 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

'
deficient authority over the component States and the
individual citizens.

III. Liability to dissolution by the secession or
rebellion of States.

IV. Liability to division into groups and factions
by the formation of separate combinations of the com-
ponent States.

V. Want of uniformity among the States in legisla-
tion and administration.

VI. Trouble, expense, and delay due to the com-
plexity of a double system of legislation and adminis-
tration.

The first four of these are all due to the same cause,
viz. the existence within one government, which ought
to be able to speak and act in the name and with the
united strength of the nation, of distinct centres of
force, organized political bodies into which part of the
nation’s strength has flowed, and whose resistance to
the will of the majority of the whole nation is likely to
be more effective than could be the resistance of indi-
viduals, because such bodies have each of them a govern-
ment, a revenue, a militia, a local patriotism to unite
them, whereas individual recalcitrants, however numer-
ous, would be unorganized, and less likely to find a
legal standing ground for opposition. The gravity
of the first two of the four alleged faults has been
exaggerated by most writers, who have assumed on
rather scanty grounds that Federal governments are
necessarily weak governments. History does not war-
rant so broad a proposition. Assuming, however, for
the sake of argument, that troubles may be expected
to flow from these four features of a Federal system, let
us see how far America has experienced such troubles.

I. In its early years, the Union was not successful in

cHap. xxix. CRITICISM OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 455

the management of its foreign relations. Few popular
governments are, because a successful foreign policy
needs in a world such as ours conditions which popular
governments seldom enjoy. Some of the faults which
marked American policy may however be set down to
the Federal character of the government. In the days
of Adams, Jefferson, and Madison, the Union put up with
a great deal of ill-treatment from France as well as from
England. It drifted rather than steered into the war of
1812. The conduct of that war was hampered by the
opposition of the New England States. The Mexican
war of 1846 was due to the slaveholders; but the com-
bination among the Southern leaders which entrapped the
nation into that conflict might have been equally suc-
cessful in a unified country. Of late years the prin-
ciple of abstention from Old World complications has
been so heartily and consistently adhered to that the
capacities of the Federal system for the conduct of foreign
affairs have been little tried ; and the likelihood of any
danger from abroad is so slender that it may be practi-
cally ignored. But when a question of external policy ©
arises which interests only one part of the Union, the
existence of States feeling themselves specially affected
may have astrong and probably an unfortunate influ-
ence. It is only in this way that the American govern-
ment can be deemed likely to suffer in its foreign rela-
tions from its Federal character.

II. For the purposes of domestic government the
Federal authority is now, in ordinary times, sufficiently
strong. However, as was remarked in last chapter,
there have been occasions when the resistance of even a
single State disclosed its weakness. Had a man less
vigorous than Jackson occupied the presidential chair in
1832, South Carolina would probably have prevailed

456 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

against the Union. In the Kansas troubles of 1855-56 the
national executive played a sorry part; and even in the
resolute hands of President Grant it was hampered in
the re-establishment of order in the reconquered southern
States by the rights which the Federal Constitution
secured to those States. The only general conclusion on
this point which can be drawn from history is that while
the central government is likely to find less and less diffi-
culty in enforcing its will against a State or disobedient
subjects, because the prestige of its success in the Civil
War has strengthened it, because the Union sentiment is
still growing, and because the facilities of communication
make the raising and moving of troops more easy, never-
theless recalcitrant States, or groups of States, still
enjoy certain advantages for resistance, advantages due
partly to their legal position, partly to their local senti-
ment, which rebels might not have in unified countries
like England, France, or Italy.

III. Everybody knows that it was the Federal
system and the doctrine of State sovereignty grounded
thereon, and not expressly excluded, though certainly
not recognized, by the Constitution, which led to the
secession of 1861, and which gave European powers a
plausible ground for recognizing the insurgent minority
as belligerents. Nothing seems now less probable than
another. secession, not merely because the supposed
legal basis for it has been abandoned, and because
the advantages of continued union are more obvious
than ever before, but because the precedent of the victory
won by the North will discourage like attempts in the
future! This is so strongly felt that it has not even

1 The Roman Catholic cantons of Switzerland (or rather the majority
of them) formed a separate league (the so-called Sonderbund) which it needed
the war of 1846 to put down. And the effect of that war was, as in the,
parallel case of America, to tighten the Federal bond for the future.

cnap. xxix CRITICISM OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM — 457

been thought worth while to add to the Constitution an
amendment negativing the right to secede. The doctrine
of the legal indestructibility of the Union is now well
established. To establish it, however, cost thousands of
millions of dollars and the lives of a million of men.

IV. The combination of States into groups was a
familiar feature of politics before the war. South
Carolina and the Gulf States constituted one such, and
the most energetic, group; the New England States
frequently acted as another, especially during the war
of 1812. At present, though there are several sets of
States whose common interests lead their representatives
in Congress to act together, it is no longer the fashion
for States to combine in an official way through their
State organizations, and their doing so would excite
reprehension. It is easier, safer, and more effective to
act through the great national parties. Any consider-
able State interest (such as that of the silver-miners or
cattle-men, or Protectionist manufacturers) can generally
compel a party to conciliate it by threatening to forsake
the party if neglected. Political action runs less in
State channels than it did formerly, and the only really
threatening form which the combined action of States
could take, that of using for a common disloyal purpose
State revenues and the machinery of State govern-
ments, has become, since the failure of secession, most
improbable.

V. The want of uniformity in private law and methods
of administration is an evil which different minds will
judge by different standards. Some may think it a
positive benefit to secure a variety which is interesting
in itself and makes possible the trying of experiments
from which the whole country may profit. Is variety
Within a country more a gain or a loss? Diversity in

458 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

t
coinage, in weights and measures, in the rules regarding

bills and cheques and banking and commerce generally,
is obviously inconvenient. Diversity in dress, in food,
in the habits and usages of society, is almost as obviously
a thing to rejoice over, because it diminishes the terrible
monotony of life. Diversity in religious opinion and
worship excited horror in the Middle Ages, but now
passes unnoticed unless where accompanied by intoler-
ance. In the United States the possible diversity of
laws is immense. Each State can play whatever tricks
it pleases with the law of family relations, of inheritance,
of contracts, of torts, of crimes.! But the actual diversity
is not great, for all the States, save Louisiana, have taken
the English common and statute law of 1776 as their
point of departure, and have adhered to its main prin-
ciples. A more complete uniformity as regards marriage
and divorce might be desirable, for it is particularly
awkward not to know whether you are married er not,
nor whether you have been or can be divorced or not ;
and several States have tried bold experiments in
divorce laws. But, on the whole, far less inconvenience
than could have been expected seems to be caused by
the varying laws of different States, partly because com-
mercial law is the department in which the diversity
is smallest, partly because American practitioners and

1 Subject to a few prohibitions contained in the Constitution.

2 Judge Cooley, however, observes to me that there is little substantial
diversity in the laws of marriage in different States, the general rule every-
where being that no special ceremony is requisite,and the statutory forms not
being deemed imperative. He adds that even as regards divorce far more
trouble arises from frauds practised on the laws than from divergent pro-
visions in the laws themselves. It may be observed that although the law
of Scotland still differs in many material points from that of England and
Ireland, having had a wholly different origin, British subjects and courts do
not find the practical inconveniences arising from the diversities to be serious

except as respects marriage and the succession to property. The mercan-
tile law of the two countries tends to become practically the same.

cHarp. xxix CRITICISM OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 459

Judges have become expert in applying the rules for
. determining which law, where those of different States
are in question, ought to be deemed to govern a given
case.?

VI. He who is conducted over an iron-clad war-
ship, and sees the infinite intricacy of the machinery and
mechanical appliances which it contains and by which
its engines, its guns, its turrets, its torpedoes, its
apparatus for anchoring and making sail, are worked,
is apt to think that it must break down in the rough
practice of war. He is told, however, that the more
is done by machinery, the more safely and easily
does everything go on, because the machinery can be
relied on to work accurately, and the performance by ‘it
of the heavier work leaves the crew free to attend to the
general management of the vessel and her armament.
So in studying the elaborate devices with which the
Federal system of the United States has been equipped,
one fancies that with so many authorities and bodies
whose functions are intricately interlaced, and some of
which may collide with others, there must be a great
risk of break-downs and deadlocks, not to speak of an
expense much -exceeding that which is incident to a
simple centralized government. The Americans do not
seem to feel this. They tell you that smoothness of
working is secured by elaboration of device, that complex
as the mechanism of their government may appear, the
citizens have grown so familiar with it that its play is
smooth and easy, attended with less trouble, and
certainly with less suspicion on the part of the people,
than would belong to a scheme which vested all powers

1 American jurists, and especially Mr. Justice Story, have done

much to elucidate this difficult branch of law, to which the name of Private
International Law is usually (though not very happily) applied,

460 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1

in éne administration and one legislature. The expense
is admitted, but is considered no grave defect when
compared with the waste which arises from untrust-
worthy officials and legislators whose depredations would,
it is thought, be greater were their sphere of action
wider, and the checks upon them fewer. He who
examines a system of government from without is
generally disposed to overrate the difficulties in working
which its complexity causes. Few things, for instance,
are harder than to explain to a person who has not been
a student in one of the two ancient English universities
the nature of their highly complex constitution and the
relation of the colleges to the university. If he does
apprehend it he pronounces it too intricate for: the
purposes it has to serve. To those who have grown up
under it, nothing is simpler and more obvious.

There is a blemish characteristic of the American
federation which Americans seldom notice because it
seems to them unavoidable. This is the practice in
selecting candidates for Federal office of regarding not
so much the merits of the candidate as the effect which
his nomination will have upon the vote of the State to
which he belongs. Second-rate men are run for first-
rate posts, not because the party which runs them over-
rates their capacity, but because it expects to carry their
State either by their local influence or through the
pleasure which the State feels in the prospect of seeing
one of its own citizens in high office. This of course
works in favour of the politicians who come from a large
State. No doubt the leading men of a large State are
prima facie more likely to be men of high ability than
those of a small State, because the field of choice is
wider, the competition probably keener. One. is re-
minded of the story of the leading citizen in the isle of

cuap. xxIX CRITICISM OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM _ 461

Seriphus who observed to Themistocles, ‘‘You would
“ not have been famous had you been born in Seriphus,”
to which Themistocles replied, “ Neither would you had
you been born in Athens.” The two great States of
Virginia and Massachusetts reared one half of the
men who won distinction in the first fifty years of
the, history of the Republic.’ Nevertheless it often
happens that a small State produces a first-rate man,
whom the country ought to have in its highest
places, as President, or as Speaker of the House of
Representatives, but who is passed over because the
Federal system gives great weight to the voice of a
State, and because State sentiment is so strong that the
voters of a State which has a large and perhaps a
doubtful vote to cast in national elections, prefer an
inferior man in whom they are directly interested to a
superior one who is a stranger.

I have left to the last the gravest reproach
which Europeans have been wont to bring against
. Federalism in America. They attribute to it the origin,
or at least the virulence, of the great struggle over
slavery which tried the Constitution so severely. That
struggle created parties which, though they had ad-
herents everywhere, no doubt tended more and more to
become identified with States, controlling the State
organizations and: bending the State governments to
their service. It gave tremendous importance to legal
questions arising out of the differences between the law
of the Slave States and the Free States, questions which
the Constitution had either evaded or not foreseen. It
shook the credit of the Supreme court by making the
judicial decision of those questions appear due to par-

1 Webster may be fairly counted to Massachusetts, as he settled there
in early life, and sat for many years as senator from it

462 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

tiality to the Slave States. It disposed the extreme
men on both sides to hate the Federal Union which
bound them in the same body with their antagonists.
It laid hold of the doctrine of State rights and State
sovereignty as entitling a commonwealth which deemed
itself aggrieved to shake off allegiance to the national
government. Thus at last it brought about secession
and the great civil war. Even when the war was over,
the dregs of the poison continued to haunt and vex the
system, and bred fresh disorders in it. The constitu-
tional duty of re-establishing the State governments of
the conquered States on the one hand, and on the other
hand the practical danger of doing so while their people
remained disaffected, produced the military govern-
merts, the “carpet bag” governments, the Ku Klux
Klan outrages, the gift of suffrage to a negro population
unfit for such a privilege, yet apparently capable of
being protected in no other way. All these mischiefs,
it has often been argued, are the results of the Federal
structure of the government, which carried in its bosom.
the seeds of its own destruction, seeds sure to ripen so
soon as there arose a question that stirred men deeply.

It may be answered not merely that the National
government has survived this struggle and emerged
from it stronger than before, but also that Federalism
did not produce the struggle, but: only gave to it
the particular form of a series of legal controversies
over the Federal pact followed by a war of States
against the Union. Where such vast economic interests
were involved, and such hot passions roused, there must
anyhow have been a conflict, and it may well be that a
conflict raging within the vitals of a centralized govern-
ment would have proved no less terrible and would have
left as many noxious sequelae behind.

cHap. xxIx CRITICISM OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 463

In blaming either the conduct of a person or the
plan and scheme of a government for evils which have
actually followed, one is apt to overlook those other
evils, perhaps as great, which might have flowed
from different conduct or some other plan. All that
can fairly be concluded from the history of the American
Unjon is that Federalism is obliged by the law of its
nature to leave in the hands of States powers whose
exercise may give to political controversy a peculiarly
dangerous form, may impede the assertion of national
authority, may even, when long-continued exasperation
has suspended or destroyed the feeling of a common
patriotism, threaten national unity itself. Against this
danger is to be set the fact that the looser structure of a
Federal government and the scope it gives for diversities
of legislation in different parts of a country may avert
sources of discord, or prevent local discord from growing
into a contest of national magnitude.

CHAPTER Xxx
MERITS OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM

I po not propose to discuss in this chapter the advan-
tages of Federalism in general, for to do this we should
have to wander off to other times and countries, to talk
of Achaia and the Hanseatic League and the Swiss Con-
federation. I shall comment on those merits only which
the experience of the American Union illustrates.

There are two distinct lines of argument by which
their Federal system was recommended to the framers
of the Constitution, and upon which it is still held forth
for imitation to other countries. These lines have been
so generally confounded that it is well to present them
in a precise form.

The first set of arguments point to Federalism
proper, and are the following :—

‘1. That Federalism furnishes.the means of uniting
commonwealths into one nation under one national
government without extinguishing their separate ad-
ministrations, legislatures, and local patriotisms. As
the Americans of 1787 would probably have preferred
complete State independence to the fusion of their
States into a unified government, Federalism was the
only resource. So when the new Germanic Empire,
which is really a Federation, was established in 1870,

cHAp.xxx JASERITS OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 465

_ Bavaria and Wurtemberg could not have been brought
under a national government save by a Federal scheme.
Similar suggestions, as every one knows, have been
made for re-settling the relations of Ireland to Great
Britain, and of the self-governing British colonies to
the United Kingdom. There are causes and conditions
whieh dispose nations living under a loosely compacted
government, or under a number of almost independent
governments, to form a closer union in a Federal form.
There are other causes and conditions which dispose the
subjects of one government, or sections of these subjects,
to desire to make their governmental union less close by
substituting a system of a Federal character. In both
sets of cases, the centripetal or centrifugal forces spring
from the local position, the history, the sentiments, the
economic needs of those among whom the problem
arises ; and that which is good for one people or politi-
cal body is not necessarily good for another. Federalism
may be an equally legitimate resource where it is
adopted for the sake of tightening or of loosening a
pre-existing bond.

2. That Federalism supplies the best means of de-
veloping a new and vast country. It permits an ex-
pansion whose extent, and whose rate and manner of
progress, cannot be foreseen to proceed with more
variety of methods, more adaptation of laws agd ad-
ministration to the circumstances of each part of the
territory, and altogether in a more truly natural and
spontaneous way, than can be expected under a central-
ized government, which is disposed -to apply its settled
system through all its dominions. Thus the special
needs of a new region are met by the inhabitants in the
way they find best: its special evils are cured by special
remedies, perhaps more drastic than an old country

VOL. I 2H,

466 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I
FI a ae
demands, perhaps ‘more lax than an old country would
tolerate; while at the same time the spirit of self-
reliance among those who build up these new com-
munities is stimulated and respected.

3. That it prevents the rise of a despotic central
government, absorbing other powers, and menacing the
private liberties of the citizen. This may now seem to
have been an idle fear, so far as America was concerned.
It was, however, a very real fear among the great-grand-
fathers of the present Americans, and nearly led to the
rejection even of so undespotic an instrument as the
Federal Constitution of 1789. Congress (or the Presi-
dent, as the case may be) is still sometimes described
as a tyrant by the party which does not control it,
simply because it is a central government: and the
States are represented as bulwarks against its encroach-
ments.

The second set of arguments relate to and recom-
mend not so much Federalism as local self-government.
I state them briefly because they are familiar.

4, Self-government stimulates the interest of people
in the affairs of their neighbourhood, sustains local poli-
tical life, educates the citizen in his daily round of civic
duty, teaches him that perpetual vigilance and the sacri-
fice of his own time and labour are the price that must
be paid for individual liberty and*collective prosperity.

5. Self-government secures the good administration
of local affairs by giving the inhabitants of each locality
due means of overseeing the conduct of their business.

That these two sets of grounds are distinct appears
from the fact that the sort of local interest which local
self-government evokes is quite a different thing from
the interest men feel in the affairs of a large body like
an American State. So, too, the control over its own

cHap,. xxx MERITS OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 467

affairs of a township, or even a small county, where
' everybody can know what is going on, is quite different
from the control exercisable over the affairs of a com-
monwealth with a million of people. Local self-govern-
ment may exist in a unified country like England, and
may be wanting in a Federal country like Germany.
Ang in America itself, while some States, like those of
New England, possessed an admirably complete system
of local government, others, such as Virginia, the old
champion of State sovereignty, were imperfectly pro-
vided with it. Nevertheless, through both sets of
arguments there runs the general principle, applicable
in every part and branch of government, that, where
other things are equal, the more power is given to
the units. which compose the nation, be they large or
small, and the less to the nation as a whole and to its
central authority, so much the fuller will be the liberties
and so much greater the energy of the individuals who
compose the people. This principle, though it had not
been then formulated in the way men formulate it now,
was heartily embraced by the Americans. Perhaps it
was because they agreed in taking it as an axiom that
they seldom referred to it in the subsequent contro-
versies regarding State rights. These controversies pro-
ceeded on the basis of the Constitution as a law rather
than on considerations of general political theory. A
European reader of the history of the first seventy years
of the United States is surprised how little is said, through
the interminable discussions regarding the relation of
the Federal government to the States, on the respective
advantages of centralization or localization of powers as
a matter of historical experience and general expediency.

Three further benefits to be expected from a Federal
System may be mentioned, benefits which seem to have

468 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

been unnoticed or little regarded by those who estab-
lished it in America. .

6. Federalism enables a people to try experiments
in legislation and administration which could not be
safely tried in a large centralized country. A compara-
tively small commonwealth like an American State
easily makes and unmakes its laws; mistakes are not
serious, for they are soon corrected ; other States profit
by the experience of a law or a method which has worked
well or ill in the State that has tried it.

7. Federalism, if it diminishes the collective force of
a nation, diminishes also the risks to which its size and
the diversities of its parts expose it. A nation so
divided is like a ship built with water-tight compart-
ments. When a leak is sprung in one compartment,
the cargo stowed there may be damaged, but the other
compartments remain dry and keep the ship afloat. So
if social discord or an economic crisis has produced dis-
orders or foolish legislation in one member of the Federal
body, the mischief may stop at the State frontier instead
of spreading through and tainting the nation at large.

8. Federalism, by creating many local legislatures
with wide powers, relieves the national legislature of a
part of that large mass of functions which might other-
wise prove too heavy for it. Thus business is more
promptly despatched, and the great central council of
the nation has time to deliberate on those questions
which most nearly touch the whole country,

All of these arguments recommending Federalism
have proved valid in American experience.

To create a nation while preserving the States was
the main reason for the grant of powers which the
National government received ; an all-sufficient reason,
and one which holds good to-day. The several States

cHar. xxx <ALERITS OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 469

have changed greatly since 1789, but they are still
commonwealths whose wide authority and jurisdiction
practical men are agreed in desiring to maintain.

Not much was said in the Convention of 1787 re-
garding the best methods of extending government over
the unsettled territories lying beyond the Alleghany
moyntains.’ It was, however; assumed that they would
develop as the older colonies had developed, and in point
of fact each district, when it became sufficiently populous,
was formed into a self-governing State, the less populous
divisions still remaining in the status of semi-self-govern-
ing Territories. Although many blunders have been com-
mitted { in the process of development, especially in the
reckless contraction of debt and the wasteful disposal
of the public lands, greater evils might have resulted
had the creation of local institutions and the control of
new communities been left to the Central government.’
Congress would have been not less improvident than
the State governments, for it would have been even
less closely watched. The opportunities for jobbery
would have been irresistible, the growth of order
and civilization probably slower. It deserves to be
noticed that, in granting self-government to all those
of her colonies whose population is of English race,

1 In 1787, however, the great Ordinance regulating the North-West
Territory was enacted by the Congress of the Confederation.

2 The United States is proprietor of the public domain in the Terri-
tories, and when a new State is organized the ownership is not changed.
The United States, however, makes grants of wild lands to the new State
as follows :—{1) Of every section numbered 16 (being one thirty-sixth of
all) for the support of common schools. (2) Of lands to endow a unj-
versity. (3) Of the lands noted in the surveys as swamp lands, and
which often are valuable. (4) It has usually made further grants to aid
in the construction of railroads, and for an agricultural college. The
grants commonly leave the United States asnuch larger landowner within
the State than is the State itself, and when all the dealings of the National
government with its lands are " considered, it is more justly chargeable
with squandering the public domain than the States are.

470 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

England has practically adopted the same plan as the
United States have done with their western territory.
The results have been generally satisfactory, although
England, like America, has found that her colonists
are disposed to treat the aboriginal inhabitants, whose
lands they covet and whose persons they hate, with a
harshness and injustice which the mother country weuld
gladly check.

The arguments which set forth the advantages of
local self-government were far more applicable to the
States of 1787 than to those of 1887. Virginia, then the
largest State, had only half a million free inhabitants,
less than the present population of Chicago or Liverpool.
Maarachusetts had 450,000, Pennsylvania 400,000, New
York 300,000; while Georgia, Rhode Island, and Delaware
had (even counting slaves) less than 200,000 between
them.1. These were communities to which the expres-
sion “local self-government” might be applied, for,
although the population was scattered, the numbers were
small, enough for the citizens to have a personal know-
ledge of their leading men, and a persona] interest
(especially as a large proportion were landowners) in the
economy and prudence with which common affairs were
managed. Now, however, when of the thirty-eight
States twenty-two have more than a million inhabitants,
and four have more than three millions, the newer States
being, moreover, larger in area than most of the older
ones, the stake of each citizen is relatively smaller, and
generally too small to sustain his activity in politics, and
the party chiefs of the State are known to him only by
the newspapers or by their occasional visits on a stump-
ing tour.’

1 I give the round numbers, reducing them a little from the num-

bers which appear in the census of 1790.
2 To have secured the real benefits of local self-government the States

cHarp. xxx JZERITS OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 471

All that can be claimed for the Federal system under
this head of the argument is that it provides the
machinery for a better control of the taxes raised and
expended in a given region of the country, and a better
oversight of the public works undertaken there than
would be possible were everything left to the Central
government... As regards the educative effect of
numerous and frequent elections, a European observer
is apt to think that elections in America are too many
and come too frequently. Overtaxing the attention of
the citizen and frittering away his interest, they leave
him at the mercy of knots of selfish adventurers. Of
this, however, more will be said in a subsequent chapter.

The utility of the State system in localizing disqrders
or discontents, and the opportunities it affords for try-
ing easily and safely experiments which ought to be
tried in legislation and administration, constitute benefits
to be set off against the risk, referred to in the last
preceding chapters, that evils may continue in a district,

‘may work injustice to a minority and invite imitation
by other States, which the wholesome stringency of
the Central government might have suppressed. Euro-
peans are startled by the audacity with which Americans
apply the doctrine of lazssez aller; Americans declare
that their method is not only the most consistent but
in the end the most curative.’

A more unqualified approval may*be given to the

ought to have been kept at a figure not much above that of their original
population, their territory being cut up into new States as the population
increased. Had this been done—no doubt at the cost of some obvious
disadvantages, such as the undue enlargement of the Senate, and the pre-
dominance of a single large ‘city in a State,—there would now be more
than two hundred instead of only thirty-eight States,

1 It must, of course, be remembered that in most parts of the Union
the local self-government of cities, counties, townships, and school districts
exists in a more complete form than in any of the great countries of
Europe.—<As to this, see Chapters XLVIIL—LII. post.

472. THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

division of legislative powers. The existence of the
State legislatures relieves Congress of a burden too heavy
for its shoulders; for although it has far less foreign
‘policy to discuss than the Parliaments of England,
France, or Italy, and although the separation of the
executive from the legislative department gives it less
‘responsibility for the ordinary conduct of the admin-
istration than devolves on those Chambers, it could not
possibly, were its competence as large as theirs, deal
with the multiform and increasing demands of the
different, parts of the Union. There is great diversity
in the material conditions of different parts of the country,
and at present the people, particularly in the West, are
eager to have their difficulties handled, their economic’
and social needs satisfied, by the State and the law.
Having only a limited field of legislation left to it,
Congress may be thought to enjoy better opportunities
than the overtasked English Parliament of cultivating
that field well. Nevertheless, as has béen shown in
previous chapter, its public legislation is scanty, and its
private legislation careless and wasteful.

These merits of the Federal system of government
which I have enumerated are the counterpart and con-
sequences of that limitation of the central authority
whose dangers were indicated in last chapter. They
are, if one may revérse the French_ phrase, the qualities
of Federalism’s defects. The problem which all federalized
nations have to solve is how to secure an efficient central
government and preserve national unity, while allowing
free scope for the diversities, and free play to the
authorities, of the members of the federation. It is, to
adopt that favourite astronomical metaphor which no
American panegyrist of the Constitution omits, to keep
the centrifugal and centripetal forces in equilibrium, so

cHar.xxx ALERITS OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM _ 473

' that neither the planet States shall fly off into space,
nor the sun of the Central government draw them
into its consuming fires, The characteristic merit
of the American Constitution lies in the method by
which it has solved this problem. It has given the
National government a direct authority over all citizens,
irrespective of the State governments, and has therefore
been able safely to leave wide powers in the hands of
. those governments. And by placing the Constitution
above both the National and the State governments, it
has referred the arbitrament of disputes between them
to an independeht body, charged with the interpretation
of the Constitution, a body which is to be deemed not
so much a third authority in the government as the
living voice of the Constitution, the unfolder of the
mind of the people whose will stands expressed i in that
supreme instrument.

The application of these two principles, unknown to,
or at any rate little used by, any previous federation,
has contributed more than anything else to the stability
of the American system, and to the reverence which its
citizens feel for it, a reverence which is the best security
for its permanence. Yet even these devices would not
have succeeded but for the presence of a mass of moral
and material influences stronger ‘than any political de-
vices, which have maintained the equilibrium of centri-
fugal and centripetal forces. On the one hand there
“has been the love of local independence and self-govern-
ment; on the other, the sense of community in blood,
in language, in habits and idéas, a common pride in the
national history and the national flag.

1 The central government in the Achaian League had apparently a
direct authority over the citizens of the several cities, but it was so ill
defined and so little employed that we can hardly cite that instance ag a
Precedent.

474 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

‘Quid leges sine moribus? The student of institu-
tions, as well as the lawyer, is apt to overrate the effect
of mechanical contrivances in politics. I admit that in
America they have had one excellent result; they have
formed a legal habit in the mind of the nation. But
the true value of a political contrivance resides not in its
ingenuity but in its adaptation to the temper and cirqum-
stances of the people for whom it is designed, in its

_ power of using, fostering, and giving a legal form to those
forces of sentiment and interest which it finds in being.
So it has been with the American system. Just as the
passions which the question of slavery evoked strained
the Federal fabric, disclosing unforeseen weaknesses, so
the love of the Union, the sense of the material and
social benefits involved .in its preservation, appeared
in unexpected strength, and manned with zealous de-
fenders the ramparts of the sovereign Constitution. It is
this need of determining the suitability of the machinery
for the workmen and its probable influence upon them,
as well as the capacity of the workmen for using and
their willingness to.use the machinery, which makes it
so difficult to predict the operation of a political con-
trivance, or, when it has succeeded in one country, to
advise its imitation in another. The growing strength
of the national government in the United States is largely
due to sentimental forces that were weak a century ago,
and to a development of internal communications which
was then undreamt of. And the devices which we
admire in the Constitution might prove unworkable
among a people less patriotic and self-reliant, less law-
loving and law-abiding, than are the English of America.

CHAPTER XXXI
GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION

THERE is another point of view from which we have
still to consider the Constitution. It is not only a
fundamental law, but an unchangeable law, unchange-
able, that is to say, by the national legislature, and
changeable even by the. people only through a slow
and difficult process. How can a country whose very
name suggests to us movement and progress be governed
by a system and under an instrument which remains the
same from year to year and from century to century ?
When we talk of the Constitution of a state or a
nation we mean those of its rules or laws which deter-
mine the form of its government, and the respective
rights and duties of the government towards the citizens
and of the citizens towards the government. These rules,
or the most important among them, may be contained in
one document, such as the Swiss or Belgian Constitution,
or may be scattered through a multitude of statutes and
reports of judicial decisions, as is the case with regard to
what men call the English Constitution: This is a dis-
tinction of practical consequence. But a still more im-
portant difference exists in the fact that in some countries
the rules or laws which make up the Constitution can be
made and changed by the ordinary legislature just like

476 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT “PART I

any other laws, while in other countries such rules are
placed above and out of the reach of the legislature,
having been enacted and being changeable only by some
superior authority. In countries of the former class the
so-called Constitution is nothing more than the aggre-
gate of those laws—taking law in its widest sense to
include customs and judicial decisions—which haye a
political character ; and this description is too vague to be
scientifically useful, for no three jurists would agree as
to which laws ought to be deemed political. In such
countries there is nothing either in the form of what are
commonly called constitutional laws, or in the source
from which they emanate, or in the degree of their
authority, to mark them off from other laws. The Con-
stitution of England is constantly changing, for as the
legislature, in the ordinary exercise of its powers, fre-
quently passes enactments which affect the methods of
government and the political rights of the citizens, there
is no certainty that what is called the Constitution will
stand the same at the end of a given session of Par-
liament as it stood at the beginning.? A constitution

1 The first. statesman who remarked this seems to have been James
Wilson, who said in 1788, ‘‘ The idea of a constitution limiting and super-
intending the operations of legislative authority, seems not to have been
accurately understood in Britain. There are at least no traces of practice
conformable to such a principle. The British Constitution is just what
the British Parliament pleases. When the.Parliament transferred legis-
lative authority to Henry VIIL, the act transferring could not, in the
strict acceptation of the term, be called unconstitutional. To control the
powers and conduct of the legislature by an overruling constitution was
an improvement in the science and practice of government reserved to the
American States.”——Elliot’s Debates, ii. 432. Paley said this in his Moral
Philosophy, published just before. See the observations of Mr. Theodore
W. Dwight on Harrington’s proposals for a supreme constitution (Pol.
Sc. Quarterly, for March 1887); and Oliver. Cromwell’s Instrument, called
“The Government of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ive-
land,” printed in the Parliamentary History, vol. iii. p. 1417. It was pro-

vided by this instrument that statutes passed in Parliament should take
effect, even if not assented to by the Lord Protector, but only if they were

cuap, xxxt_ DEVELOPMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION — 477

of this kind, capable at any moment of being bent or
turned, expanded or contracted, may properly be called
a Flexible Constitution.

In countries of the other class the laws and rules
which préscribe the nature, powers, and functions of the
government are contained in a document or documents
emanating from an authority superior to that of the
legislature. This authority may be a monarch who has
octroyé a charter alterable by himself only. Or it may
be the whole people voting at the polls; or it may be a
special assembly, or combination of assemblies, appointed
ad hoc. In any case we find in such countries a law or
group of laws distinguished from other laws not merely
by the character of their contents, but by the source
whence they spring and by the force they exert, a force
which overrides and breaks all enactments passed by the
ordinary legislature. Where the. Constitution consists
of such.a law or laws, I propose to call it a Rigid Con-
stitution, ze. one which cannot be bent or twisted by
the action of the legislature, but stands stiff and solid,
opposing a stubborn resistance to the attacks of any
Majority who may desire to trangress or evade its
provisions. As the English Constitution is the best
modern instance of the flexible type, so is the American
of the rigid type.

It will at once be asked, How can any constitution be
truly rigid 2 Growth and decay are the necessary con-
ditions of the life of institutions as well as of individual
organisms. One constitution may be altered less fre-

agreeable to the articles of the instrument, which would therefore appear
to have been a genuine rigid constitution within the terms of the defini-
tion here given. Some of the provisions of the articles are so minute that
they can hardly have been intended to be placed above change by Parlia-
ment ; but Cromwell seems from the remarkable speech which he delivered
on 16th December 1653, in promulgating the Instrument, to have con-
ceived that what he called the Fundamentals should be unchangeable.

478 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

quently or easily than another, but an absolutely un-
changeable constitution is an impossibility.’

The question is pertinent; the suggestion is true.
No constitution can be made to stand unsusceptible of
change, because if it were, it would cease to be suit-
able to the conditions amid which it has to work,
that is, to the actual forces which sway politics. ,And
being unsuitable, it-rvould be weak, not rooted in the
nature of the State and in the respect of the citizens
for whom it exists; and being weak, it would presently
be overthrown. If therefore we find a rigid constitution
tenacious of life, if we find it enjoying, as Virgil says of
the gods, a fresh and green old age, we may be sure
that it has not stood wholly changeless, but has been so
modified as to have adapted itself to the always altering
circumstances that have grown up round it. Most of
all must this be true of a new country where men and
circumstances change faster than in Europe, and where,
owing to the equality of conditions, the leaven of new
ideas works more thoroughly upon the whole lump.

We must therefore be prepared to expect that the
American Constitution will, when its present condition

1 The constitutions of the ancient world were all or nearly all
flexible, because the ancient republics were governed by primary assem-
blies, all whose laws were of equal validity. By far the most interest-
ing and instructive example is the Constitution of Rome. It presents
some striking resemblances to the Constitution of England—both left many
points undetermined, both relied largely upon non-legal usagés and under-
standinge—and any English constitutional lawyer who should compare
the practical workings of the tivo in an exact and philosophical way would
render a service to history and political science.

However, one finds here and there in Greek constitutions provisions in-
tended to secure certain laws from change. At Athens, for instance,
there was a distinction between Laws (vduor) which required the approval
of a committee called the Nomothetae, and Decrees (Ynpicpara), passed
by the Assembly alone, and any person proposing a decree inconsistent
with a law was liable to an action (ypad7) tapavdpuwv) for having, so to
speak, led the people into illegality. His conviction in this action carried
with it a declaration of the invalidity of the decree.

cHap. xxx1 DEVELOPMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION 479

is compared with its fire-new condition in 1789, prove
to have felt the hand of time and change:

Historical inquiry verifies this expectation. The
Constitution of the United States, rigid though it be,
has changed, has developed. It has developed in three
ways to which I devote the three following chapters.

Jt has been changed by Amendment. Certain pro-
visions have been struck out of the original document
of 1787-88; certain other, and more numerous, pro-
visions have been added. This method needs little
explanation, because it is open and direct. It resembles
the method in which laws are changed in England, the
difference being that whereas in England statutes are
changed by the legislature, here in the United States
the fundamental law is changed in a more roundabout
fashion by the joint action of Congress and the States.

It has been developed by Interpretation, that is, by
the unfolding of the meaning implicitly contained in its
necessarily brief terms ; or by the extension of its pro-
visions to cases which they do not directly contemplate,
but which their general spirit must be deemed to cover.

It has been developed by Usage, that is, by the
establishment of rules not inconsistent with its express
provisions, but giving them a character, effect, and direc-
tion which they would not have if they stood alone, and
by which their working is materially modified. These
rules are sometimes embodied in statutes passed by
Congress and repealable by Congress. Sometimes they
remain in the stage of a mere convention or understand-
ing which has no legal authority, but which everybody
knows and accepts. Whatever their form, they must
not conflict with the letter of the Constitution, for if they
do conflict with it, they will be deemed invalid whenever
a question involving them comes before a court of law,

480 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT : PART I

a ee eee ee
It may be observed that of these three modes of

change, the first is the most obvious, direct, and effective,
but also the most difficult to apply, because it needs
an agreement of many independent bodies which is
rarely attainable. The second mode is less potent
in its working, because an interpretation put on a
provision may be recalled or modified by the same
authority, viz. the courts of law (and especially the
Supreme Federal Court), which has delivered it. But
while a particular interpretation stands, it is as strong
as the Constitution itself, being indeed incorporated
therewith, and therefore stronger than anything which
does not issue from the same ultimate source of power,
the will of the people. The weakest, though the easiest
and most frequent method, is the third. For, legisla-
tion and custom are altogether subordinate to the Con-
stitution, and can take effect only where the letter
of .the Constitution is silent, and where no authorized
interpretation has extended the letter to an unspeci-
fied case. But they work readily, quickly, freely ; and
the developments to be ascribed to them are therefore as
much larger in quantity than those due to the two other
methods as they are inferior in weight and permanence,

We shall perceive after examining these three sources
of change not only that the Constitution as it now
stands owes much to them, but-that they are likely to
modify it still further as time goes on. We shall find
that, rigid as it is, it suffers constant qualification and
deflection, and that while its words continue in the main
the same, it has come to mean something different to
the men of 1888 from what it meant to those of 1808,
when it had been at work for twenty years, or even to
those: of 1858, when the fires of protracted controversy
might be thought to have thrown a glare of light into
- every corner of its darkest chambers.

CHAPTER XXXII
THE AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION

THE men who sat in the Convention of 1787 were not
Sanguine enough, like some of the legislating sages of
antiquity, or like such imperial codifiers as the Emperor
Justinian, to suppose that their work could stand
unaltered for all time to come. They provided (Art. v.)
that ‘‘Congress, whenever two-thirds of both houses
shall deem it necessary, shall propose amendments to
this Constitution, or on the application of the legisla-
tures of two-thirds of the several States, shall call a
convention for proposing amendments, which, in either
case, shall be valid to all intents and purposes as part of
this Constitution when ratified by the legislatures of
three-fourths of the several States, or by conventions in
three-fourths thereof, as the one or the other mode may
be prescribed by Congress.”

There are therefore two methods of framing and
proposing amendments.

(A) Congress may itself, by a two-thirds vote in each
house, prepare and propose amendments.

(B) The legislatures of two-thirds of the States may
require Congress to summon a Constitutional Convention.
Congress shall thereupon do so, having no option to
refuse; and the Convention when culled shall draft

VOL. I 21

482 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

and submit amendments. No provision is made as to
the election and composition of the Convention, matters
which would therefore appear to be left to the discretion
of Congress.

There are also two methods of enacting amendments
framed and proposed in either of the foregoing ways. It
is left to Congress to prescribe one or other methgd as
Congress may think fit.

(X) The legislatures of three-fourths of the States
may ratify any amendments submitted to them.

(Y) Conventions may be called in the several States,
and three-fourths of these conventions may ratify.

On all the occasions on which the amending power
has-been exercised, method A has been employed for
proposing and method X for ratifying—z.e. no drafting
conventions of the whole Union or ratifying conventions
in the several States have ever been summoned, The
preference of the action of Congress and the State legis-
latures may be ascribed to the fact that it has never
been desired to remodel the whole Constitution, but
only to make changes or additions on special points.
Moreover, the procedure by National and State conven-
tions might be slower, and would involve controversy
over the method of electing those bodies. The consent
of the President is not required to a constitutional
amendment.’ A two-thirds majority in Congress can
override his veto of a Bill, and at least that majority
is needed to bring a constitutional amendment before
the people.

There is only one provision of the Constitution which
cannot be changed by this process, It is that which

1 The point was decided by the Supreme court in 1794 in the case of
Hollingsworth v. State of Vermont (3 Dall. 378) ; and the Senate came to

the same conclusion in 1865, See Jameson on Constitutional Conventions,
§ 560.

cHap. xxx1l. AATENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION 483

secures to each and every State equal representation in
‘one branch of the legislature. ‘No State without its
consent shall be deprived of its equal suffrage in the
Senate” (Art. v.) It will be observed that this provision
does not require unanimity on the part of the States to
a change diminishing or extinguishing State representa-
tion, in the Senate, but merely gives any particular State
proposed to be affected an absolute veto on the proposal.
If a State were to consent to surrender its rights, and
three-fourths of the whole number to concur, ‘the resist~
ance of the remaining fourth would not prevent the
amendment from taking effect.

Following President Lincoln, the Americans ae of
the Union as indestructible; and the expression, “An
indestructible Union of indestructible States,” has been
used by the Supreme court in a famous case.1 But
looking at the Constitution simply as a legal document,
one finds nothing in it to prevent the adoption of an
amendment providing a method for dissolving the exist-
ing Federal tie, whereupon such method would be applied
so as to form new unions, or permit each State to become
an absolutely sovereign and independent commonwealth.
The power of the people of the United States appears
competent to effect this, should it ever be desired, in a
perfectly legal way, just as the British Parliament is
legally competent to re-divide Great Britain into the

sixteen or eighteen independent kingdoms which existed
within the island in the eighth century.

The amendments made by the above process (A+X)
to the Constitution have been in all fifteen in number.
These have been made on four occasions, and fall into
fouf groups, two of which consist of one amendment
each. The first group, including ten amendments made

1 Texas v. White, see ante, p. 429.

484 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

immediately after the adoption of the Constitution,
ought to be regarded as a supplement or postscript to it,
rather than as changing it. They constitute what the
Americans, following the English precedent, call a Bill
of Rights, securing the individual citizen and the
States against the encroachments of Federal power.’
The second and third groups, if a single amendment
can be properly called a group (viz. amendments xi. and
xii.) are corrections of minor defects which had disclosed
themselves in the working of the Constitution? The
fourth group is the only one which marked a political
crisis and registered a political victory. It comprises
three amendments (xiii. xiv. xv.) which forbid slavery,
define citizenship, secure the suffrage of citizens against
attempts by States to discriminate to the injury of par-
ticular classes, and extend Federal protection td those
citizens who may suffer from the operation of certain
kinds of unjust State laws. These three amendments
are the outcome of the War of Secession, and were
needed in order to confirm and secure for the future its
results. The requisite majority of States was obtained
under conditions altogether abnormal, some of the
lately conquered States ratifying while actually con-
trolled by the northern armies, others as the price
which they were obliged to pay for the re-admission to
Congress of their senators and representatives.? The

1 These ten amendments were proposed by the first Congress, having
been framed by it out of 103 amendments suggested by various States,
and were ratified by all the States but three. They took effect in Decem-
ber 1791. ;

2 The eleventh amendment negatived a construction which the
Supreme court had put upon its own judicial powers (see above, p. 315) ;
the twelfth corrected a fault in the method of choosing the President.

8 The thirteenth amendment was proposed by Congress in Febrbary
1865, ratified and declared in force December 1865 ; the fourteenth was
proposed by Congress June 1866, ratified and declared in force July
1868 ; the fifteenth was proposed by Congress February 1869, ratified

cHap. xxx AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION 485

details belong to history: all we need here note is
that these deep-reaching, but under the circumstances
perhaps unavoidable, changes were carried through not
by the free will of the peoples of three-fourths of the
States, but under the pressure of a majority which had
triumphed in a great war, and used its command of the
miljtary strength and Federal government of the Union
to effect purposes deemed indispensable to the recon-
struction of the Federal system.’

Many amendments to the Constitution have been
at various times suggested to Congress by Presidents,
or brought forward in Congress by members, but
very few of these have ever obtained the requisite two-
thirds vote of both Houses. In 1789, however, and
again in 1807, amendments were passed by Congress

and declared in force March 1870. The fourteenth amendment had given
the States a strong motive for enfranchising the negroes by cutting down
the representation in Congress of any State which excluded male in-
habitants (being citizens of the United States) from the suffrage ; the
fifteenth went further and forbade “race, colour, or previous condition of
servitude,” to be made a ground of exclusion. The grounds for this bold
step were succinctly set forth by Senator Willey (of West Virginia) when
he said that the suffrage was the only sure guarantee the negro could
have in many parts of the country for the enjoyment of his civil rights ;
that it would be a safer shield than law, and that it was required by the
demands of justice, the principles of human liberty, and the spirit of
Christian civilization.

The effect of these three amendments was elaborately considered by
the Supreme court (in 1872) in the so-called Slaughter-house Cases (16
Wall. 82), the effect of which is thus stated by Mr. Justice Miller : “ With
the exception of the specific provisions in the three amendments for the
protection of the personal rights of the citizens and people of the United
States, and the necessary restrictions upon the power of the States for that
purpose, with the additions to the power of the general government to
enforce those provisions, no substantial change has been made in the rela-
tions of the State governments to the Federal government,”’—Address
delivered before the University of Michigan, June 1887.

1 But though military coercion influenced the adoption of the
thifteenth amendment, while political coercion bore a large part in
securing the adoption of the others, it must be remembered that some
changes in the Constitution were an absolutely necessary corollary to the
war which had just ended.

486 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

and submitted to the States for which the requisite
majority of three-fourths of the States was not obtained ;
and in February and March 1861 an amendment for-
bidding the Constitution to be ever so amended as to
authorize Congress to interfere with the ‘domestic
institutions,” including slavery, of any State, was passed
in both Houses, but never submitted to the States,, be-
cause war broke out immediately afterwards. It would
doubtless, had peace been preserved, have failed to
obtain the acceptance of three-fourths of the States, and
its’ effect could only have been to require those who
might thereafter propose to amend the Constitution so
as to deal with slavery, to propose also the repeal of this
particular amendment itself.’ ‘

The moral of these facts is not far to seek.
Although it has long been the habit of the Americans
to talk of their Constitution with almost superstitious
reverence, there have often been times when leading
statesmen, perhaps even political parties, would have
materially altered it if they could have done so. There
have, moreover, been some alterations suggested in it,
which the impartial good sense of the wise would
have approved, but which have never been submitted
to the States, because it was known they could not

1 The Greek republics of antiquity sometimes placed some particular
law under a special sanction by denouncing the penalty of death on
any one who should propose to repeal it. In such cases, the man who
intended to repeal the law so sanctioned of course began by proposing
the repeal of the law which imposed the penalty. So it would have been
in this case : so it must always be. No sovereign body can limit its own
powers. The British Parliament seems to have attempted to bind itself
by providing in the Act of Union with Ireland (39 and 40 George IIL,
c. 67) that the maintenance of the Protestant Episcopal Church as an
Established Church in Ireland should be “deemed an essential and
fundamental part of the Union.” That Church was, however, dis-
established in 1869 with as much ease as though this provision had never
existed.

cHap. xxxtt AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION 487

be carried by the requisite majority.’ If, therefore,
comparatively little use has been made of the provisions
for amendment, this has been due, not solely to the
excellence of the original instrument, but also to the
difficulties which surround the process of change.
Alterations, though perhaps not large alterations, have
been needed, to cure admitted faults or to supply
dangerous omissions, but the process has been so diffi-
cult that it has never been successfully applied, except
either to matters of minor consequence involving no
party interests (Amendments xi. and xii.), or in the
course of a revolutionary movement which had dislo-
cated the Union itself (Amendments xiii. xiv. xv.)

Why then has the regular procedure for amendment
proved in practice so hard to apply ?

Partly, of course, owing to the inherent disputa-
tiousness and perversity (what the Americans call
“cussedness”) of bodies of men. It is difficult to get
two-thirds of two assemblies (the Houses of Congress)
and three-fourths of thirty-eight commonwealths, each
of which acts by two assemblies, for the State legislatures

1 In the Forty-ninth Congress (1884-86) no fewer than forty-seven
propositions were introduced for the amendment of the Constitution, some
of them ofa sweeping, several of a rather complex, nature. (Some of these
covered the same ground, so the total number of alterations proposed was
less than forty-seven.) None seems to have been voted on by Congress ;
and only five or six even deserved serious consideration, One at least, that
enabling the President to veto items in an appropriation bill, would, in the
opinion of most judicious statesmen, have effected a great improvement.
I find among them the following proposals: To prohibit the sale of
alcoholic liquors, to forbid polygamy, to confer the suffrage on women,
to vest the election of the President directly in the people, to elect repre-
sentatives for three instead of two years, to choose senators by popular
election, to empower Congress to limit the hours of labour, to empower
Congress to pass uniform laws regarding marriage and divorce, to enable
the people to elect certain Federal officers, to forbid Congress to pass any
local private or special enactment, to forbid Congress to direct the payment

of claims legally barred by lapse of time, to forbid the States to hire out
the labour of prisoners.

488 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1

aré all double-chambered, to agree to the same practical
proposition. Except under the pressure of urgent
troubles, such as were those which procured the accept-
ance of the Constitution itself in 1788, few persons or
bodies will consent to forego objections of detail, perhaps
in themselves reasonable, for the mere sake of agreeing
to what others have accepted. They want to have what
seems to themselves the very best, instead of a second
best suggested by some one else. Now, bodies enjoy-
ing so much legal independence as do the legisla-
tures of the States, far from being disposed to defer to
Congress or to one another, are more jealous, more
suspicious, more vain and opinionated, than so many
individuals. Nothing but a violent party spirit, seeking
either a common party object or individual gain to flow
from party success, makes them work together.

If an amendment comes to the legislatures recom-
mended by the general voice of their party, they will be
quick to adopt it. But in that case it will encounter
the hostility of the opposite party, and parties are in
most of the Northern States usually pretty evenly bal-
anced, It is seldom that a two-thirds majority in
either House ‘of Congress can be secured on a party
issue ; and of course such majorities.in both Houses,
and a three-fourths majority of State legislatures on a
party issue, are still less probable, Now, in a country
pervaded by the spirit of party, most questions
either are at starting, or soon become, controversial.
A change in the Constitution, however useful its
-ultimate consequences, is likely to be for the moment.
deemed more advantageous to one party than to the
other, and this is enough to make the other party
oppose it. Indeed, the mere fact that a proposal
comes from one side, rouses the suspicion of the other.

cHap. xxx AALENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION 489

There is always that dilemma of which England has
so often felt the evil consequences. If a measure
of reform is immediately pressing, it becomes matter
of party contention, it excites temper and passion.
If it is not pressing, neither party, having other and
nearer aims, cares to take it up and push it through.’
In America, a party amendment to the Constitution
can very seldom be carried. A non-party amendment
falls into the category of those things which, because
they are everybody’s business, are the business of
nobody.

It is evident when one considers the nature of a
Rigid or Supreme constitution, that some method of
altering it so as to make it conform to altered facts and
ideas is indispensable. A European critic may remark
that the American method has failed to answer the
expectations formed of it. The belief, he will say, of its
authors was that while nothing less than a pretty general
agreement would justify alteration, that agreement
would exist when obvious omissions preventing its
smooth working were discovered. But this has not
come to pass. There have been long and fierce contro-
versies over the construction of several points in the
Constitution, over the right of Congress to spend money
on internal improvements, to charter a national bank,
to impose a protective tariff, above all, over the treat-
ment of slavery in the Territories. But the method of
amendment was not applied to any of these questions,
because no general agreement could be reached upon

1 In England, during many years, thinking men of both parties
have been convinced that something ought to be done to re-construct the
Upper Chamber, but since neither party had any direct gain to expect from
such a reform, neither has troubled itself to undertake a confessedly difficult
task, Yet in England changes in the Constitution are effected by the
comparatively simple method of a statute.

490 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

them, or indeed upon any but quite secondary matters.
So the struggle over the interpretation of a docu-
ment which it was found impossible to amend, passed
from the law courts to the battle-field. Americans
reply to such criticisms by observing that the power
of amending the Constitution is one which cannot
prudently be employed to conclude current political
controversies, that if it were so used no constitution
could be either rigid or reasonably permanent, that
some latitude of construction is desirable, and that
in the above-mentioned cases amendments excluding
absolutely one or other of the constructions contended
for would either have tied down the legislature too
tightly or have hastened a probably inevitable conflict.
Ought the process of change to be made easier? say
by requiring only a bare majority in Congress, and a
two-thirds majority of States? American statesmen
think not. A swift and easy method would not only
weaken the sense of security which the rigid Constitu-
tion now gives, but would increase the troubles of
current politics by stimulating a majority in Congress
to frequently submit amendments to the States. The
habit of mending would turn into the habit of tinkering,
There would be too little distinction between changes in
the ordinary statute law, which require the agreement
of majorities in the two Houses and the President, and
changes in the more solemnly enacted fundamental law.
And the rights of the States, upon which congressional
legislation cannot now directly encroach, would be en-
dangered. The French scheme, under which an absolute
majority of the two Chambers, sitting together, can amend
the Constitution; or even the Swiss scheme, under
which a bare majority of the voting citizens, coupled
with a majority of the Cantons, can ratify constitutional

cuap, xxx AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION 491

changes drafted by the Chambers, in pursuance of a
previous popular vote for the revision .of the Consti-
tution,’ is considered by the Americans dangerously
lax. The idea reigns that solidity and security are the
most vital attributes of a fundamental law.

From this there has followed another interesting
result. Since modifications or developments are often
needed, and since they can rarely be made by amend-
ment, some other way of making them must be found.
The ingenuity of lawyers has discovered:one method in
interpretation, while the dexterity of politicians has in-
vented a variety of devices whereby legislation may
extend, or usage may modify, the express provisions of
the apparently immovable and inflexible instrument.

1 See the Swiss Federal Constitution, Arts. 118-121.

CHAPTER XXXIII
THE INTERPRETATION OF THE CONSTITUTION

Tue Constitution of England is contained in hundreds
of volumes of statutes and reported cases; the Constitu-
tion of the United States (including the amendments)
may be read through aloud in twenty-three minutes.
It is about half as long as St. Paul’s first Epistle
‘to the Corinthians, and only one-fortieth part as long as
the Irish Land Act of 1881. History knows few instru-
ments which in so few words lay down equally moment-
ous rules on a vast range of matters of the highest
importance and complexity. The Convention of 1787
were well advised in making their draft short, because
it was essential that the people should comprehend it,
because fresh differences of view would have emerged
the further they had gone into details; and because the
more one specifies, the more one has to specify and to
attempt the impossible task of proyiding beforehand for
all contingencies. These sages were therefore content
to lay down a few general rules and principles, leaving
some details to be filled in by congressional legislation,
and foreseeing that for others it would be Decay to
trust to interpretation.

It is plain that the shorter a law is, the more general
must its language be, and the greater therefore the need
for interpretation. So too the greater the range of a law,

cHap. xxxin JVTERPRETATION OF CONSTITUTION 493

and the more numerous and serious the cases which it
‘governs, the more frequently will its meaning be can-
vassed. There have been statutes dealing with private
law, such as the Lex Aquilia at Rome and the Statute
of Frauds in England, on which many volumes of
commentaries have been written, and thousands of
juristic and judicial constructions placed. Much more
then must we expect to find great public and constitu-
tional enactments subjected to the closest scrutiny in
order to discover every shade of meaning which their
words can be made to bear. Probably no writing
except the New Testament, the Koran, the Pentateuch,
and the Digest of the Emperor Justinian, has employed
so much ingenuity and labour as the American Constitu-
tion, in sifting, weighing, comparing, illustrating, twist-
ing, and torturing its text. It resembles theological
writings in this, that both, while taken to be immutable
guides, have to be adapted to a constantly changing
world, the one to political conditions which vary from
year to year and never return to their former state, the
other to new phases of thought and emotion, new beliefs
in the realms of physical and ethical philosophy. There
must, therefore, be a development in constitutional
formulas, just as there is in theological. It will come,
it cannot be averted, for it comes in virtue of a law
of nature: all that men can do is to shut their eyes to
it, and conceal the reality of change under the continued
use of time-honoured phrases, trying to persuade them-
selves that these phrases mean the same thing to their
minds to-day as they meant generations or centuries
ago. Asa great living theologian says, “In a higher
world it is otherwise;- but here below to live is to
change, and to be perfect is to have changed often.”?
* Newman, Essay on Development, p. 39.

494 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

The Constitution of the United States is so concise
and so general in its terms, that even had America been
as slowly moving a country as China, many questions
must have arisen on the interpretation of the funda-
mental law which would have modified its aspect. But
America has been the most swiftly expanding of all
countries. Hence the questions that have presented
themselves have often related to matters which the
framers of the Constitution could not have contemplated.
Wiser than Justinian before them or Napoleon after
them, they foresaw that their work would need to be
elucidated by judicial commentary. But they were
far from conjecturing the enormous strain to which
some of their expressions would be subjected in the
effort to apply them to new facts.

I must not venture on any general account of the
interpretation of the Constitution, nor attempt to set
forth the rules of construction laid down by judges and
commentators, for this is a vast matter and a matter for
law books, All that this chapter has to do is to indi-
caté, very generally, in what way and with what results
the Constitution has been expanded, developed, modi-
fied, by interpretation ; and with that view there are
three points that chiefly need discussion: (1) the
authorities entitled to interpret the Constitution, (2)
the main principles followed in determining whether or
no the Constitution has granted certain powers, (3) the
checks on possible abuses of the interpreting power.

I. To whom does it belong to interpret the Con-
stitution? Any question arising in a legal proceeding as
to the meaning and application of this fundamental law
will evidently be settled by the courts of law. Hvery
court is equally bound to pronounce and competent to
pronounce on such questions, a State court no less than

cHar, xxxut_ JVZERPRETATION OF CONSTITUTION 495

a Federal court ;? but as all the more important questions
‘are carried by appeal to the supreme Federal court, it is
practically that court whose opinion determines them.

Where the Federal courts have declared the meaning
of a law, every one ought to accept and guide himself
by their deliverance. But there are always questions of
construction which have not been settled by the courts,
some because they have not happened to arise in a law-
suit, others because they are such as cannot arise in a
law-suit. As regards such points, every authority, Federal
or State, as well as every citizen, must be guided by the
best view he or they can form of the true intent and
meaning of the Constitution, taking, of course, the risk
that this view may turn out to be wrong.

There are also points of construction on which every
court, following a well-established practice, will refuse.
to decide, because they are deemed to be of “a purely
political nature,” a vague description, but one which
could be made more specific only by an enumeration of the
cases which have settled the practice. These points are
accordingly left to the discretion of the executive and
legislative powers, each of which forms its view as
to the matters falling within its sphere, and in acting
on that view is entitled to the obedience of the citizens
and of the States also.’

It is therefore an error to suppose that the judiciary
is the only interpreter of the Constitution, for a large
field is left open to the other authorities of the govern-
ment, whose views need not coincide, so that a dispute
between those authorities, although turning on the
meaning of the Constitution, may be incapable of being

1 See Chapter XXIV. ante,
2 Assuming, of course, that the matter is one which comes within
the range of Federal competence.

496 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

settled by any legal proceeding. This causes no great
confusion, because the decision, whether of the political
or the judicial authority, is conclusive so far as regards
the particular controversy or matter passed upon.

The above is the doctrine now generally accepted
in America. But at one time the Presidents claimed
the much wider right of being, except in questjons
of pure private law, generally and prima facie en-
titled to interpret the Constitution for themselves,
and to act on their own interpretation, even when
it ran counter to that delivered by the Supreme
court. Thus Jefferson denounced the doctrine laid
down in the famous judgment of Chief-Justice Marshall
in the case of Marbury v. Madison ;' thus Jackson in-
sisted that the Supreme court was mistaken in hold-
ing that Congress had power to charter the United
States bank, and that he, knowing better than the
court did what the Constitution meant to permit,
was entitled to attack the bank as an illegal insti-
tution, and to veto a bill proposing to re-charter it.’
Majorities in Congress have more than once claimed for
themselves the same independence. But of late years
both the executive and the legislature have practically

1 As the court dismissed upon another point in the case the proceed-
ings against Mr. Secretary Madison, the question whether Marshall was
tight did not arise in a practical form.

2 There was, however, nothing unconstitutional in the course which
Jackson actually took in withdrawing the deposits from the United States
Bank and in vetoing the bill for a re-charter. It is still generally ad-
mitted that a President has the right in considering a measure coming to
him from Congress to form his own judgment, not only as to its expedi-
ency but as to its conformability to the Constitution. Judge Cooley *
observes to me: “If Jackson sincerely believed that the Constitution had
been violated in the first and second charter, he was certainly not bound,
when a third was proposed, to surrender his opinion in obedience to pre-
cedent. The question of approving a new charter was political; and he

was entirely within the line of duty in refusing it for any reasons which,
to his own mind, seemed sufficient.”

cHap. xxxur JNTERPRETATION OF CONSTITUTION 497

receded from the position which the language formerly
used seemed to assert; while, on the other hand, the
judiciary, by their tendency during the whole course
of their history to support every exercise of power
which they did not deem plainly unconstitutional, have
left a wide field to those authorities. If the latter have
not ysed this freedom to stretch the Constitution even
more than they have done, it is not solely the courts of
law, but also public opinion and their own professional
associations (most presidents, ministers, and congressional
leaders having been lawyers) that have checked them.

IJ. The Constitution has been expanded by con-
struction in two ways. Powers have been exercised,
sometimes by the President, more often by the legis-
lature, in passing statutes, and the question has arisen
whether the powers so exercised were rightfully exercised,
z.e. were really contained in the Constitution. When
the question was resolved in the affirmative by the
court, the power has been henceforth recognized as a
part of the Constitution, although, of course, liable to be
subsequently denied by a reversal of the decision which
established it. This is one way. The other is where
some piece of State legislation alleged to contravene
the Constitution has been judicially decided to con-
travene it, and to be therefore invalid. The decision, in
narrowing the limits of State authority, tends to widen
the prohibitive authority of the Constitution, and con-
firms it in a range and scope of action which was pre-
viously doubtful.

Questions’ of the above kinds sometimes arise as
questions of Interpretation in the strict sense of the term,
te, as questions of the meaning of a term or phrase
which is so far ambiguous that it might be taken either
to cover or not to cover a case apparently contemplated:

VOL. I 2K

498 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1

by the people when they enacted the Constitution.
Sometimes they are rather questions to which we may
apply the name of Construction, z.e. the case that has
arisen is one apparently not contemplated by the enacters
of the Constitution, or one which, though possibly con-
templated, has for brevity’s sake been omitted; but the
Constitution has nevertheless to be applied to its solu-
tion. In the former case the enacting power has “said
something which bears, or is supposed to bear, on the
matter, and the point to be determined is, what do the
words mean? In the latter it has not directly referred
to the matter, and the question is, Can anything be
gathered from its language which covers the point
that has arisen, which establishes a principle, large
enough to reach and include an unmentioned case,
indicating what the enacting authority would have said
had the matter been present to its mind, or had it
thought fit to enter on an enumeration of specific in-
stances?? As the Constitution is not only a well-drafted
instrument with few ambiguities but also a short instru-

1 For example, the question whether an agreement carried out be-
tween a State and an individual by a legislative act of a State is a ‘‘con-
tract” within the meaning of the prohibition against impairing the
obligation of a contract, is a question of interpretation proper, for it turns
on the determination of the meaning of the term “contract.” The
question whether Congress had power to pass an act emancipating the
slaves of persons aiding in a rebellion was a question of construction,
because the case did not directly arise undéf any provision of the Consti-
tution, and was apparently not conteniplated by the framers thereof. It
was a question which had to be solved by considering what the war
powers contained in the Constitution might be taken to imply. The
question whether the National government has power to issue treasury
notes is also a question of construction, because, although this is a case
which may possibly have been contemplated when the Constitution was
enacted, it is to be determined by ascertaining whether the power “to
borrow money” covers this particular method of borrowing. There is
no ambiguity about the word “ borrow” ; the difficulty is to pronounce
which out of various methods of borrowing, some of which probably were
contemplated, can be properly deemed, on a review of the whole financial

cHap, xxx JNVTERPRETATION OF CONSTITUTION 499

ment which speaks in very general terms, mere interpre-
tation has been far less difficult than construction.
It is through the latter chiefly that the Constitution
has been, and still continues to be, developed and ex-
panded. The nature of these expansions will appear
from the nature of the Federal government. It is a
government of delegated and specified powers. The
péople have entrusted to it, not the plenitude of
their own authority but certain enumerated functions,
and its lawful action is limited to these functions,
Hence, when the Federal executive does an act, or the
Federal legislature passes a law, the question arises—Is
the power to do this act or pass this law one of the
powers which the people have by the Constitution dele-
gated to their agents? The power may never have
been exerted before. It may not be found expressed,
in so many words, in the Constitution. Nevertheless
it may, upon the true construction of that instrument,
taking one clause with another, be held to be therein
contained.

Now the doctrines laid down by Chief-Justice Mar-
shall, and on which the courts have constantly since pro-
ceeded, may be summed up in two propositions.

1, Every power alleged to be vested in the National
government, or any organ thereof, must be affirmatively
shown to have been granted. There is no presumption

attributes and functions of the National government, to be included
within the borrowing power.

As to the provision restraining States from passing laws impairing the

obligation of a contract, see note at the end of this volume on the case of
Dartmouth College v. Woodward.
. 1 Jt is worth remarking that as the Constitution is deemed to proceed
from the People who enacted it, not from the Convention who drafted it,
it is regarded for the purposes of interpretation as being the work not of
& group of lawyers but of the people themselves. For a useful summary
of some of the general rules of constitutional interpretation, see Patterson’s
Federal Restraints on State Action, pp. 215-217,

509 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1

in favour of the existence of a power; on the contrary,
the burden of proof lies on those who assert its existence,
to point out something in the Constitution which, either
expressly or by necessary implication, confers it. Just
as an agent, claiming to act on behalf of his principal,
must make out by positive evidence that his principal
gave him the authority he relies on; so Congress, or
those who rely on one of its statutes, are bound to show
that the people have authorized the legislature to pass
the statute. The search for the power will be conducted
in a spirit of strict exactitude, and if there be found in
the Constitution nothing which directly or impliedly
conveys it, then whatever the executive or legislature
of the National government, or both of them together,
may have done in the persuasion of its existence, must
be deemed null and void, like the act of any other
unauthorized agent.’

2. When once the grant of a power by the people
to the National government has been established, that
power will be construed broadly. The strictness applied
in determining its existence gives place to liberality in
supporting its application. The people—so Marshall
and his successors have argued—when they confer a
power, must be deemed to confer a wide discretion as
to the means-whereby it is to be used in their service.
For their main object is that it should be used vigorously
and wisely, which it cannot be if the choice of methods

1 For instance, several years ago a person summoned as a witness
before a committee of the House of Representatives was imprisoned by
order of the House for refusing to answer certain questions put to him,
He sued the sergeant-at-arms for false imprisonment, and recovered
damages, the Supreme court holding that as the Constitution could not
be shown to have conferred on either House of Congress any power to
punish for contempt, that power (though frequently theretofore exercised)

did not exist, and the order of the House therefore constituted no defence
for the sergeant’s act (Kilbourn v. Thompson, 103 United States, 168).

cHar. xxx, INTERPRETATION OF CONSTITUTION 501 -

is narrowly restricted; and while the people may
well be chary in delegating powers to their agents,

they must be presumed, when they do grant these
powers, to grant them with confidence in the agents’ '
judgment, allowing all that freedom in using one means
or another to attain the desired end which is needed to
ensyre success.’ This, which would in any case be the
common-sense view, is fortified by the language of the
Constitution, which authorizes Congress “to make all
laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying
into’ execution the foregoing powers, and all other
powers vested by this Constitution in the Government
of the United States, or in any department or office
thereof.” The sovereignty of the National government,
therefore, “‘ though limited to specified objects, is plenary
as to those objects” * and supreme in its sphere. Con-
gress, which cannot go one step beyond the circle of
action ,which the Constitution has traced for it, may
within that circle choose any means which it deems apt
for executing its powers, and is in its choice of means |
subject to no review by the courts in their function of

interpreters, because the people have made their repre-
sentatives the sole and absolute judges of the mode in
which the granted powers shall be employed. This
doctrine: of implied powers, and the interpretation of
the words “ necessary and proper,” were for many years
a theme of bitter and incessant controversy among
American lawyers and publicists. The history of the
United States is in a large measure a history of the

1 For instance, Congress having power to declare war, has power to
prosecute it by all means necessary for success, and to acquire territory
either by conquest or treaty.. Having power to borrow money, Congress
may, if it thinks fit, issue treasury notes, and may make them legal tender.

2 See Gibbons v. Ogden, 9 Wheat. p. 1 sqq., judgment of Marshall, C.J.

8 “The powers of the government are limited, and ite limits are not

502 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART !

arguments which sought to enlarge or restrict its im-
port. One school of statesmen urged that a lax con-
struction would practically leave the States at the
mercy of the National government, and remove those
checks on the latter which the Constitution was de-
signed to create; while the very fact that some powers
were specifically granted must be taken to import that
those not specified were withheld, according to the old
maxim expressio unius exclusio alterius, which Lord
Bacon concisely explains by saying, “as exception
strengthens the force of a law in cases not excepted,
so enumeration weakens it in cases not enumerated.”
It was replied by the opposite school that to limit the
powers of the government to those expressly set forth
in the Constitution would render that instrument unfit
to serve the purposes of a growing and changing nation,

to be transcended. But the sound construction of the Constitution must
allow to the national legislature that discretion with respect to the means
by which the powers it confers are to be carried into execution, which
will enable that body to perform the high duties assigned to it in the
manner most beneficial to the people. Let the end be legitimate, let it
be within the scope of the Constitution, and all means which are appro-
priate, which are plainly adapted to that end, which are not prohibited
but consistent with the letter and spirit of the Constitution, are constitu-
tional.”—Marshall, C-J., in M‘Culloch v. Maryland (4 Wheat. 316). This
is really a working-out of one of the points of Hamilton’s famous argu-
ment in favour of the constitutionality of a United States bank: “ Every
power vested in a government is in its nature sovereign, and includes by
force of the term a right to employ all the means requisite and fairly
applicable to the attainment of the ends of such power, and which are
not precluded by restrictions and exceptions specified in the Constitution.”
—Works (Lodge’s ed.), vol. iii. p. 181.

Judge Hare sums up the matter by saying, “Congress is sovereign as
regards the objects and within the limits of the Constitution, It may
use all proper and suitable means for carrying the powers conferred by
the Constitution into effect. The means best suited at one time may be
inadequate at another ; hence the need for vesting a large discretion in
Congress, . . . ‘Necessary and proper’ are therefore, as regards legisla-
tion, nearly if not quite synonymous, that being ‘necessary’ which is
suited to the object and calculated to attain the end in view.”— Lectures
on Constitutional Law, p. 78.

cHap. xxx JVZTERPRETATION OF CONSTITUTION 503

and would, by leaving men no legal means of attaining
necessary but originally uncontemplated aims, provoke
revolution and work the destruction of the Constitution
itself.

This latter contention derived much support from
the fact that there were certain powers that had not
been mentioned in the Constitution, but which were so
obviously incident to a national government that they
must be deemed to be raised by implication? For
instance, the only offences which Congress is expressly
empowered to punish are treason, the counterfeiting of
the coin or securities of the government, and piracies
and other offences against the law of nations. But it
was very early held that the power to declare other acts
to be offences against the United States, and punish
them as such, existed as a necessary appendage to
various general powers. So the power to regulate
commerce covered the power to punish offences ob-
structing commerce; the power to manage the post-
office included the right to fix penalties on the theft of
letters; and, in fact, a whole mass of criminal law grew
up as a sanction to the civil laws which Congress had
been directed to pass.

The three lines along which this development of the
implied powers of the government has chiefly progressed,
have been those marked out by the three express powers
of taxing and borrowing money, of regulating commerce,

1 See the philosophical remarks of Story, J., in Martin v. Hunter’s
Lessee (1 Wheat. p. 304 sqq.)

2 Stress was also laid on the fact that whereas the Articles of
Confederation of 1781 contained (Art. ii.) the expression, “Each State
retains every power and jurisdiction and right not expressly delegated
to the United States in Congress assembled,” the Constitution merely
says (Amendment x.), “The powers not granted to the United States are
reserved to the States respectively or to the people,” omitting the word
“expressly.” See the text of the Articles in the Appendix to this volume.

504 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

and'of carrying on war. Each has produced a progeny
of subsidiary powers, some of which have in their turn
been surrounded by an unexpected offspring. Thus
from the taxing and borrowing powers there sprang
the powers to charter a national bank and exempt its
branches and its notes from taxation by a State (a
serious restriction on State authority), to create a system
of custom-houses and revenue cutters, to establish a
tariff for the protection of native industry. Thus the
regulation of commerce has been construed to include
legislation regarding every kind of transportation of
goods and passengers, whether from abroad or from one
State to another, regarding navigation, maritime and
internal pilotage, maritime contracts, etc, together
with the control of all ‘navigable waters,’ the construc-
tion of all public works helpful to commerce between
States or with foreign countries, the power to prohibit
immigration, and finally a power to establish a railway
commission and control all inter-State traffic.2 The war
power proved itself even more elastic. The executive
and the majority in Congress found themselves during
the War of Secession obliged to stretch this power to

1 Navigable rivers and lakes wholly within the limits of 4 State, and
not accessible from without it, are under the authority of that State.

2 The case of Gibbons v. Ogden supplies an interesting illustration of
the way in which this doctrine of implied powers works itself out. The
State of New York had, in order to reward ‘Fulton and Livingston for
their services in introducing steamboats, passed a statute giving them an
exclusive right of navigating the Hudson river with steamers. A case
having arisen in which this statute was invoked, it was alleged that the
statute was invalid, because inconsistent with an Act passed by Congress.
The question followed, Was Congress entitled to pass an Act dealing with
the navigation of the Hudson ? and it was held that the power to regulate
commerce granted to Congress by the Constitution implied a power to
legislate for navigation on such rivers as the Hudson, and that Congress
having exercised that power, the action of the States on the subject was
necessarily excluded. By this decision a vast field of legislation was
secured to Congress and closed to the States.

cHAP, xxxil JNTERPRETATION OF CONSTITUTION 50s

cover many acts trenching on the ordinary rights of the
‘States and of individuals, till there ensued something
approaching a suspension of constitutional guarantees
in favour of the central government.

The courts have occasionally gone even further afield,
and have professed to deduce certain powers of the legis-
lature from the sovereignty inherent in the National
government. In its last decision on the legal tender
question, a majority of the Supreme court seems to have
placed upon this ground, though with special reference
to the section enabling Congress to borrow money, its
affrmance of that competence of Congress to declare
paper money a legal tender for debts, which the earlier
decision of 1871 had referred to the war power. This
position evoked a controversy of wide scope, for the
question what sovereignty involves is evidently at least
as much a question of political as of legal science, and
may be pushed to great lengths upon considerations
with which law proper has little to do.

The above-mentioned instances of development have
been worked out by the courts of law. But others are
due to the action of the executive, or of the executive
and Congress conjointly. Thus, in 1803, President
Jefferson negotiated and completed the purchase of
Louisiana, the whole vast possessions of France beyond
the Mississippi. He believed himself to be exceeding
any powers which the Constitution conferred; and
desired to have an amendment to it passed, in order
to validate his act. But Congress and the people did
not share his scruples, and the approval of the legisla-
ture was deemed sufficient ratification for a step of
transcendent importance, which no provision of the
Constitution bore upon.: In 1807 and 1808 Congress
laid, by two statutes, an embargo on all shipping in

506 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

'
United States ports, thereby practically destroying the
lucrative carrying trade of the New England States.
Some of these States declared the Act unconstitutional,
arguing that a power to regulate commerce was not a
power to annihilate it, and their courts held it to be
void. Congress, however, persisted for a year, and the
Act, on which the Supreme court never formally pro-
nounced, has been generally deemed within the Constitu-
tion, though Justice Story (who had warmly opposed it
when he sat in Congress) remarks that it went to the
extreme verge. More startling, and more far-reaching
in their consequences, were the assumptions of Federal
authority made during the War of Secession by the
executive and confirmed, some expressly, some tacitly, by
Congress and the people. It was only a few of these
that came before the courts, and the courts, in some
instances, disapproved them. But the executive con-
tinued to exert this extraordinary authority. Appeals
made to the letter of the Constitution by the minority
were discredited by the fact that they were made by
persons sympathizing with the Secessionists who were
seeking to destroy it. So many extreme things were
done under the pressure of necessity that something

1 See Judge Cooley’s History of Michigan, p. 353. The same emi.
nent authority observes to me: “The President suspended the writ of
habeas ‘corpus. The courts held this action unconstitutional (it was
subsequently confirmed by Congress), but he did not at once deem it
safe to obey their judgment. Military commissioners, with the approval
of the War Department and the President, condemned men to punishment
for treason, but the courts released them, holding that the guaranties of
liberty in the Constitution were as obligatory in war as in peace, and
should be obeyed by all citizens, and all departments, and officers of
governioent (Milligan’s case, 4 Wall. 1). The courts held closely to the
Constitution, but as happens in every civil war, a great many wrongs
were done in the exercise of the war power for which no redress, or none
that was adequate, could possibly be had.” Inter arma silent leges must

be always to some extent true, even under a Constitution like that of
the United States.

cuap. xxx JVZTERPRETATION OF CONSTITUTION 507

less than these extreme things came to be accepted as
a reasonable and moderate compromise."

The best way to give an adequate notion of the
extent to which the outlines of the Constitution have
been filled up by interpretation and construction, would
be to take some of its more important sections and
enumerate the decisions upon them and the doctrines
established by those decisions. This process would,
however, be irksome to any but a legal reader, and the
legal reader may do it more agreeably for himself by
consulting one of the annotated editions of the Con-
stitution.? He will there find that upon some pro-
visions such as Art. i.§ 8 (powers of Congress), srt.
i. § 10 (powers denied to the States), Art. iii. § 2 (extent
of judicial power), there has sprung up a perfect forest
of judicial constructions, working out the meaning and
application of the few and apparently simple words of
the original document into a variety of unforeseen results,
The same thing has more or less befallen nearly every
section of the Constitution and of the fifteen amendments.

The process shows no signs of stopping, nor can it, for’

the new conditions of economics and politics bring up
new problems for solution. But. the most important
work was that done during the first half century, and
especially by Chief-Justice Marshall during his long
tenure of the presidency of the Supreme court (1801-
1835). It is scarcely an exaggeration to call him,
as an eminent American jurist has done, a second
maker of the Constitution. I will not borrow the
phrase which said of Augustus that he found Rome of

1 Such as the suspension of the writ of habeas corpus, the emancipa-
tion of the slaves of persons aiding in rebellion, the suspension of the statute
of limitations, the practical extinction of State banks by increased taxation

laid on them under the general taxing power.
2 Such as Desty’s clear and compendious Federal Constitution Annotated.

508 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

brick and left it of marble, because Marshall’s function
was not to change but to develop. The Constitution
was, except of course as regards the political scheme of
national government, which was already well established,
rather a ground plan than acity. It was, if I may
pursue the metaphor, much what the site of Washington
was at the beginning of this century, a symmetrical
ground plan for a great city, but with only some tall
edifices standing here and there among fields and woods.
Marshall left it what Washington has now become, a
splendid and commodious capital within whose ample
bounds there are still some vacant spaces and some mean
dwellings, but which, built up and beautified as it has
been by the taste and wealth of its rapidly growing
population, is worthy to be the centre of a mighty nation.
Marshall was, of course, only one among seven judges.
but his majestic intellect and the elevation of his char-
acter gave him such an ascendency, that he, found
himself only once in a minority on any constitutional
question.’ His work of building up and working out
the Constitution was accomplished not so much by the
decisions he gave as by the judgments in which he
expounded the principles of these decisions, judgments
which for their philosophical breadth, the luminous exact-
ness of their reasoning, and the fine political sense
which pervades them, have never been surpassed and
rarely equalled by the most famous jurists of modern
Europe or of ancient Rome. Marshall did not forget
the duty of a judge to decide nothing more than the

1 In that one case (Ogden v. Sanders) there was a bare majority against
him, and professional opinion now approves the view which he took. See
an extremely interesting address delivered to the American Bar Associa-
tion in 1879 by Mr. Edward J, Phelps, who observes that when Mar-
shall became Chief-Justice only two decisions on constitutional law had
been pronounced by the court, Between that time and his death fifty-
one were given.

-

cuap. xxx JVTERPRETATION OF CONSTITUTION 509

suit before him requires, but he was wont to set forth
the grounds of his decision in such a way as to show
how they would fall to be applied in cases that had not
yet arisen. He grasped with extraordinary force and
clearness the cardinal idea that the creation of a national
government implies the grant of all such subsidiary
powers as are requisite to the effectuation of its main
powers and purposes, but he developed and applied this
idea with so much prudence and sobriety, never treading
on purely political ground, never indulging the tempta-
tion to theorize, but content to follow out as a lawyer
the consequences of legal principles, that the Constitution
seemed not so much to rise under his hands to its. full
stature, as to be gradually unveiled by him till it stood
revealed in the harmonious perfection of the form which
its framers had designed. That admirable flexibility
and capacity for growth which characterize it beyond
all other rigid or supreme constitutions, is largely due to
him, yet not more to his courage than to his caution.’

We now come to the third question: How is the
interpreting authority restrained? If the American
Constitution is capable of being so developed by this
expansive interpretation, what security do its written
terms offer to the people and to the States? What
becomes of the special value claimed for Rigid constitu-
tions that they preserve the frame of government unim-
paired in its essential merits, that they restrain the
excesses of a transient majority, and (in Federations)
the aggressions of a central authority ?

1 Had the Supreme court been in those days possessed by the same
spirit of strictness and literality which the Judicial Committee of the
British Privy Council has recently applied to the construction of the
British North America Act of 1867 (the Act which creates the Consti-

tution of the Canadian Federation), the United States Constitution would
never have grown to be what it now is.

510 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART 1

The answer is two-fold. In the first place, the inter-
preting authority is, in questions not distinctly political,
different from the legislature and from the executive.
There is therefore a probability that it will disagree
with either of them when they attempt to transgress the
Constitution, and will decline to stretch the law so as
to sanction encroachments those authorities may have
attempted. The fact that the interpreting authority is
nowise amenable to the other two, and is composed of
lawyers, imbued with professional habits, strengthens
this probability. In point of fact, there have been few
cases, and those chiefly cases of urgency during the war,
in which the judiciary has been even accused of lending
itself to the designs of the other organs of government.
The period when extensive interpretation was most
active (1800-1835) was also the period when the party
opposed to a strong central government commanded
Congress and the executive, and so far from approving
the course the court took, the dominant party then
often complained of it.

In the second place, there stands above and behind
the legislature, the executive, and the judiciary, another
power, that of public opinion. The President,.Congress,
and the courts are all, the two former directly, the latter
practically, amenable to the people, and anxious to be
in harmony with the general current of its sentiment.
If the people approve the way in which these authorities
are interpreting and using the Constitution, they go on;
if the people disapprove, they pause, or at least slacken
their pace. Generally the people have approved of
such action by the President or Congress as has. seemed
justified by the needs of the time, even though it
may have gone beyond the letter of the Constitution:
generally they have approved the conduct of the courts

cuar, xxx INTERPRETATION OF CONSTITUTION gir

whose legal interpretation has upheld such legislative or
executive action. Public opinion sarictioned the pur-
chase of Louisiana, and the still bolder action of the
executive in the Secession War. It approved the
Missouri compromise of 1820, which the Supreme court
thirty-seven years afterwards declared to have been in
excess of the powers of Congress. But it disapproved
the Alien and Sedition laws of 1798, and although these
statutes were never pronounced unconstitutional by the
courts, this popular censure has prevented any similar
legislation since that time.’ The people have, of course,
much less exact notions of the Constitution than the
legal profession or the courts. But while they generally
desire to see the powers of the government so far
expanded as to enable it to meet the exigencies of the
moment, they are sufficiently attached to its general
doctrines, they sufficiently prize the protection it affords
them against their own impulses, to censure any inter-
pretation which palpably departs from the old lines.
And their censure is, of course, still more severe if the
court seems to be acting at the bidding of a party.

A singular result of the importance of constitutional
interpretation in the American government may be here
teferred to. It is this, that the United States legislature
has been very largely occupied in purely legal dis-
cussions. When it is proposed to ‘legislate on a subject
which has been heretofore little dealt with, the opponents
of a measure have two lines of defence. They may,
as Englishmen would in a like ease, argue that the
measure is inexpedient. But they may also, which
Englishmen cannot, argue that it is unconstitutional, ze.
illegal, because transcending the powers of Congress,

1 So it disapproved strongly, in the northern States, of the judgments
delivered by the majority of the Supreme court in the Dred Scott case.

512 !' THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

This is a question fit to be raised in Congress, not only
as regards matters with which, as being purely political,
the courts of law will refuse to interfere, but as regards
all other matters also, because since a decision on the
constitutionality of a statute can never be obtained
from the judges by anticipation, the legislature ought to
consider whether they are acting within their com-
petence. And it is a question on which a stronger
case can often be made, and made with less exertion,
than on the issue whether the measure be substantially
expedient. Hence it is usually put in the fore-front of
the battle, and argued with great vigour and acumen by
leaders who are probably more ingenious as lawyers than
they are far-sighted as statesmen.

A further consequence of this habit is pointed out
by one of the most thoughtful among American constitu-
tional writers. Legal issues are apt to dwarf and obscure
the more substantially important issues of principle and
policy, distracting from these latter the attention of the
nation as well as the skill of congressional debaters.

“ The English legislature,” says Judge Hare, “is free
to follow any course that will promote the welfare of the
State, and the inquiry is not, ‘Has Parliament power to
pass the Act?’ but, ‘Is it consistent with principle, and
such as the circumstances demand?’ These are the
material points, and if the publie mind is satisfied as to
them there is no further controversy. In the United
States, on the other hand, the question primarily is one
of power, and in the refined and subtle discussion which
ensues, right is too often lost sight of or treated as if it
were synonymous with might. It is taken for granted
that what the Constitution permits it also approves, and
that measures which .are legal cannot be contrary ‘to

morals,” ? me
1 Lectures on Constitutional Law, p. 135.

cHap, xxx JVZTERPRETATION OF CONSTITUTION 513

The interpretation of the Constitution has at times
become so momentous as to furnish a basis for the for-
mation of political parties ; and the existence of parties
divided upon such questions has of course stimulated
the interest with which points of legal interpretation
have been watched and canvassed. Soon after the
formation of the National government in 1789 two
parties grew up, one advocating a strong central
authority, the other championing the rights of the
States. Of these parties the former naturally came to
insist on a liberal, an expansive, perhaps a lax construc-
tion of the words of the Constitution, because the more
wide is the meaning placed upon its grant of powers, so
much the wider are those powers themselves. The
latter party, on the other hand, was acting in protection
both of the States and of the individual citizen against
the central government, when it limited by a strict and
narrow interpretation of the fundamental instrument the
powers “which that instrument conveyed. The dis-
tinction which began in those early days has never
since vanished. There has always been a party pro-.
fessing itself disposed to favour the central government,
and therefore a party of broad construction. There has
always been a party claiming that it aimed at protecting
the rights of the States, and therefore a party of strict
construction. Some writers have gone so.far as to deem
these different views of interpretation to be the found-
ation of all the political parties that have divided
America. This view, however, inverts the facts, It
is not because men have differed in their reading of
the Constitution that they have advocated or opposed.
an extension of Federal powers ; it is their attitude on
this substantial issue that has determined their attitude
on the verbal one. Moreover, the two great parties

VOL. I 21

514 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

have several times changed sides on the very question
of interpretation. The purchase of Louisiana and the
Embargo acts were the work of the Strict Construc-
tionists, while it was the Loose Constructionist party
which protested against the latter measure, and which,
at the Hartford Convention of 1814, advanced doctrines
of State rights almost amounting to those subsequently
asserted by South Carolina in 1832 and by the Seces-
sionists of 1861. Parties in America, as in most
countries, have followed their temporary interest; and
if that interest happened to differ from some traditional
party doctrine, they have explained the latter away.
Whenever there has been a serious party conflict, it has
been in reality a conflict over some living and practical
issue, and only in form a débate upon canons of legal
interpretation. What is remarkable, though natural
enough in a country governed by a written instrument,
is that every controversy has got involved with questions
of constitutional construction. When it was proposed to
exert some power of Congress, as for instance to charter
a national bank, to grant money for internal improve-
ments, to enact a protective tariff, the opponents of these
schemes could plausibly argue, and therefore of course did
argue, that they were unconstitutional. So any sug-
gested interference with slavery in States or Territories
was immediately declared to violate the State rights
which the Constitution guaranteed. Thus every serious
question came to be fought as a constitutional question.
But as regards most questions, and certainly as regards
the great majority of the party combatants, men did
not attack or defend a proposal because they held it
legally unsound or sound on the true construction of
the Constitution, but alleged it to be constitutionally
wrong or right because they thought the welfare of the

cHap, xxxut ZJWVTERPRETATION OF CONSTITUTION 515

country, or at least their party interests, to be involved.
Constitutional interpretation was a pretext rather than
a cause, a matter of form rather than of substance.

The results were both good and evil. They were
good in so far as they made both parties profess them-
selves defenders of the Constitution, zealous only that it
should be interpreted aright; as they familiarized the
people with its provisions, and made them vigilant critics
of every legislative or executive act which “could affect
its working. They were evil in distracting public atten-
tion from real problems to the legal aspect of those
problems, and in cultivating a habit of casuistry which
threatened the integrity of the Constitution itself.

Since the Civil War there has been much less of this
casuistry because there have been fewer occasions for it,
the Broad Construction view of the Constitution having
practically prevailed—prevailed:so far that the Supreme
court now. holds that the power of Congress to make
paper money legal tender is incident to the sovereignty
of the National ‘government, and that a Democratic
House of Representatives passes a bill giving a Federal
commission vast powers over all the railways which pass
through more than one State. There is still a party in-
clined to strict construction, but the strictness which it
upholds would have been deemed lax by the Broad Con-
structionists of thirty years ago. The interpretation
which has thus stretched the Constitution to cover
powers once undreamt of, may be deemed a dangerous
resource. But it must be remembered that even the
constitutions .we call rigid must make their choice
between being bent or being broken. The Americans
have more than once bent their Constitution in order
that they might not be forced to break it.

CHAPTER XXXIV
THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION BY USAGE

THERE is yet another way in which the Constitution has
been developed. This is by laying down rules on
matters which are within its general scope, but have
not been dealt with by its words, by the creation of
machinery which it has not provided for the attainment
of objects it contemplates, or, to vary the metaphor, by
ploughing or planting ground which though included
within the boundaries of the Constitution, was left
waste and untilled by those who drew up the original
instrument,

Although the Constitution is parody minute upon
some comparatively small points, such as the qualifica-
tions of members of Congress and ‘the official record of
their votes, it passes over in silence many branches of
political action, many details essential to every govern-
ment. Some may have been forgotten, but some were
purposely omitted, because the Convention could not
agree upon them, or because they would have provoked
opposition in the ratifying conventions, or because they
were thought unsuited to a document which it was
desirable to draft concisely and to preserve as far, as
possible unaltered. This was wise and indeed necessary,
but it threw a great responsibility upon those who had

CHAP. XXXIV DEVELOPMENT BY USAGE 517

to work the government which the Constitution created.
They found nothing within the four corners of the
instrument to guide them on points whose gravity was
perceived as soon as they had to be settled in practice.
Many of such points could not be dealt with by inter-
pretation or construction, however liberally extensive it
might be, because there was nothing in the words of the
Constitution from which such construction could start,
and because they were in some instances matters which,
though important, could not be based upon principle,
but must be settled by an arbitrary determination.

Their settlement, which began with the first Con-
gress, has been effected in two ways, by Congressional
legislation and by usage.

Congress was empowered by the Constitution to
pass statutes on certain prescribed topics. On many
other topics not specially named, but within its general
powers, statutes were evidently needed. For instance,
the whole subject of Federal taxation, direct and in-
direct, the establishment of Federal courts, inferior to
the Supreme court, and the assignment of particular
kinds and degrees of jurisdiction to each class of courts,
the organization of the civil, military, and naval services
of the country, the administration of Indian affairs
and of the Territories, the rules to be observed in
the elections of Presidents and senators, these and
many other matters of high import are regulated by
statutes, statutes which Congress can change as English
Statutes are changed by Parliament, but which, in
their main features, have been but little changed
since their first enactment. Although such statutes
cannot be called parts of the Constitution in the same
sense as the interpretations and constructions judicially
placed upon it, for these latter have (subject to the

518 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

possibility of their reversal) become practically incor-
porated with its original text, still they have given to
its working a character and direction which must be
borne in mind in discussing it, and which have, in some
instances, produced results opposed to the ideas of
its framers. To take the latest instance, the pass-
ing of the Inter-State Commerce Act, which regulates
all the greater railways over the whole United States,
is an assertion of Federal authority over numerous and
powerful corporations chartered by and serving the
various States, which gives a new aspect and significance
to the clause in the Constitution empowering Congress
to regulate commerce. Legal interpretation held that
clause to be sufficiently wide to enable Congress to
legislate on inter-State railways; but when Congress
actually exerted its power in enacting this statute a
further step, and a long one, was taken towards bringing
the organs of transportation under national control.’
Legislation, therefore, though it cannot in ‘strictness
enlarge the frontiers fixed by the Constitution, can give
to certain provinces lying within those frontiers far
greater importance than they formerly possessed, and
by so doing, can substantially change the character of
the government. It cannot engender a new power, but
it can turn an old one in a new direction, and call a
dormant one into momentous activaty.

Next as to usage. Custom,.which is a law-produc-
ing agency in every department, is specially busy in
matters which pertain to the practical conduct of govern-

1 It need hardly be said that the now general recognition that the
Constitution empowers Congress to deal with the subject does not imply
that every detail of the Act is above objection. Although prima facic
Congress, when competent to legislate on a subject, is free to choose its
means, still it remains open to any one to challenge the constitutionality
of any particular provisions in a statute,

CHAP, XXXIV DEVELOPMENT BY USAGE 519

ment. Understandings and conventions are in modern
‘practice no less essential to the smooth working
of the English Constitution, than are the principles
enunciated in the Bill of Rights. Now understand-
ings are merely long-catablished usages, sanctioned by
no statute, often too vague to admit of precise state-
ment,” yet in some instances deemed so binding that
a breach of them would damage the character of a
statesman or a ministry just as much as the transgression
of a statute. In the United States there are fewer
such understandings than in England, because under a
Constitution drawn out in one fundamental document
everybody is more apt to stand upon his strict legal
rights, and the spirit of institutions departs less widely
from their letter. Nevertheless some of those features
of American government to which its character is chiefly ©
due, and which recur most frequently in its daily work-
ing, rest neither upon the Constitution nor upon any
statute, but upon usage alone. Here are some instances.
The presidential electors have by usage and by usage
only lost, the right the Constitution gave them of exer-
cising their discretion in the choice of a chief magistrate,
The President is not re-elected more than once,
though the Constitution places no restriction whatever
. . hd 2
on re-eligibility.

1 For instance, it is impossible to state precisely the rights of the
House of Lords as to rejecting bills passed by the House of Commons,
It is admitted that the Upper House must, as a matter of political
necessity or prudence, in the long run yield to the Lower, but exactly
how soon or under what circumstances is a matter on which no rule can
be said to exist. A notion has grown up in some quarters that the House
of Lords may properly resist till a general election, but must then bow to
the will of the voters. But this idea, which of course receives no counten-
ance from English law, cannot be deemed to have become established oy
custom as & part of the Constitution.

2 See anie, Chap. V. The Federalist (No. Ixviii.) says that ‘te

President will be and ought to be re-elected as often as the people think
him worthy of their confidence,

$20 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

The Senate now never exercises its undoubted power
of refusing to confirm the appointments made by the
President to cabinet offices.

The President is permitted to remove, without asking
the consent of the Senate, officials to whose appointment
the consent of the Senate is necessary. This was for a
time regulated by statute, but the statute having been
repealed the old usage has revived. The Constitution
is silent on the point.

Both the House and the Senate conduct their legis-
lation by means of standing committees. This vital
peculiarity of the American system of government
has no firmer: basis than the standing orders of each
House, which can be repealed at any moment, but
have been maintained for many years.

The Speaker of the House is by a similar practice
entrusted with the nomination of all the House com-
mittees, an arrangement which gives him an influence
upon legislation greater than the President's.’

The chairmen of the chief committees of both Houses,
which control the great departments of State (e.g. foreign
affairs, navy, justice, finance), have practically become
an additional set of ministers for those departments.

The custom of going into caucus, by which the
parties in each of the two Houses of Congress determine
their action, and the obligation on individual members
to obey the decision of the caucus meeting, are mere
habits or understandings, without legal sanction. So
is the right of the senators from a State to control the
Federal patronage of that State, a right shaken (as
observed in an earlier chapter) by the victory of Presi-
dent Garfield over Mr. Conkling, but still largely
exerted. So is the usage that appropriation bills
shall be first presented to the House.

CHAP, XXXIV DEVELOPMENT BY USAGE 521

The rule that a member of Congress must be chosen
from the district, as well as from the State, in which he
resides, rests on no Federal enactment; indeed, neither
Congress nor any State legislature would be entitled
thus to narrow the liberty of choice which the words
of the Constitution imply, though some State legis-
latures have affected so to do.

Jackson introduced, and succeeding Presidents con-
tinued the practice of dismissing Federal officials belonging
to the opposite party, and appointing none but adherents
of their own party to the vacant places. This is the so-
called Spoils System, which, having been applied also to
State and municipal offices, has been made the corner-
stone of “ practical politics” in America. The Constitu-
tion is nowise answerable for it, and legislation only
partially.

Neither in English law nor in American is there
anythipg regarding the re-eligibility of a member of
the popular chamber; nor can it be said that usage
has established in either country any broad general rule
on the subject.. But whereas the English tendency has
been to re-elect a member unless there is some positive
reason for getting rid of him, in many parts of America
men are disposed the other way, and refuse to re-elect
him just because he has had Mis turn already. Any
one can understand what a difference this makes in the

character of the chamber.
We see, then, that several salient features of the
present American government, such as the popular
election of the President, the influence of senators
and.congressmen over patronage, the immense power
of the Speaker, the Spoils system, are due to usages
which have sprung up round the Constitution and
profoundly affected its working, but which are not parts

522 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART

of the Constitution, nor necessarily attributable to any
specific provision which it contains. The most remark-
able instance of all, the choice of presidential candidates
by the great parties assembled in their national con-
ventions, will be fully considered in a later chapter.

One of the changes which the last seventy years
have brought about is so remarkable as to deserve
special mention. The Constitution contains no pro-
visions regarding the electoral franchise in congressional
elections save the three following :—

That the franchise shall in every State be the same
as that by which the members of the ‘most numerous
branch of the State legislature” are chosen (Art. i. § 2).

That when any male citizens over twenty-one ‘years
of age are excluded by any State from the franchise
(except for crime) the basis of representation in Con-
gress of that State shall be proportionately reduced
(Am. xiv., 1868). .

That “the right of citizens of the United States to
vote shall not be denied or abridged on account of race,
colour, or previous condition of servitude” (Am. xv.,
1870).

Subject to these conditions every State may regulate
the electoral franchise as it pleases.

In the first days of the Constitution the suffrage was
in nearly all States limited by various conditions (e.g.
property qualification, length of residence, etc.) which
excluded, or might have excluded, though in some States
the proportion of very poor people was small, a con-
siderable number of the free inhabitants. At present
the suffrage is in every State practically universal. It
had become so in the Free States’ even before the war.

1 Save that in many of them persons of colour were placéd at a dis-
advantage,

CHAP, XXXIV DEVELOPMENT BY USAGE 523

Here is an advance towards pure democracy effected
‘ without the action of the national legislature, but solely.
by the legislation of the several States, a legislation
which, as it may be changed at any moment, is, so far
as the national government is concerned, mere custom.
And of this great step, modifying profoundly the
colour and character of the government, there is no
trace in the words of the Constitution other than the
provisions of the fourteenth and fifteenth amendments
introduced for the benefit of the liberated negroes.

It is natural, it is indeed inevitable, that there should
be in every country such a parasitic growth of usages
and understandings round the solid legal framework of
government. But must not the result of such a growth
‘be different where a rigid constitution exists from what
it is in countries where, as in England, the constitution
is flexible? In England usages of the kind described
become inwoven with the law of the country as settled
by statutes and decisions, and modify that law. Cases
come before a court in which a usage is recognized and
thereby obtains a sort of legal sanction. Statutes are
passed in which an existing usage is taken for granted,
and which therefore harmonize with it. Thus the
always changing Constitution becomes interpenctrated
by custom. Custom is in fact the first stage through
which a rule passes before it is embodied in binding
law. But in America, where the fundamental law
cannot readily be, and is in fact very rarely altered,
may we not expect a conflict, or at least a want of
harmony, between Jaw and custom, due to the constant
growth of the one and the immutability of the other ?

In examining this point one must distinguish between
subjects on which the Constitution is silent and subjects
on which it speaks. As regards the former there is

524 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

little difficulty. Usage and legislation may expand
the Constitution in what way they please, subject only
to the control of public opinion. The courts of law
will not interfere, because no provision of the Constitu-
tion is violated ; and even where it may be thought that
an act of Congress or of the executive is opposed to the
spirit of the Constitution, still if it falls within the range
of the discretion which these authorities have received,
it will not be questioned by the judges.’

If, on the other hand, either congressional legislation
or usage begins to trench on ground which the Con-
stitution expressly covers, the question at once arises
whether such legislation is valid, or whether an act
done in conformity with such usage is legal. Questions
of this kind do not always come before the courts, and
if they do not, the presumption is in favour of what-
ever act has been done by Congress or by any legally
constituted authority. When, however, such 9. ques-
tion is susceptible of judicial determination and is
actually brought before a tribunal, the tribunal is dis-
posed rather to support than to treat as.null the act
done. Applying that expansive interpretation which
has prevailed since the war as it prevailed in the days
of Chief-Justice Marshall, the Supreme court is apt to
find grounds for moving in the direction which it
perceives public opinion to have taken, and for putting
on the words of the Constitution a sense which legalizes
what Congress has enacted or custom approved. When
this takes place things proceed smoothly. The change
which circumstances call for is made gently, and is con-
trolled, perhaps modified, in its operation.

1 “Tt is an axiom in our jurisprudence that an Act of Congress is not
to be pronounced unconstitutional unless the defect of power to pass it is
so clear as to admit of no doubt. - Every doubt is to be resolved in favour
of the validity of the law.”—Swayne, J., in U.S. v. Rhodes, 1 Abb. U.S, 49.

CHAP, XXXIV DEVELOPMENT BY USAGE 525

But sometimes the courts feel bound to declare some
statute, or executive act done in pursuance of usage,
contrary to the Constitution. What happens? In
theory the judicial determination is conclusive, and
ought to check any further progress in the path which
has been pronotinced unconstitutional. But whether
this result follows will in practice depend on the cir-
cumstances of the moment. If the case is not urgent,
if there is no strong popular impulse behind Congress
or the President, no paramount need for the usage
which had sprung up and is now disapproved, the
decision of the courts will be acquiesced in; and what-
ever tendency towards change exists will seek some
other channel where no constitutional obstacle bars its
course, But if the needs of the time be pressing, courts
and Constitution may have to give way. Salus reipub-
licae lex suprema. Above that supreme written law
stands the safety of the commonwealth, which will be
secured, if possible in conformity with the Constitution ;
but if that be not possible, then by evading, or even
by overriding the Constitution... This is what happened
in the Civil War, when men said that they would break
the Constitution in order to preserve it.

Attempts to disobey the Constitution have been rare,

1 In a remarkable letter written to Mr. Hodges (4th April 1864),
President Lincoln said: “My oath to preserve the Constitution imposed
on me the duty of preserving by every indispensable means that govern-
ment, that nation, of which the Constitution was the organic law. Was
it possible to lose the nation and yet preserve the Constitution? By
general law life and limb must be protected, yet often a limb must be
amputated to save a life, but a life is never wisely given to save a limb.
I felt that measures, otherwise unconstitutional, might become lawful by
becoming indispensable to the preservation of the Constitution through
the preservation of the nation. Right or wrong I assumed this ground,
and now avow it. I could not feel that to the best of my ability I had
even tried to preserve the Constitution, if, to save slavery, or any minor
matter, I should permit the wreck of government, country, and Constitu-
tion altogether.”

526 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

because the fear of clashing with it has arrested many
mischievous proposals in their earlier stages, while the
influence of public opinion has averted possible collisions
by leading the courts to lend their ultimate sanction to
measures or usages which, had they come under review
at their first appearance, might have been pronounced
unconstitutional." That collisions have been rare is good
evidence of the political wisdom of American statesmen
and lawyers. But politicians in other countries will err
if they suppose that the existence of a rigid or supreme
constitution is enough to avert collisions, or to secure
the victory of the fundamental instrument.’ A rigid
constitution resembles, not some cliff of Norwegian
gneiss which bears for centuries unchanged the lash of
Atlantic billows, but rather a sea-wall, such as guards
the seaside promenade of an English town, whose
smooth surface resists the ordinary waves. and currents
of the Channel but may be breached or washed away
by some tremendous tempest. The American Constitu-
tion has stood unbroken, because America has never
seen, as some European countries have seen, angry
multitudes or military tyrants bent on destroying the
institutions which barred the course of their passions or
ambition, And it has also stood because it has sub-:
mitted to a process of constant, though sometimes
searcely perceptible, change which has adapted it to the
conditions of a new age. —

1 Such as the expenditure of vast sums on “ internal improvements”
and the assumption of wide powers over internal communications. *

2 Judge Cooley aptly observes: “If the great men of 1787 had been
living o little later they might have seen in the experience of France that
the most carefully prepared and popular written constitution is not more
secure than any other against sudden, violent, and destructive changes,
and may, indeed, be more easily overturned by the assaults of faction
than it possibly could be if its principles, having their roots deep in the
nature of the people, were only expressed in unwritten usages,”—Address
to the South Carolina Bar Association.

CHAP, XXXIV DEVELOPMENT BY USAGE 527

The solemn determination of a people enacting a
fundamental law by which they and their descendants
shall be governed cannot prevent that law, however
great the reverence they continue to profess for it, from
being worn away in one part, enlarged in another,
modified in a third, by the ceaseless action of influences
playing upon the individuals who compose the people.
Thus the American Constitution has necessarily changed
as the nation has changed, has changed in the spirit with
which men regard it, and therefore in its own spirit. To
use the words of the eminent constitutional lawyer whom
I have more than once quoted : ‘We may think,” says
Judge Cooley, “that we have the Constitution all before
us; but for practical purposes the Constitution is that
which the government, in its several departments, and
the people in the performance of their duties as citizens,
recognize and respect as such; and nothing else is,
.. . Cervantes says: Every one is the son of his
own works. This is more emphatically true of an
instrument of government than it can possibly be of a
natural person. What it takes to itself, though at first
unwarrantable, helps to make it over into a new instru-
ment of government, and it represents at last the acts
done under it.”

CHAPTER XXXV
THE RESULTS OF CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT

We have seen that the American Constitution has:
changed, is changing, and by the law of its existence
must continue to change, in its substance and practical
working even when its words remain the same. {Time
and habit,” said Washington, “are at least as necessary
to fix the true character of governments as of other
human institutions :” and while habit fixes some things,
time remoulds others.

It remains to ask what has been the general result of
the changes it has suffered, and what light an examination
of ‘its history, in this respect, throws upon the probable
future of the instrument and on the worth of Rigid or
Supreme constitutions in general.

The Constitution was avowedly created as an instru-
ment of checks and balances. Each branch of the
National government was to restrain the others, and
maintain the equipoise of the whole. The legislature
was to balance the executive, and the judiciary both.
The two houses of the legislature were to balance one
another. The National government, taking all its
branches together, was balanced against the State
governments. As this equilibrium was placed under the
protection of a document, unchangeable save by the

- 1 Farewell Address, 17th September 1796.

CHAP, XXXV RESULTS OF DEVELOPMENT 529

people themselves, nS one of the branches of the
’ National government has been able to absorb or override
the others, as the House of Commons and the Cabinet,
itself a child of the House of Commons, have in England
overridden and subjected the Crown and the House of
Lords. Each branch maintains its independence, and
can, within certain limits, defy the others.

‘But there is among political bodies and offices
(z.e. the persons who from time to time fill the same
office) of necessity a constant strife, a struggle for
existence similar to that which Mr. Darwin has shown
to exist among plants and animals; and as in the case
of plants and animals so also in the- political sphere
this struggle stimulates each body or office to exert its
utmost force for its own preservation, and to develop
its aptitudes in any direction wherein development
is possible. Each branch of the American govern-
ment hgs striven to extend its range and its powers;
each has advanced in certain directions, but in others
has been restrained by the equal or stronger pressure
of other branches. I shall attempt to state the chief
differences perceptible between the ideas which men
entertained’ regarding the various bodies and offices of
the government when they first entered life, and the
aspect they now wear to the nation. .

The President has developed a capacity for becom-
ing, in moments of national peril, something like a
Roman dictator. He is in quiet times no stronger than
‘he was at first, possibly weaker. Congress has in some
respects encroached on him, yet his office has shown
that it may, in the hands of a trusted leader and at the
call of a sudden necessity, rise to a tremendous height.

1 It is from these ideas that one must start in attempting such a com-
parison, because to endeavour to determine what the powers of each body
and person really were would involve a long and difficult inquiry.

VOL. I 2M

530 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

The ministers of the President have not become more
important either singly or collectively as a cabinet.‘ Cut
off from the legislature on one side, and from the people
on the other, they have been a mere appendage to the
President.

The Senate has come to press heavily on the execu-
tive, and at the same time has developed legislative
functions which, though contemplated in the Constitu-
tion, were comparatively rudimentary in the older days.
It has, in the judgment of American publicists, grown
relatively stronger than it then was.

The Vice- President of the United States has become
even more insignificant than the Constitution seemed to
make him.

On the other hand, the Speaker of the House of
Representatives, whom the Constitution mentions only
once, and on whom it bestows no powers, has now
secured one of the leading parts in the piece, and can
affect the course of legislation more than any other
single person.

An oligarchy of chairmen of the leading committees
has sprung up in the House of Representatives as a con-
sequence of the increasing demands’ on its time and of
the working of the committee system.

The Judiciary was deemed to be making large strides
during the first forty years, because it established its
claim to powers which, though doubtless really granted,
had been but faintly apprehended in 1789. After 1830
the development of those powers advanced more slowly.
But the position which the Supreme court has taken in
the scheme of government, if it be not greater than the
framers of the Constitution would have wished, is yet
greater than they foresaw.

Although some of these changes are eonsideruble,

CHAP, XXXV RESULTS OF DEVELOPMENT 531

_ they are far smaller than those which England has seen
pass over her Government since 1789. So far, there-
fore, the rigid Constitution has maintained a sort of
equilibrium between the various powers, whereas that
which was then supposed to exist in England between
the king, the peers, the House of Commons, and the
people (z.e. the electors) has vanished irrecoverably.

In the other struggle that has gone on in America,
that between the National government and the States,
the results have been still more considerable, though the
process of change has sometimes been interrupted. Dur-
ing the first few decades after 1789 the States, in spite
of a steady and often angry resistance, sometimes backed
by threats of secession, found themselves more and more
entangled in the network of Federal powers which some-
times Congress, sometimes the President, sometimes the
Judiciary, as the expounder of the Constitution, flung
over them. Provisions of the Constitution whose bearing
had been inadequately realized in the first instance were
put in force against a State, and when once put in force
became precedents for the future. It is instructive to
observe that this was done by both of the great national
parties, by those who defended State rights and preached
State sovereignty as well as by the advocates of a strong
central government. For the former, when they saw
the opportunity of effecting by means of the central
legislative or executive power an object of immediate
party importance, did not hesitate to put in force that
central power, forgetful or heedless of the example they
were setting.

It is for this reason that the process by which the
National government has grown may be called a natural
one. A political force has, like a heated gas, a natural
tendency to expansion, a tendency which works even

532 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

apart from the knowledge and intentions of those
through whom it works. In the process of expansion
such a force may meet, and may be checked or driven
back by, a stronger force. The expansive force of the
National government proved ultimately stronger than the
force of the States, so the centralizing tendency prevailed.
And it prevailed not so much by the conscious purpose
of the party disposed to favour it, as through the in-
herent elements of strength which it possessed, and the
favouring conditions amid which it acted, elements and
conditions largely irrespective of either political party,
and operative under the supremacy of the one as well as
of the other. Now and then the centralizing process
was checked. Georgia defied the Supreme court in
1830-32, and was not made to bend because the execu-
tive sided with her. South Carolina defied Congress
and the President in 1832, and the issue was settled by
a compromise. Acute foreign observers then and often
during the period that followed predicted the dissolu-
tion of the Union. For some years before the outbreak
of the Civil War the tie of obedience to the National
government was palpably loosened over a large part of
the country. But during and after the war the former
tendency resumed its action, swifter and more potent
than before.

A critic may object to the view here presented by
remarking that the struggle between the National
government and the States has not, as in the case of the
struggles between different branches of the National
government, proceeded merely by the natural develop-
ment of the Constitution, but has been accelerated by
specific changes in the Constitution, viz. those made by
the three last amendments.

This is true. But the dominance of the centralizing

CHAP. XXXV RESULTS OF DEVELOPMENT 533

tendencies is not wholly or even mainly due to those
amendments. It had begun before them. It would
have come about, though less completely, without
them. It has been due not only to these amendments
but also—

To the extensive interpretation by the judiciary
of the powers which the Constitution vests in the
National government.

To the passing by Congress of statutes on topics not
exclusively reserved to the States, statutes which
have sensibly narrowed the field of State action.

To exertions of executive power which, having been
approved by the people, and not condemned by
the courts, have passed into precedents.

These have been the modes in which the centralizing
tendency has shown itself and prevailed. What have
been the underlying causes ?

They belong to history. They are partly economical,
partly moral. Steam and electricity have knit the
various parts of the country closely together, have made
each State and group of States more dependent on its
neighbours, have added to the matters in which the whole
country benefits by joint action and uniform legislation.
The power .of the National government to stimulate or
depress commerce and industries by tariff legislation has
given it a wide control over the material prosperity of
part of the Union, till ‘‘the people, and especially
the trading and manufacturing classes, came to look
more and more to the national capital for what enlists
their interests, and less and less to the capital of their
own State... ..It is the nation and not the State
that is present to the imagination of the citizens as
sovereign, even in the States of Jefferson and Calhoun.

534 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

. The Constitution as it is, and the Union as it was,
can no longer be the party watchword. There is a new
Union, with new grand features, but with new en-
grafted evils.” There has grown up a pride in the
national flag, and in the national government as repre-
senting national unity. In the North there is grati-
tude to that government as the power that saved the
Union in the Civil War; in the South a sense’ of
the strength which Congress and the President then
exerted; in both a recollection of the immense scope
which the war powers took and might take again. All
over the country there is a great army of Federal office- ©
holders who look to Washington as the centre of their
hopes and fears. As the modes in and by which ,these
and other similar causes can work are evidently not
exhausted, it is clear that the development of the
Constitution as between the nation and the States has
not yet stopped, and present appearances suggest that
the centralizing tendency will continue to prevail.

How does the inquiry we have been conducting
affect the judgment to be passed upon the worth of
rigid constitutions, 7.e. of written instruments of
government emanating from an authority superior to
that of the ordinary legislature? The question is a
grave one for European countries, which seem to be
passing from the older or flexibla to the newer or rigid
type of constitutions.

A European reader who has followed the facts stated
in the last foregoing chapters may be inclined to dismiss
the question summarily. “ Rigid Constitutions,” he will
say, “are on your own showing a delusion and a sham.
The American Constitution has been changed, is being
changed, will continue to be changed, by interpretation

1 Cooley, History of Michigan.

CHAP, XXXV RESULTS OF DEVELOPMENT 535

and usage. It is not what it was even thirty years ago;
who can tell what it will be thirty years hence? If its
transformations are less swift than those of the English
Constitution, this is only because England has not even
yet so completely democratized herself as America had
done half a century ago, and therefore there has been
more room for change in England. If the existence of
the fundamental Constitution did not prevent violent
stretches of executive power during the war, and of
legislative power after as well as during the war, will
not its paper guarantees be trodden under foot more
recklessly the next time a crisis arrives? It was in-
tended to protect not only the States against the
central government, not only each branch of the
government against the other branches, but the people
against themselves, that is to say, the people as a
whole against the impulses of a transient majority.
What becomes of this protection when you admit that
even the Supreme court is influenced by public opinion,
which is only another name for the reigning sentiment
of the moment? If every one of the checks and safe-
guards contained in the document may be overset, if all.
taken together may be overset, where are the boasted
guarantees of the fundamental law? Evidently it
stands only because’it is not at present assailed. It is
like the walls of Jericho, tall and stately, but ready to
fall at the blast of the trumpet. It is worse than a
delusion : it is a snare; for it lulls the nation into a
fancied security, seeming to promise a stability for the
institutions of government, and a: respect for the rights
of the individual, which are in fact baseless. A flexible
constitution-like that of England is really safer, because
it practises no similar deceit, but by warning good
citizens that the welfare of the commonwealth depends

536 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

always on themsclves and themselves only, stimulates
them to constant efforts for the maintenance of their
own rights and the deepest interests of society.”

This statement of the case errs as much in one direc-
tion by undervaluing, as common opinion errs by over-
valuing, the stability of rigid constitutions. They do
not perform all that the solemnity of their wording
promises. But they are not therefore useless.

To expect any form of words, however weightily
conceived, with whatever sanctions enacted, perma-
‘ nently to regtrain the passions and intcrests of men,
is to expect the impossible. Beyond a certain point,
you cannot protect the people against themselves
any more than you can, to use a familiar American
expression, lift yourself from the ground by your own
boot-straps. Laws sanctioned by the overwhelming
physical power of a despot, laws sanctioned by super-
natural terrors whose reality no one doubted, have failed
to restrain those passions in ages of slavery and super-
stition. The world is not so much advanced that in this
age laws, even the best and most venerable laws, will of
themselves command obedience. Constitutions which
in quiet times change gradually, peacefully, almost
imperceptibly, must in times of revolution be changed
more boldly, some provisions being sacrificed for the sake
of the rest, as mariners throw overboard part of the
cargo in a storm in order to save the other part with
the ship herself. To cling to the letter of a Constitution
when the welfare of the country for whose sake the
Constitution exists is: at stake, would be to seek to
preserve life at the cost of all that makes life worth
having—propter vitam vivendi perdere causas.

Nevertheless the rigid Constitution of the United
States has rendered, and renders now, inestimable

CHAP. XXXV RESULTS OF DEVELOPMENT 537

services. It opposes obstacles to rash and hasty change.
It secures time for deliberation. It forces the people to
think seriously before they alter it or pardon a trans-
gression of it. It makes legislatures and statesmen slow
to overpass their legal powers, slow even to propose
measures which the Constitution seems to disapprove.
It tends to render the inevitable process of modification
gradual and tentative, the result of admitted and grow-
ing necessities rather than of restless impatience. It
altogether prevents some changes which a temporary
majority may clamour for, but which wil} have ceased
to be demanded before the barriers interposed by the
Constitution have been overcome.* ;

It does still more than this. It forms.the mind and
temper of the people. It trains them to habits of
legality. It strengthens their conservative instincts,
their sense of the value of stability and permanence in
political arrangements. It makes them feel that to

1 The sense of these services induces some thoughtful Americans to
believe that it might be prudent for England to place some fundamental
constitutional rules out of the reach of the ordinary methods of parlia-
mentary change. See note to this chapter at the end of this volume.

2 An illustration of what I mean is afforded by the, history of the .
Roman private law. That law surpassed the laws of all other ancient
States chiefly owing to the conservative temper and habits of the Roman
people and the Roman lawyers. These conservative habits were largely due
to the fact that early in the history of the Republic the customary law of the
nation was solemnly enacted in the form of a sort of code, the so-called
Law of the Twelve Tables. The existence of this code, which summed up
the law in a concise and impressive form, and which had stood almost
unmodified for several generations before the need of modifying it began
to be felt, caused legal changes—and these necessarily became frequent
when the nation had begun to extend its dominions, and to grow in
commerce, wealth, and civilization—to be made in a cautious and gradual
way, here a little and there a little, so that continuity was preserved,
failures abandoned, the results of successful experiments secured. Thus
development, while slower, became surer and better rooted in the senti-
ments of the people, who were themselves educated into a reverential
regard for the Jaw, and taught to abstain in practice from the imprudent
exercise of that power uf swift legislation which they all along possessed.

538 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PART I

comprehend their supreme instrument of government is
a personal duty, incumbent on each one of them. It
familiarizes them with, it attaches them by ties of pride
and reverence to, those fundamental truths on which
the Constitution is based.

These are enormous services to render to any free
country, but above all to one which, more than any
other, is governed not by the men of rank or wealth‘ or
special wisdom, but by public opinion, that is to say, by
the ideas and feelings of the people at large. In no
country were swift political changes so much to be
apprehended, because nowhere has material growth been
so rapid and immigration so enormous. In none might
the political character of the people have seemed more
likely to be bold and prone to innovation, because their
national existence began with a revolution, which even
now lies only a century behind. That none has ripened
into a more prudently conservative temper may be
largely ascribed to the influence of the famous instru-
ment of 1789, which, enacted in and for a new republic,
summed up so much of what was best in the laws and
customs of an ancient monarchy.

APPENDIX

NOTE to CHAPTER III
ON CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTIONS

In America it is always by a convention (ie. a representative
body called together for some occasional or temporary purpose)
that a constitution is framed. It was thus that the first con-
stitutions for the thirteen revolting colonies were drawn up and
enacted fh 1776 and the years following; and as early as 1780
the same plan had suggested itself as the right one for framing
a constitution for the whole United States.’ Recognized in the
Federal Constitution (Art. v.) and in the successive Con-
stitutions of the several States as the proper method to be
employed when a new constitution is to be prepared, or an
existing constitution revised throughout, it has now become
a regular and familiar part of the machinery of Ameritan
government, almost a necessary part, because all American
legislatures are limited by a fundamental law, and therefore
when a fundamental law is to be repealed or largely recast,
it is desirable to provide for the purpose a body distinct from
the ordinary legislature, Where it is sought only to change
the existing fundamental law in a few specified points, the
function of proposing these changes to the people for their

1 It is found in a private letter of Alexander Hamilton (then only twenty-
three years of age) of that year.

540 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT APPENDIX

acceptance may safely be left, and generally is left, to the
legislature. Originally a convention was conceived of as a
sovereign body, wherein the full powers of the people were
vested by popular election. It is now, however, merely an
advisory body, which prepares a draft of a new constitution
and submits it to the people for their acceptance or, rejection.
And it is not deemed to be sovereign in the sense of possess-
ing the plenary authority of the people, for its powers maf be,
indeed now invariably are, limited by the statute under which
the people elect it.

Questions relating to the powers of a Constitutional Con-
vention have several times come before the courts, so that
there exists a small body of law as well as a large body of
custom and practice regarding the rights and powers of such
assemblies. Into this law and practice I do not propose to
enter. But it is worth while to indicate certain advantages
which have been found to attach to the method of entrusting
the preparation of a fundamental instrument of government to
a body of men specially chosen for the purpose instead of to
the ordinary legislature. The topic suggests interesting com-
parisons with the experience of France and other European
countries in which constitutions have been drafted and enacted
by the legislative, which has been sometimes also practically
the executive, authority. Nor is it wholly without bearing on
problems which have recently arisen in England, where Parlia-
ment has found itself, and may find itself again, invited to
enact what would be in substance.a new constitution for a
part of the United Kingdom.

An American Constitutional Convention, being chosen
for the sole purpose of drafting a constitution, and having
nothing to do with the ordinary administration of government,

1 The State Conventions which carried, or rather affected to carry, the seced-
ing Slave States out of the Union, acted as sovereign bodies. Their proceedings,
however, though clothed with legal forms, were practically revolutionary.

? See the learned and judicious treatise of Judge Jameson on Constitutional
Conventions,

APPENDIX ON CONSTITUTIONAL C ONVENT. TONS 541

no influence or patronage, no power to raise or appropriate
revenue, no opportunity of doing jobs for individuals or corpor-
ations, is not necessarily elected on party lines or in obedience
to party considerations. Such considerations do affect the
election, but they-are not always dominant, and may sometimes
be of little moment.1 Hence men who have no claims on a
party, or will not pledge themselves to a party, may be and
ofteh are elected; while men who seek to enter a legislature
for the sake of party advancement or the promotion of some
gainful object do not generally care to serve in a convention.

When the convention meets, it is not, like a legis-
lature, a body strictly organized by party. A sense of in-
dividual independence and freedom may prevail unknown in
legislatures. Proposals have therefore a chance of being
considered on their merits. A scheme does not necessarily
command the support of one set of men nor encounter the
hostility of another set because it proceeds from a leader or a
group belonging to a particular party. And as the ordinary
party questions do not come up for decision while its delibera-
tions are going on, men are not thrown back on their usual
party affiliations, nor are their passions roused by exciting
political issues.

Having no work but constitution-making to consider, a con-
vention is ‘free to bend its whole mind to that work. Debate
has less tendency to stray off to irrelevant matters. Business
advances because there are no such interruptions as a legislature
charged with the ordinary business of government must expect.

- Since a convention assembles for one purpose only,
and that a purpose specially interesting to thoughtful and
public-spirited citizens, and since its duration is short, men
who would not care to enter a legislature, men pressed by

1 It will be shown in the account of the legislatures and political parties of
the States (in Vol. II. post) that the questions of practical importance to the
States with which a State Convention would deal are very often not in issue
between the two State parties, seeing that the latter are formed on national
lines,

542 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT APPENDIX

professional labours, or averse to the “rough and tumble” of
politics, a class large in America and increasing in Europe,
are glad to serve on it, while mere jobbers or office-seekers
find little to attract them in its functions.’

The fact that the constitution when drafted has to be
submitted to the people, by whose authority it will (if accepted)
be enacted, gives to the convention a somewhat larger freedom
for proposing what they think best than a legislature, coufting
or fearing its constituents, commonly allows itself. As the
convention vanishes altogether when its work is accomplished,
the ordinary motives for popularity-hunting are less potent. As
it does not legislate but merely proposes, it need not fear to
ask the people to enact what may offend certain persons or
classes, for the odium, if any, of harassing these classes will
rest with the people. And as the people must accept or reject
the draft en bloc (unless in the rare case where provision is made
for voting on particular points separately), more care is taken
in’ preparing the draft, in seeing that it is free from errors or
repugnances, than a legislature capable of repealing or-altering
in its next session what it now provides, is likely to bestow on
the details of its measures.

Those who are familiar with European parliaments may
conceive that as a set-off to these advantages there will be a
difficulty in getting a number of men not organized by parties
to work promptly and efficiently, that a convention will be, so
to speak, an amorphous body, that if it has no leaders nor
party allegiance it will divide one-way to-day and another
way to-morrow, that the abundance of able men will mean an
abundance of doctrinaire proposals and a reluctance to sub-

1 Many of the men conspicuous in the public life of Massachusetts during the
last thirty years first made their mark in the Constitutional Convention of
1853, The draft framed by that Convention was, however, rejected by the
people. The new Constitution for New York, framed by the Convention of
1867, was also lost at the polls. That Convention was remarkable as being
(aceording to Judge Jameson) the only one in which the requirement that a dele-
gate must be resident in the district electing him was dispensed with (Constit.
Conventions, § 267).

APPENDIX ON CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTIONS 543

ordinate individual prepossessions to practical success. Ad-
mitting that such difficulties do sometimes arise, it may be
observed that in America men quickly organize themselves for
any and every purpose, and that doctrinairism is there so
uncommon a fault as to be almost a merit. When a con-
plete new constitution is to be prepared, the balance of con-
venience is decidedly in favour of giving the work to a conven-
tion, for although conventions are sometimes unwise, they are
usually composed of far abler men than those who fill the
legislatures, and discharge their function with more wisdom as
well as with more virtue. But where it is not desired to revise
the whole frame of government, the simpler and better plan
ig to proceed by submitting to the people specific amendments,
limited to particular provisions of the existing constitution ;
and this is the method now most generally employed in im-
proving State constitutions.

The above remarks are of course chiefly based on the
history of State conventions, because no national constitutional
convention has sat since 1787.1 But they apply in principle
to any constitution-making body. As regards the Convention of
1787, two observations may be made before I quit the subject.

It included nearly all the best intellect and the ripest
political experience that the United States then contained.
John Adams was absent as Minister to England, Thomas
Jefferson as Minister to France. But of the other shining
lights of the time, Jay (afterwards first Chief-Justice of the
Supreme Court) and John Marshall (afterwards third Chief-
Justice, but not yet famous), were almost the only two who
did not join in this national work. These men, great by their
talents and the memory of their services, could not have been
brought together for any smaller occasion, nor would any
lower authority than theirs have sufficed to procure the accept-
ance of a plan which had so much prejudice arrayed against it.?

1 All the amendments made in the Federal Constitution have been drafted by
Congress. See as to these amendments, Chapter XXXII.
3 It is remarkable that two of the strongest men in the Convention were, as

544 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT APPENDIX

The Convention met at the most fortunate moment in
American history. Between two storms there is often a per-
fectly still and bright day. It was in such an interval of
calm that this work was carried through, Had it been
attempted four years earlier or four years later, at both which
times the waves of democracy were running high, it must have
failed. In 1783 the people, flushed with their victory over
England, were full of confidence in themselves and in libetty,
persuaded that the world was at their feet, disposed to think
all authority tyranny. In 1791 their fervid sympathy with
the Revolution in France had not yet been damped by the
excesses of the Terror nor alienated by the insolence of the
French government and its diplomatic agents in America,
But in 1787 the first reaction from the War of Independence
had set in. Wise men had come to discern the weak ‘side of
popular government; and the people themselves were in a
comparatively humble and teachable mind. Before the next
wave of democratic enthusiasm swept over the country the
organization of a national government under the Congtitution
was in all its main features complete. It was seen that liberty
‘was still safe, and men began ere long to appreciate the
larger and fuller national life which the Federal Government
opened before them. History sees so many golden oppor-
tunities lost that she gladly notes those which the patriotic
foresight of such men as Washington and Franklin, Hamilton.
and Madison and Roger Sherman seized and used.
not being native Americans, far less influenééd than most of their colleagues
by local and State feeling, and therefore threw the whole weight of their jn-
tellect and influence into the national scale. These were Alexander Hamilton,
born a West Indian, the “son of a Scotch father and French mother, and James
Wilson, an immigrant from Scotland. The speeches of the latter (a lawyer in
Philadelphia, and afterwards a justice of the Supreme Federal ,Court) in the
Pennsylvania ratifying Convention, as well as in the great Convention of 1787,
display an amplitude and profundity of view in matters of constitutional theory
which place him in the front rank of: the political thinkers of his age. Wilson,
who was born about 1742 and died in 1792, is one of the luminaries of the time

to whom, as to the still greater and far more brilliant Hamilton, subsequent
generations of Americans have failed to do full justice.

APPENDIX THE FEDERAL CONSTITUTION 545
eae a Bene tone 8 ean ene A ee eee

NOTE to CHAPTER IV

WHAT THE FEDERAL CONSTITUTION OWES TO THE CONSTITUTIONS
OF THE SEVERAL STATES

THE following statement of the provisions of the Federal Con-
stitution which have been taken from or modelled upon State con-
stitutions, is extracted from a valuable article by Mr. Alexander
Johnston in the New Princeton Review for September 1887 :—

“ That part of the Constitution, which has attraeted most notice
abroad, is probably its division of Congress into a Senate and a
House of Representatives, with the resulting scheme of the Senate
as based on the equal representation of the States. It is probably
inevitable that the upper or hereditary House in foreign legisla-
tive bodies shall disappear in time. And it is not easy to hit on
any available substitute ; and English writers for example, judging
from the difficulty of finding a substitute for the House of Lords,
have rated too high the political skill of the Convention in hitting
upon so brilliant a success as the Senate. But the success of
the Convention was due to the antecedent experience of the States.
Excepting Pennsylvania and Vermont, which then gave all legisla-
tive powers to one House, and executive powers to a governor and
council, all the States had bicameral systems in’ 1787.1

“The name ‘Senate’ was used for the Upper House in Mary-
land, Massachusetts, New York, North Carolina, New Hampshire,
and South Carolina and Virginia; and the name ‘ House of Repre-
sentatives,’ for the Lower House, was in use in Massachusetts, New
Hampshire, and South Carolina, as well as in Pennsylvania and
Vermont.

“The rotation, by which one-third of the Senate goes out every
two years, was taken from Delaware, where one-third went out
each year, New York (one-fourth each year), Pennsylvania (one-
third of the council each year), and Virginia (one-fourth each
year). The provisions of the whole fifth section of Art. i, the

1 Georgia, however, had not till 1789 a true second chamber, her constitution
of 1777 having merely created an executive council elected by the Assembly from
among its own members.

Vermont was not one of the thirteen original States, but was a semi-inde-
Pendent commonwealth, not a member of the Confederation of 1781, not repre-
sented in the Convention of 1787, and not admitted to the Union till 1791,

VOL. I 2N

546 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT APPENDIX

j
administration of the two Houses, their power to decide the
election of their members, make rules and punish their violation,
keep a journal, and adjourn from day to day, are in so many
State constitutions that no specification is needed for them.

“The provision that money-bills shall originate in the House of
Representatives is taken almost word for word from the Constitu-
tions of Massachusetts and New Hampshire, as is the provision,
which has never been needed, that the President may adjourn the
two Houses when they cannot agree on a time of adjournment.
The provision for a message is from the Constitution of New
York. All the details of the process of impeachment as adopted
by the Convention may be found in the Constitutions of Dela-
ware, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New York, Pennsylvania,
South Carolina, Vermont, Virginia, even to the provision in the
South Carolina system that conviction should follow the vote of
two-thirds of the members present. (It should be said, how-
ever, that the limitation of sentence in case of conviction’ to re-
moval from office and disqualification for further office-holding is
a new feature.) Even the much-praised process of the veto is
taken en bloc from the Massachusetts Constitution of 1780, and the
slight changes are so evidently introduced as improvements on the
language alone as to show that the substance was copied. *

“The adoption of different bases for the two Houses—the House
of Representatives representing the States according to population,
while the Senate represented them equally—was one of the most
important pieces of work which the Convention accomplished as
well as the one which it reached most unwillingly. All the States
had been experimenting to find different bases for their two Houses.
Virginia had come nearest to the appearance of the final result
in having her Senate chosen by districts and her representatives by
counties ; and, as the Union already Nad -its ‘districts’ formed (in
the States), one might think that the Convention merely followed
Virginia’s experience. But the real process was far different and
more circuitous. There were eleven States. represented in the
Convention, New Hampshire taking New York’s place when the
latter withdrew, and Rhode Island sending no delegates. Roughly
speaking, five States wanted the ‘Virginia plan’ above stated ;
five wanted one House as in the Confederation with State equality
in it; and one (Connecticut) had a plan of its-own to which the
other ten States finally acceded. The Connecticut system since

APPENDIX THE FEDERAL CONSTITUTION 547

1699, when its legislature was divided into two Houses, had main-
, tained the equality of the towns in the Lower House, while choosing
the members of the Upper House from the whole people. In
like manner its delegates now proposed that the States should be
equally represented in the Senate, while the House of Representa-
tives, chosen from the States in proportion to population, should
represent the people numerically. The proposition was renewed
again and again for nearly a month until the two main divisions
of the Convention, unable to agree, accepted the ‘Connecticut com-
promise,’ as Bancroft calls it, and the peculiar constitution of the
Senate was adopted.

“The President’s office was simply a development of that of
the governors of the States. The name itself had been familiar ;
Delaware, New Hampshire, Pennsylvania, and South Carolina, had
used the title of President instead of that of Governor. In all the
States the governor was commander-in-chief, except that in Rhode
Tsland he was to have the advice of six assistants, and the major
part of the freemen, before entering upon his duties. The President's
pardoning power was drawn from the example of the States; they
had granted it to the governors (in some cases with the advice of
a council) in all the States except Connecticut, Rhode Island, and
Georgia,”where it was retained to the legislature, and in South
Carolina, where it seems to have been forgotten in the Constitution
of 1778, but was given to the governor in 1790. The governor
was elected directly by the people in Connecticut, Massachusetts,
New York, and Rhode Island, and indirectly by the two Houses in
the other eight States; and in this nearly equal division we may,
perhaps, find a reason for the Convention’s hesitation to adopt either
system, and for its futile attempt to introduce an electoral system, as
a compromise. The power given to the Senate of ratifying or
rejecting the President’s appointments seems to have been an echo
of .New York’s council of appointment; the most strenuous and
persistent efforts were made to provide a council to share in appoint-
ments with the President ; the admission of the Senate as a substi-
tute was the furthest concession which the majority would make ;
and hardly any failure of details caused more heart-burnings than
the rejection of this proposed council for appointments.

“The President’s power of filling vacancies, by commissions to
expire at the end ‘of the next session of the Senate, is taken in
terms from the Constitution of North Carolina.

548 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT APPENDIX

“ Almost every State prescribed a form of oath for its officers ;
the simple and impressive oath of the President seems to have been
taken from that of Pennsylvania, with a suggestion, much improved
in language, from the oath of allegiance of the same State. The office
of vice-president was evidently suggested by that of the deputy,
or lieutenant-governor (in four States the vice-president) of the
States. The exact prototype of the office of vice-president is to
be found in that of the lieutenant-governor of New York. He was
to preside in the Senate, without a vote, except in case of a* tie,
was to succeed the governor, when succession was necessary, and
was to be succeeded by the President pro tempore of the Senate.

“ The provisions for the recognition of inter-State citizenship, and
for the rendition of fugitive slaves and criminals, were a necessity
in any such form of government as was contemplated, but were not
at all new. They had formed a part of the eighth article of the
New England Confederation of 1643. Finally the first ten
amendments, which were tacitly taken as a part of the’ original
instrument, are merely a selection from the substance or the spirit of
the Bills of Rights which preceded so many of the State constitutions.

“The most solid and excellent work done by the Convention
was its statement of the powers of Congress (in § 8 of Art. i.)
and its definition of the sphere of the Federal’ judiciary (in Art.
iii.) The results in both of these cases were due, like the powers
denied to the States and to the United States (in §§ 9 and 10 of
Art. i.), to the previous experience of government by the States
alone. For eleven years or more (to say nothing of the antecedent
colonial experience) the people had been engaged in their State.
governments in an exhaustive analysis of the powers of government,
The failures in regard to some, the successes in regard to others,
were all before the Convention for its consideration and guidance.

“Not creative genius, but wise ard discreet selection was the
proper work of the Convention; and its success was due to the
clear perception of the antecedent failures and successes, and to the
self-restraint of its members.

“The (presidential) electoral system was almost the only feature
of the Constitution not suggested by State experience, almost the
only feature which was purely artificial, not a natural growth ; it
was the ope which met with least criticism from contemporary
opponents of the Constitution and most unreserved praise from the
Federalist ; and democracy has ridden right over it.”

APPENDIX RULES OF THE SENATE 549

NOTE to CHAPTER X
EXTRACTS FROM THE RULES OF THE SENATE

A QuoRuM shall consist of a majority of the senators, duly chosen
and sworn.

The legislative, the executive, the confidential legislative pro-
ceedings, and the proceedings when sitting as a Court of Impeach-
ment, shall each be recorded in a separate book.

When the yeas and nays are ordered, the names of senators
shall be called alphabetically ; and each senator shall, without
debate, declare his assent or dissent to the question, unless excused
by the Senate; and no senator shall be permitted to vote after the
decision shall have been announced by the presiding officer, but
may for sufficient reasons, with unanimous consent, change or with-
draw his vote.

When a senator declines to vote on call of his name, he shall be
required to assign his reasons therefor, and on his having assigned
them, the presiding officer shall submit the question to the Senate,
“Shall the senator for the reasons assigned by him, be excused
from votfng’?” which shall be decided without debate.

Every bill and joint resolution shall receive three readings
previous to its passage ; which readings shall be on three different
days, unless the Senate unanimously direct otherwise ; and the
presiding officer shall give notice at each reading whether it be the
first, second, or third.

When a senator desires to speak he shall rise and address the
presiding officer, and shall not proceed until he is recognised, and
the presiding officer shall recognise the senator who shall first
address him. No senator shall interrupt another senator in debate
without his consent, and to obtain such consent he shall first
address the presiding officer ; and no senator shall speak more than
twice upon any one question in debate on the same day, without
leave of the Senate, which shall be determined without debate.

Any motion or resolution may be withdrawn or modified by the
mover at any time before a decision, amendment, or ordering of the
yeas and nays, except a motion to re-consider, which shall not be
withdrawn without leave, ;

In the appointment of the standing committees, the Senate,

550 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT APPENDIX

t :
unless otherwise ordered, shall proceed by ballot to appoint severally
the chairman of each committee, and then, by one ballot, the other
members necessary to complete the same. A majority of the whole
number of votes given shall be necessary to the choice of a chairman
of a standing committee, but a plurality of votes shall elect the
other members thereof. All other committees shall be appointed
by ballot, unless otherwise ordered, and a plurality of votes shall
appoint.

At the second or any subsequent session of a Congress,*the
legislative business which remained undetermined at the close of
the next preceding session of that Congress shall be resumed and
proceeded with in the same manner as if no adjournment of the
Senate had taken place.

On a motion made and seconded to close the doors of the
Senate, on the discussion of any business which may, in the opinion
of a senator, require secrecy, the presiding officer shall direct the
galleries to be cleared ; and during the discussion of such ‘motion
the doors shall remain ‘eloaeds

When the President of the United States shall meet the Senate
in the Senate chamber for the consideration of executive business,
he shall have a seat on the right of the presiding officer, When
the Senate shall be convened by the President of the United States
to any other place, the presiding officer of the Senate and the
senators shall attend at the place appointed, with the necessary
officers of the Senate. ;

When acting upon confidential or executive business the Senate
chamber shall be cleared of all persons except the secretary, the
chief clerk, the principal legislative clerk, the executive clerk, the
minute and journal clerk, the sergeant-at-arms, the assistant door-
keeper, and such other officers as the presiding officer shall think
necessary, and all such officers shall be’Sworn to secrecy,

All confidential communications made by the President of the
United States to the Senate shall be by the senators and the
officers of the Senate kept secret; and all treaties which may be
laid before the Senate, and all remarks, votes, and proceedings
thereon, shall also be kept secret until the Senate shall, by their re-
solution, take off the injunction of secrecy.

Any senator or officer of the Senate who shall disclose the
secret or confidential business or proceedings of the Senate shall be
liable, if a senator, to suffer expulsion from the body; and if an

APPENDIX PRIVATE BILLS 5st

officer, to dismissal from the service of the Senate, and to punish-
ment for contempt.

On the final question to advise and consent to the ratification
of a treaty in the form agreed to, the concurrence of two-thirds of the
senators present shall be necessary to determine it in the affirmative ;
but all other motions and questions upon a treaty shall be decided
by a majority vote, except a motion to postpone indefinitely, which
shall be decided by a vote of two-thirds,

”When nominations shall be made by the President of the
United States to the Senate, they shall, unless otherwise ordered,
be referred to appropriate committees; and the final question
on every nomination shall be, “ Will the Senate advise and consent
to this nomination?” Which question shall not’ be put on the
same day on which the nomination is received, nor on the day on
which it may be reported by a committee, unless by unanimous
consent.

All information communicated or remarks made by a senator,
when acting upon nominations, concerning the character or qualifica-
tions of the person nominated, also all votes upon any nomination,
shall be kept secret. If, however, charges shall be made against
a person nominated, the committee may, in its discretion, notify
such nominee thereof, but the name of the person making such
charges shall not be disclosed. The fact that a nomination has
been made, or that it’has been confirmed or rejected, shall not be
regarded as a secret.

NOTE (A) ro CHAPTER XVI
PRIVATE BILLS

In England a broad distinction is drawn between public bills
and local or private bills. The former class includes measures of
general application, altering or adding to the general law of the
land, The latter includes measures intended to apply only to some
particular place or person, as for instance, bills incorporating rail-
way or gas or water companies or extending the powers of such
bodies, bills authorizing municipalities to execute public improve- .
ments, as well as estate bills, bills relating to charitable founda-

552 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT APPENDIX

tions, and (for Ireland) divorce bills. Bills of the local and personal
class have for’ many years past been treated differently from
public bills. They are brought in, as it is expressed, on petition,
and not on motion. Notice is required to be given of such a bill
by advertisement nearly three months before the usual date of the
meeting of Parliament, and copies must be deposited some weeks
before the opening of the session. The second reading is usually
granted as a matter of course ; and after second reading, instead of
being, like a public bill, considered in committee of the whole Hotse,
it goes (if opposed) to a private bill committee consisting (usually)
of four members, who take evidence regarding it from the promoters
and opponents, and hear counsel argue for and against its preamble
and its clauses. In fact, the proceedings on private bills are to some
extent of a judicial nature, although of course the committee must
have regard to considerations of policy.

Pecuniary claims against the Government are in England not
raised by way of private bill. They are presented in the courts by
a proceeding called a petition of right, the Crown allowing itself to
be sued by one of its subjects.

In America no such difference of treatment as the above exists
between public and private bills ; all are dealt with in substantially
the same way by the usual legislative methods. A bill of & purely
local or personal nature gets its second reading as a matter of course,
like a bill of general application, is similarly referred to the appro-
priate committee (which may hear evidence regarding it, but does
not hear counsel), is considered and if necessary amended by the
committee, is, if time permits, reported back to the House, and
there takes its chance among the jostling crowd of ‘other bills,
Fridays, however, being specially set apart for the consideration of
private business. There is a calendar of private bills, and those
which get a place early upon it have a chance of passing.” A
great many are unopposed, and can be hurried through “by unani-
mous consent.” :

Private bills are in America even more multifarious in their
contents, as well as incomparably more numerous, than in England,
although they do not include the vast mass of bills for the creation

1 The official distinction in the yearly editions of the Statutes is into Publio
General Acts, Public Acts of a local character (which include Provisional Order
Acts), and Local Acts, and Private Acts. But in ordinary speech, those measures

which are brought in at the instance of particular persons for a loca) purpose are
called private.

APPENDIX PRIVATE BILLS 553

or regulation of various public undertakings within a particular
State, since these would fall within the province of the State legis-
lature. They include three classes practically unknown in England,
pension bills, which propose to grant a pension to some person
(usually a soldier or his widow), bills for satisfying some claim
of an individual against the Federal Government, and bills for
dispensing in particular cases with a variety of administrative
statutes. Matters which would in England be naturally left to be
deXlt with at the discretion of the executive are thus assumed by
the legislature, which is (for reasons that will appear in later chapters)
more anxious to narrow the sphere of the executive than are the
ruling legislatures of European countries. I subjoin from the
private bills of the session of 1880-81 some instances showing
how wide is the range of congressional interference.

In tHE House oF REPRESENTATIVES.

Read twice, referred to the Committee on Invalid Pensions, and
ordered to be printed.
Mr. Murch introduced the following bill :—
A BILL
* For the relief of James E. Gott.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
United States of America in Congress Assembled.
That the Secretary of the Interior be, and he is hereby,
Authorized and directed to increase the pension of James E.
Gott, late a member of Company A, Fourteenth Regiment,
Maine Volunteers, to twenty-four dollars per month.

Qo fF WL Re

Read twice, referred to the Committee on War Claims, and

ordered to be printed.
A BILL

For the relief of the heirs of George W. Hayes.

Be it enacted, ete.

That the proper accounting officer of the Treasury be, and he is
hereby, directed to pay to the heirs of George W. Hayes, of North
Carolina, the sum of four hundred and fifty dollars, for three mules
furnished the United States Army in eighteen hundred and sixty-
four, for which they hold proper vouchers,

554 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT APPENDIX

Read twice, referred to the Committee on Commerce, and

ordered to be printed.
A BILL
To establish a fog-bell or fog-bell buoy on Graham Shoals, in the
Straits of Mackinaw, and State of Michigan.

Be it enacted, etc.

That the Secretary of War be authorized and directed to
establish and maintain a fog-bell or fog-bell buoy on Graham Shoals,
so called, in the Straits of Mackinaw, in the State of Michigan. *

Read twice, and referred to the Committee on Naval Affairs.
A BILL

For the relief of Thomas G. Corbin.

Be it enacted, ete.

That the President of the United States be, and is héreby,
authorized to restore Thomas G. Corbin, now a captain on the
retired list of the Navy, to the active list, and to take rank next
after Commodore J. W. A. Nicholson, with restitution, from Decem-
ber twelfth, eighteen hundred and seventy-three, of the difference
of pay between that of a commodore on the active list, on # waiting
orders” pay, and that of a captain retired on half-pay, to be paid
out of any money in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated.

Read twice, referred to the Committee on Ways and Means, and
ordered to be printed.
Mr. Robinson introduced the following joint resolution :—

JOINT RESOLUTION
Authorizing the remission or refunding“of duty on a painted-glass
, window from London, England, for All Souls’ Church, in
Washington, District of Columbia.
Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States
of America in Congress Assembled.

That the Secretary of the Treasury be, and he is hereby,
authorized and directed to remit or refund, as the case may be, the
duties paid or accruing upon a painted-glass window from London,
England, for All Souls’ Church, in Washington, District of Columbia,
imported, or to be imported into Baltimore, Maryland, or other port.

AehEND RE THE LOBBY 355
ee eee ts ee Os ee

NOTE (B) to CHAPTER XVI
THE LOBBY

“The Lobby” is the name given in America to persons, not
being members of a legislature, who undertake to influence its
members, and thereby to secure the passing of bills. The term
inéludes both those who, since they hang about the chamber, and make
a regular profession of working upon members, are called “ lobbyists,”
and those persons who on any particular occasion may come up to
advocate, by argument or solicitation, any particular measure in which
they happen to be interested. The name, therefore, does not neces-
sarily impute any improper motive or conduct, though it is commonly
used in what Bentham calls a dyslogistic sense.

The causes which have produced lobbying are easily explained.
Every legislative body has wide powers of affecting the interests
and fortunes of private individuals, both for good and for evil. It
entertains in every session some public bills, and of course many
more private (ie. local or personal) bills, which individuals are
interested in supporting or resisting. Such, for instance, are public
bills imposing customs duties or regulating the manufacture or sale of
particular articles (e.g. intoxicants, explosives), and private bills estab-
lishing railroad or other companies, or granting public franchises,
or (in State legislatures) altering the areas of local government, or
varying the taxing or borrowing powers of municipalities. When
such bills are before a legislature, the promoters and the opponents
naturally seek to represent their respective views, and to enforce
them upon the members with whom the decision rests. So far there
is nothing wrong, for advocacy of this kind is needed in order to
bring the facts fairly before the legislature.

Now both in America and in England it has been found necessary,
owing to the multitude of bills and the difficulty of discussing them
in a large body, to refer private bills to committees for investigation ;
and the legislature has in both countries formed the habit of
accepting generally, though not invariably, the decisions of a com-
mittee upon the bills it has dealt with. America has, however, gone
farther than England, for Congress refers all public bills as well as
private bills to committees, And whereas in England private bills
are dealt with by a semi-judicial procedure, the promoters and

556 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT APPENDIX

opponents appearing by professional agents and barristers, in
America no such procedure has been created, either in Congress
or in the State legislatures, and private bills are handled much like
public ones. Moreover, the range of private bills is wider in
America than in England, in respect that they are used to obtain
the satisfaction of claims by private persons against the Govern-
ment, whereas in England such claims would either be brought
before a law-court in the form of a Petition of Right, or, though
this rarely happens, be urged upon the executive by a motion mude
in Parliament.

We see, therefore, that in the United States—

All business goes before committees, not only private bills but
public bills, often involving great pecuniary interests,

To give a bill a fair chance of passing, the committee must be
induced to report in favour of it.

The committees have no quasi-judicial rules of procedure, but
inquire into and amend bills in their uncontrolled discretion, upon
such evidence or other statements as they choose to admit or use.

Bills are advocated before committees by persons not belonging
to any recognized and legally regulated body. :

The committees, both in the State legislatures and in the Federal
House of Representatives, are largely composed of new men unused
to the exercise of the powers entrusted to them.

It results from the foregoing state of facts that the efforts of the
promoters and opponents of a bill will be concentrated upon the
committee to which the bill has been referred ; and that when the
interests affected are large it will be worth while to employ every
possible engine of influence. Such influence can be better applied
by those who have skill and a tact matured by experience ; for it
is no easy matter to know how to handle a committee collectively
and its members individually. Accordingly, a class of persons
springs up whose profession it is to influence committees for or
against bills. There is nothing necessarily legitimate in doing so.
As Mr. Spofford remarks :

“What is known as lobbying by no means implies in all cases
the use of money to affect legislation. This corruption is frequently
wholly absent in cases where the lobby is most industrious, numer-
ous, persistent, and successful. A measure which it is desired to
pass into law, for the benefit of certain interests represented, may
be urged upon members of the legislative body in every form of

APPENDIX THE LOBBY 557

influence except the pecuniary one. By casual interviews, by in-
formal conversation, by formal presentation of facts and arguments,
by printed appeals in pamphlet form, by newspaper communications
and leading articles, by personal introductions from or through men
of supposed influence, by dinners, receptions, and other entertain-
ments, by the arts of social life and the charms of feminine attrac-
tion, the public man is beset to look favourably upon the measure
which interested parties seek to have enacted. It continually
happens that new measures or modifications of old ones are agitated
in which vast pecuniary interests are involved. The power of the
law, which when faithfully administered is supreme, may make or
unmake the fortunes of innumerable corporations, business firms, or
individuals. Changes in the tariff duties, in the internal revenue
taxes, in the banking system, in the mining statutes, in the land
laws, in the extension of patents, in the increase of pensions, in the
regulation of mail contracts, in the currency of the country, or pro-
posed appropriations for steamship subsidies, for railway legislation,
for war damages, and for experiments in multitudes of other fields
of legislation equally or more important, come before Congress. It
is inevitable that each class of interests liable to be affected should
seek its own advantage in the result. When this is done legitimately,
by preséntation and proof of facts, by testimony, by arguments, by
printed or personal appeals to the reason and sense of justice of
members, there can be no objection to it.”}

Just as a plaintiff in a lawsuit may properly employ an attorney
and barrister, 80 a promoter may properly employ a lobbyist. But
there is plainly a risk of abuse. In legal proceedings, the judge and:
jury are bound to take nothing into account except the law and the
facts proved in evidence. It would be an obvious breach of dutyshould
a judge decide in favour of a plaintiff because he had dined with or
been importuned by him (as in the parable), or received £50 from
him. The judge is surrounded by the safeguards, not only of
habit but of opinion, which would condemn his conduct and cut
short his career were he to yield to any private motive. The
attorney and barrister are each of them also members of a recog-
nized profession, and would forfeit its privileges were they to be
detected in the attempt to employ underhand influence. No such
safeguards surround either the member of a committee or the

1Mr. A. R. Spofford (Librarian of Congress) in American Cyclopedia of
Political Science, Article ‘‘ Lobby.”

558 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT APPENDIX

lobbyist. The former usually comes out of obscurity, and returns
to it; the latter does not belong to any disciplined profession.
Moreover, the questions which the committee has to decide are not
questions of law, nor always questions of fact, but largely ques-
tions of policy, on which reasonable men need not agree, and as to
which it is often impossible to say that there is a palpably right
view or wrong view, because the determining considerations will be
estimated differently by different minds.

These dangers in the system of private bill legislation made
themselves so manifest in England, especially during the great
era of railway construction some fifty years ago, as to have led to
the adoption of the quasi-judicial procedure described in the Note
on Private Bills, and to the erection of parliamentary agents into a
regularly constituted profession, bound by professional rules. Public
opinion has fortunately established the doctrine that each member of
a private bill committee is to be considered as a semi-judicial person,
whose vote neither a brother member nor any outsider must'‘attempt
to influence, but who is bound to decide, as far as he can, in a judicial
spirit on the footing of the evidence tendered. Of course practice
is not up to the level of theory in Parliament any more than else-
where ; still there is little solicitation to members of committees,
and an almost complete absence of even the suspicion of corruption.

“In the United States,” says an experienced American publicist,
whose opinion I have inquired, “though lobbying is perfectly
legitimate in theory, yet the secrecy and want of personal responsi-
bility, the confusion and want of system in the committees, make it
rapidly degenerate into a process of intrigue, and fall into the hands
of the worst men. It is so disagreeable and humiliating that all
men shrink from it, unless those who are stimulated by direct
personal interest ; and these soon throw away all scruples. The
most dangerous men are ex-members, who know how things are to
be managed.”

That this unfavourable view is the prevailing one, appears not
merely from what one hears in society or reads in the newspapers,
though in America one must discount a great deal of what rumour
asserts regarding illicit influence, but from the constitutions and
statutes of some States, which endeavour to repress it.

What has been said above applies equally to Congress and to
the State legislatures, and to some extent also to the municipal
councils of the great cities. All legislative bodies which control

APPENDIX THE LOBBY 559

important pecuniary interests are as sure to have a lobby as an
army to have its camp-followers, Where the body is, there will the
vultures be gathered together. Great and wealthy States, like New
York and Pennsylvania, support the largest and most active lobbies.
It must, however, be remembered that although no man of good
position would like to be called a lobbyist, still such men are often
obliged to do the work of lobbying—i.e. they must dance attend-
ance on a committee, and endeavour to influence its members for
tha sake of getting their measure through. They may have to do
this in the interests of the good government of a city, or the reform
of a charity, no less than for some private end.

The permanent professional staff of lobbyists at Washington is
of course from time to time recruited by persons interested in some
particular enterprise, who combine with one, two, or more profes-
sionals in trying to push it through. Thus there are at Washington,
says Mr. Spofford, “pension lobbyists, tariff lobbyists, steamship
subsidy lobbyists, railway lobbyists, Indian ring-lobbyists, patent
lobbyists, river and harbour lobbyists, mining lobbyists, bank
lobbyists, mail-contract lobbyists, war damages lobbyists, back-pay
and bounty lobbyists, Isthmus canal lobbyists, public building
lobbyists, State claims lobbyists, cotton-tax lobbyists, and French
spoliatiots lobbyists. Of the office-seeking lobbyists at Washington
it may be said that their name is legion. There are even artist
lobbyists, bent upon wheedling Congress into buying bad paintings
and worse sculptures; and too frequently with success. At times
in our history there has been a British lobby, with the most genteel
accompaniments, devoted to watching legislation affecting the great
importing and shipping interests.”

A committee whose action can affect the tariff is of course an
important one, and employs a large lobby.! I remember to have
heard an anecdote of a quinine manufacturer, who had kept a lawyer
ag his agent to “look after” a committee during a whole session,
and prevent them from touching the duty on that drug. On the
last day of sitting the agent went home, thinking the danger past.
As soon as he had gone, the committee suddenly recommended
an alteration of the duty, on the impulse of some one who had
been watching all the time for his opportunity.

1 The phrase one often hears “‘ there was a strong lobby” (i.e for or against
such and such a bill) denotes that the interests and influences represented were
numerous and powerful.

560 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT APPENDIX

+ Women are said to be among the most active and successful
lobbyists at Washington.

Efforts have been made to check the practice of lobbying, both
in Congress and in State legislatures. Statutes have been passed
severely punishing any person who offers any money or value to any
member with a view to influence his vote.1 It has been repeatedly
held by the courts that “contracts which have for their object to
influence legislation in any other manner than by such open and
public presentation of facts, argiiments, and appeals to reasonsas
are recognized as proper and legitimate with all public bodies,
must be held void.” It has also been suggested that a regular
body of attorneys, authorized to act as agents before committees of
Congress, should be created. A bill for this purpose was laid before
the Senate in January 1875.8

In many States an attempt has been made to check the evils
consequent on lobbying, by restraining the legislature from passing
special laws in a great variety of cases. See post, Chapter XL.

1 As to Congress, sce § 5450 of Revised Statutes of the United States. The
provisions of State Statutes are too numerous to mention. The Constitution of
California declares lobbying to be a felony ; Georgia calls it a crime.

2 Cooley, Constit. Limit., p. 166. He adds, ‘‘ While counsel may be properly
employed to present the reasons in favour of any public measure to the body author-
ized to pass upon it, or to any of its committees empowered to collect’ facts and
hear arguments, and parties interested may lawfully contract to pay for this ser-
vice, yet secretly to approach the members of such a body with a view to influence ‘
their action at a time and in a manner that do not allow the presentation of
opposite views, is improper and unfair to the opposing interest, and a contract
to pay for this irregular and improper service would not be enforced by the law.”
He quotes abundant judicial authority in support of this doctrine ; among others,
the following observations of Justice Chapman, in Frost v. Belmont, 6 Allen, 152 :—

‘*Though Committees properly dispense with many of the rules which regu-
late hearings before judicial tribunals, yet common fairness requires that neither
party shall be permitted to have secret consultations and exercise secret influences
that are kept from the knowledge of the other party. ‘The business of ‘lobby
members’ is not to go fairly and openly before the committees and present state-
ments, proofs, and arguments, ‘that the other side has an opportunity to meet and
refute if they are wrong, but to go secretly to the members and ply them with
statements and arguments that the other side cannot openly meet, however
erroneous they may be, and to bring illegitimate influences to bear upon them.
If the ‘lobby member’ is selected because of his political or personal influence,
it aggravates the wrong. If his business is to unite various interests by means of
projects that are called ‘log-rolling,’ it is still worse. The practice of procuring
members of the legislature to act under the influence of what they have eaten and
drunk at houses of entertainment tends to render those who yield to such in-
fluences wholly unfit to act in such cases. They are disqualified, from acting
fairly towards interested parties or towards the public.”

3 See an article in the Century Magazine for April 1886, p. 963.

aprenpix. ENGLISH UNIVERSITIES’ FEDERAL SYSTEM 561

NOTE to CHAPTER XXVII
THE FEDERAL SYSTEM OF THE ENGLISH UNIVERSITIES

THE structure of the American Federation may be illustrated by
a federal system familiar to many Englishmen from ‘its existence in
the two ancient universities of Oxford and Cambridge, as they stood
con8tituted twenty years ago. The analogy, which recent legisla-
tion has rendered less perfect to-day than it was then, appears in
four points.

I. Each of these universities was then for some pwrposes a feder-
ation of colleges. Every member of it was also a member of some *
college or hall;! as no one can he an active citizen of the United
States who is not a citizen of some State. The colleges made up
the university as the States make up the Union. But the university
was and is something distinct from the colleges taken together. It

‘has a sphere of its own, laws of its own, a government of its own, a

revenue and budget of its own. So has each of the colleges. Each
member has two patriotisms, that of his college, that of the uni-
versity ; just as each American citizen has his State patriotism as
well as his national patriotism.

II. Tho university has a direct and immediate jurisdiction over
every one of its members, distinct from the jurisdiction exercised by
the colleges over the same persons. An offender may be punished
for certain offences by a university tribunal, for certain others by a
college tribunal, for some by both tribunals. So every citizen lives
under the jurisdiction of the Union as well as under that of his
State.

1 By a recent statute of the University of Oxford (which I take for the sake of
Simplicity), reverting to its earlier constitution before the college monopoly had
been established, persons have been admitted to be members who are not members
of any college or hall; they are, however, treated for some purposes as collectively
constituting a community similar to a college. They might be compéred to
United States citizens resident in the Territories, were it not that the citizen
in a Territory enjoys no share in the national government, whereas the Oxford
non-collegiate graduate can vote in Convocation and Congregation and for the
election of members of Council.

There is of course this remarkable difference between the two cases I am com-
paring, that in the English universities the university is older than the colleges,
whereas in America the States are older than the nation. The federal character
of Oxford dates only from the time of Archbishop Laud.

VOL. I 20

562 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT APPENDIX

III. The governing authorities of the university are created
partly by the direct action of its members as graduates, partly by
that of the colleges as communities. So in America Congress is
created partly by the citizens as citizens, partly by the States as
communities. Before the reforms of 1854 the part played by the
colleges was much greater than it is now, because the Council, which
is a sort of Upper House of the university legislature, consisted
entirely of heads of colleges.

IV. The university has very little authority over the collages
as corporations, and indeed scarcely comes in contact with them all.
Under a recent statute they are obliged to make certain contributions
to the university, and to send a copy of their accounts to a univer-
sity office. But they are self-governing; the university cannot
interfere with their internal management, nor with the exercise of
their jurisdiction over their members, which is their own and not
delegated by it. So the States exercise an original and not a dele-
gated authority over their citizens, and cannot be controlled by the
National government in respect of all those numerous matters as to
which the Constitution leaves them free.

NOTE (A) ro CHAPTER XXX
CONSTITUTION OF THE CONFEDERATE STATES, 1861-65

Tue Constitution adopted 11th March 1861 by the Slave States
which seceded from the Union and formed the short-lived Southern
Confederacy, was a reproduction of the Federal Constitution of
1788-89, with certain variations, interesting because they show the
points in which the States’ Rights party thought the Federal Con-
stitution defective as inadequately safeguarding the rights of the
several States, and because they embody certain other changes
which have often been advocated as likely to improve the working
of that instrument.
The most important of these variations are the following :—

Art, i. § 2. A provision is inserted permitting the impeachment of a
Federal officer acting within the limits of any State by a vote of two-
thirds of the legislature thereof.

Art. i. § 6. There is added: “Congress may by -law grant to the
principal officer in each of the executive departments, a seat upon the

APPENDIX CONSTITUTION OF CONFEDERATE STATES 563

floor of either House, with the privilege of discussing any measure apper-
taining to his department.”

Art. i. § 7. The President is permitted to veto any particular item or
items in an appropriation bill.

Art. i. § 8. The imposition of protective duties and the granting of
bounties on industry are forbidden, and the granting of money for in-
ternal improvements is strictly limited.

Art. i. § 9. Congress isforbidden to appropriate money from the Treasury,
except by a vote of two-thirds of both Houses, unless it be asked by the
head of a department and submitted by the President, or be for the pay-
ment of its own expenses, or of claims against the Confederacy declared
by a judicial tribunal to be just.

Art. ii. § 1. The President and Vice-President are to be elected for
six years, and the President is not to be re-eligible.

Art. ii. § 2. The President is given power to remove the highest
officials at his pleasure, and others for good cause, reporting the removals
to the Senate.

Art, v. The process for amending the Constitution is to be by a Conven-
tion of all the States, followed by the ratification of two-thirds of the States.

Of these changes, the third and fifth were-obvious improve-
ments ; and much may be said in favour of the second and eighth.
The second was a slight approximation towards the Cabinet
system of England.?

I omit the important changes relating to slavery, which was
fully pretected, because these have only a historical interest.

The working of the Constitution of the Confederate States
cannot be fairly judged, because it was conducted under the

“exigencies of a war, which nécessarily gave it a despotic turn. The
executive practically got its way. Congress usually sat in secret
and “did little beyond register laws prepared by the executive, and
debate resolutions for the vigorous conduct of the war. Outside of
the ordinary powers conferred by the legislature, the war powers
openly or practically exercised by the executive were more sweeping
and general than those assumed by President Lincoln.” Alexander
Johnston in American Cyclopedia of Political Science, Art. “ Con-
federate States.”

1 A singular combination of the Presidential with the Cabinet system may be
found in the present Constitution of the Hawaiian kingdom, promulgated 7th
July 1887, Framed under the influence of American traditions, it keeps the
Cabinet, which consists of four ministers, out of the legislature, but having an
irresponsible hereditary monarch, it is obliged to give the legislature the power
of dismissing them by a vote of want of confidence. The legislature consists of
two sets of elective members, Nobles (unpaid), and Representatives (paid), who

sit and vote together. Two successive legislatures can alter the Constitution by
certain prescribed majorities ; the Constitution is therefore a Rigid one,

564 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT APPENDIX

NOTE (B) to CHAPTER XXX
THE FEDERAL CONSTITUTION OF CANADA

Tuer Federal Constitution of the Dominion of Canada is contained
in the British North America Act 1867, a statute of the British
Parliament (30 Vict. c. 3). I note a few of the many points in
which it deserves to be compared with that of the United States.

The Federal or Dominion Government is conducted on tho so-
called “Cabinet system” of England, i.e. the Ministry sit in Parlia-
ment, and hold office at the pleasure of the House of Commons.
The Governor-General is in the position of an irresponsible and
permanent executive similar to that of the Crown in Great Britain,
acting on the advice of responsible ministers. He can dissolve
Parliament. The Upper House or Senate is composed of 78
persons, nominated for life by the Governor-General, i.e. the Ministry.
The House of Commons has at present 210 members, who are
elected for five years. Both senators and members receive salarics.
The Senate has very little power or influence. The Governor-
General has a veto but rarely exercises it, and may reserve a bill
for the Queen’s pleasure. The judges, not only of the Federal or
Dominion Courts, but also of the Provinces, are appointed by the
Crown, i.e. by the Dominion Ministry, and hold for good behaviour.

Each of the Provinces, at present seven in number, has a leyis-
lature of its own, which, however, consists in Ontario, British
Columbia, and Manitoba, of one House only, and a Lieutenant-
Governor, with a right of veto on the acts of the legislature, which
he seldom exercises. Members of the Dominion Parliament cannot
sit in a Provincial legislature.

The Governor-General has a right af disallowing acts of a Pro-
vincial legislature, and sometimes exerts it, especially when a legis-
lature is deemed to have exceeded its constitutional competence.

In each of the Provinces there is a responsible Ministry, working
on the Cabinet system of England.

The distribution of matters within the competence of the
Dominion Parliament and of the Provincial legislatures respectively,
bears a general resemblance to that existing in the United States ;
but there is this remarkable distinction, that whereas in the United

} See also 34 & 35 Vict. ¢, 28, and 49 & 50 Vict. c. 35.

APPENDIX THE DARTMOUTH COLLEGE CASE 565

States, Congress has only the powers actually granted to it, the State
legislatures retaining all such powers as have not been taken from
thom, the Dominion Parliament has a general power of legislation,
restricted only by the grant of certain specific and exclusive powers
to the Provincial legislatures (s§ 91-95). Criminal law is reserved
for the Dominion Parliament; and no province has the right to
maintain a military force. Questions as to the constitutionality
of a statute, whether of the Dominion Parliament or of a Pro-
viacial legislature, come before the courts in the ordinary way, and
if appealed, before the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council
in England.

The Constitution of the Dominion was never submitted to
popular vote, and can be altered only by the British Parliament,
except as regards certain points left to itsown legislature. It was
drafted by a sort of convention in Canada, and enacted en bloc by
the British Parliament. There exists no power of amending the
Provincial constitutions by popular vote similar to that which the
peoples of the several States exercise in the United States.

NOTE to CHAPTER XXXIII
THE DARTMOUTH COLLEGE CASE

Tue famous case of Dartmouth College v. Woodward (4 Wheat. 518),
decided in 1818, has been so often brought up in English discussions,
that it seems proper to give a short account of it, taken from an
authoritative source, an address by Mr. Justice Miller (senior justice,
and one of the most eminent members, of the Supreme court), de-
livered before the University of Michigan, June 1887.

“Tt may well be doubted whether any decision ever delivered by
any court has had such a pervading operation and influence in
controlling legislation as this. It is founded upon the clause of
the Constitution (Art. i. § 10) which declares that no State shall
make any law impairing the obligation of contracts.

“Dartmouth College existed as a corporation under a charter
granted by the British Crown to its trustees in New Hampshire,
in the year 1769. This charter conferred upon them the entire
governing power of the college, and among other powers that of

566 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT APPENDIX

filling up all vacancies occurring in their own body, and of remov-
ing and appointing tutors, It also declared that the number of
trustees should for ever consist of twelve and no more.

“After the Revolution, the legislature of New Hampshire
passed a law to amend the charter, to improve and enlarge the
corporation. It increased the number of trustees to twenty-one,
gave the appointment of the additional members to the executive of
the State, and created a board of overseers to consist of twenty-five
persons, of whom twenty-one were also to be appointed by tho
executive of New Hampshire. These overseers had power to
inspect and control the most important acts of the trustees.

“The Supreme court, reversing the decision of the Superior
court of New Hampshire, held that the original charter constituted
a contract between the Crown, in whom the power was then vested,
and the trustees of the college, which was impaired by the act of
the legislature above referred to. The opinion, to which there was
but one dissent, establishes the doctrine that the act of a govern-
ment, whether it be by a charter of the legislature or of the
Crown, which creates a corporation, is a contract between the state
and the corporation, and that all the essential franchises, powers,
and benefits conferred upon the corporation by the charter become,
when accepted by it, contracts within the meaning of the clause of
the Constitution referred to.

“The opinion has been of late years much criticized, as includ-
ing with the class of contracts whose foundation is in the legislative
action of the States, many which were not properly intended to be
so included by the framers of the Constitution, and it is undoubtedly
true that the Supreme court itself has been compelled of late years
to insist in this class of cases upon the existence of an actual con-
tract by the state with the corporation, when relief is sought against
subsequent legislation.

“The main feature of the case, namely, that a State can make a
contract by legislation, as well as in any other way, and that in no
such case shall a subsequent act of the legislature interpose any
effectual barrier to its enforcement, where it is enforceable in the
ordinary courts of justice, has remained. The result of this prin-
ciple has been to make void innumerable acts of State legisla-
tures, intended in times of disastrous financial depression and
suffering to protect the people from the hardships of a rigid and
prompt enforcement of the law in regard to their contracts, and to

APPENDIX AN AMERICAN VIEW OF PARLIAMENT 567

prevent the States from repealing, abrogating, or avoiding by legis-
lation contracts fairly entered into with other parties.

“This decision has stood from the day it was made to the
present hour as a great bulwark against popular effort through State
legislation to evade the payment of just debts, the performance of
obligatory contracts, and the general repudiation of the rights of
creditors.” ,

As here intimated, the broad doctrine laid down in this case has
been of late years considerably qualified and restricted. It has
also become the practice for States making contracts by grants to
which the principle of this decision could apply, to reserve power to
vary or annul them, so as to leave the hands of the State free.

NOTE to CHAPTER XXXV

The following remarks, with which I am favoured by an eminent
American publicist, Mr. Seth Low, ex-mayor of Brooklyn, indicate a
view which is beginning to be largely held beyond the Atlantic, and
may befound interesting by English readers :—

“England, for the whole of this century, has constantly been
modifying her system of government, which was largely feudal
in its character, and which still retains in great part the forms of
arbitrary power, in order to make it suitable for operation in con-
formity with modern democratic ideas. While this process has
produced remarkable results, there yet remains a great deal of
work of the same sort to be done before the problem of government
in England will be what it is in the United States, the simple effort
on the part of society as a whole to learn and to apply to itself the
art of government.

“So long as England’s problem continues ,to be largely of this
character, her omnipotent Parliament will continue to prove of ser-
vice to her. When, however, this process is substantially completed,
so that all men in England are politically equal, and all men equally
enjoy the right to take part in the government of the country, the
experience of the United States would indicate that an omnipotent
parliament would then be full of peril. The United States have
enjoyed the measure of prosperity which they have had by trusting

568 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT APPENDIX

completely the whole of society. But written constitutions, in the
nation and in each of the States, protect at once the individual, the
State, and the nation, from hasty and ill-considered action on the
part of majorities as to matters fundamental. Laws may be passed
by majorities, and may be removed by majorities, but majorities
cannot change, in a moment, the fundamental relations of govern-
ment to the people. In other words, written constitutions interpose
effectual bars of delay to the passions and the prejudices of the
people. The people have it in their power in the United States,
as surely as in England, to change even the fundamental features
of government. But they cannot do this under the impulse of a
mere whim. They can do it only by prolonged and intelligent
effort directed to this end through a series of years. How far those
who have been the governing classes in England, with her more
homogeneous population, can modify and control the passions and
prejudices of the people when all come to have a vote, so that hasty
action on vital matters shall never be had, is a matter upon which
no American can form a judgment. To the American mind, it seems
as though England’s omnipotent Parliament, which has been to her
so invaluable during this period of change from the feudal to the
democratic ideal, may before long become an instrument full of
danger to the state, unless, in some way, checks producing fhe same
effect as those which have been found necessary in the United
States, are placed upon the exercise of its omnipotence.”

ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION, 1781-1788

Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union between the States of New
Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay, Rhode Island and Providence Planta-
tions, Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware,
Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia.

Articue I, The style of this confederacy shall be, “The United
States of America.” ;

Art. II. Each State retains its sovereignty, freedom, and independence,
and every power, jurisdiction, and right, which is not by this confedera-
tion expressly delegated to the United States in Congress assembled.

Arr, IIT, The said States hereby severally enter into a firm league of
friendship with each other, for their common defence, the security of their
liberties, and their mutual and general welfare, binding themsclves to
assist eacn other against all force offered to, or attacks made upon them,
or any of them, on account of religion, sovereignty, trade, or any other
pretence whatever.

Art. IV. The better to secure and perpetuate mutual friendship and

intercourse among the people of the different States in this Union, the
free inhabitants of each of these States, paupers, vagabonds, and fugitives
from justice excepted, shall be entitled to all privileges and immunities of
free citizens in the several States ; and the people of each State shall have
free ingress and regress to and from any other State, and shail enjoy
therein all the privileges of trade and commerce, subject to the same
«duties, impositions, and restrictions, as the inhabitants thereof respect-
ively; provided that such restrictions shall not extend so far as to prevent
the removal of property imported .into any State, to any other State of
which the owner is an inhabitant; provided, also, that no imposition,
duties, or restriction, shall be laid by any State on the property of the
United States, or either of them.

If any person guilty of, or charged with, treason, felony, or other
high misdemeanour in any State, shall flee from justice, and be found in
any of the United States, he shall, upon demand of the governor or
executive power of the State from which he fled, be delivered up, and
‘removed to the State having jurisdiction of his offence.

570 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT APPENDIX

Full faith and credit shall be given, in cach of these States, to the
records, acts, and judicial proceedings of the courts and magistrates of
every other State.

Agr. V. For the more convenient management of the general interests
of the United States, delegates shall be annually appointed in such man-
ner as the legislature of each State shall direct, to meet in Congress on
the first Monday in November, in every year, with a power reserved to
each State to recall its delegates, or any of them, at any time within the
year, and to send others in their stead for the remainder of the year. 2

No State shall be represented in Congress by less than two, nor by
more than seven members; and no person shall be capable of being a
delegate for more than three years, in any term of six years; nor shall
any person, being a delegate, be capable of holding any office under the
United States, for which he, or another for his benefit, receives any salary,
fees, or emolument of any kind.

Each State shall maintain its own delegates in any meeting of the
States, and while they act as members of the committee of the States.

In determining questions in the United States, in Congress assembled,
each State shall have one vote.

Freedom of speech and debate in Congress shall not be impeached or
questioned in any court or place out of Congress; and the members of
Congress shall be protected in their persons from arrests and imprison-
ments during the time of their going to and from, and atterlance on
Congress, except for treason, felony, or breach of the peace.

Arr. VI. No State, without the consent of the United States, in
Congress assembled, shall send any embassy to, or receive any embassy
from, or enter into any conference, agreement, alliance, or treaty, with
any king, prince, or state; nor shall any person holding any office of
profit or trust under the United States, or any of them, accept of any
present, emolument, office, or title of any kind whatever, from any king,
prince, or foreign state ; nor shall the United States, in Congress assem.
bled, or’any of them, grant any title of nobility.

No two or more States shall enter into any treaty, confederation, or
alliance whatever between them, without the consent of the United States,
in Congress assembled, specifying accurately the purposes for which the
same is to be entered into, and how long it shall continue,

No States shall lay any imposts or duties which may interfere with any
stipulations in treaties entered into by the United States, in Congress
assembled, with any king, prince, or state, in pursuance of any treaties
already proposed by Congress to the courts of France and Spain.

No vessels of war shall be kept up in time of peace by any State,
except such number only as shall be deemed necessary by the United
States, in Congress assembled, for the defence of such State or its trade;

APPENDIX ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION 571

nor shall any body of forces be kept up by any State, in time of peace,
except such number only as, in the judgment of the United States, in
Congress assembled, shall be deemed requisite to garrison the forts neces-
sary for the defence of such State; but every State shall always keep up a
well-regulated and disciplined militia, sufficiently armed and accoutred,
and shall provide and constantly have ready for use, in public stores, a
due number of field-pieces and tents, and a proper quantity of arms,
ammunition, and camp equipage.

y No State shall engage in any war without the consent of the United
States, in Congress assembled, unless such State be actually invaded by
enemies, or shall have received certain advice of a resolution being formed
by some nation of Indians to invade such State, and the-danger is so im-
minent as not to admit of a delay till the United States, in Congress
assembled, can be consulted; nor shall any State grant commissions
to any ships or vessels of war, nor letters of marque or reprisal, except
it be after a declaration of war by the United States, in Congress assembled,
and then only against the kingdom or state, and the subjects thereof
against which war has been so declared, and under such regulations as
shall be established by the United States, in Congress assembled,
unless such State be infested by pirates, in which case vessels of war
may be fitted out for that occasion, and kept so long as the danger shall
continue, or until the United States, in Congress assembled, shall deter-
mine othérwise.

Arr, VII. When land forces are raised by any State for the common
defence, all officers of or under the rank of colonel shall be appointed by
the legislature of each State respectively by whom such forces shall be
raised, or in such manner as such State shall direct, and all vacancies
shall be filled up by the State which first made the appointment.

Art. VIII. All charges of war, and all other expenses that shall be
incurred for the common defence or general welfare, and allowed by the
United States, in Congress assembled, shall be defrayed out of a common
treasury, which shall be supplied by the several States, in proportion to
the value of all land within each State, granted to, or surveyed for, any
person, as such land and the buildings and improvements thereon shall
be estimated according to such mode as the United States, in Congress
assembled, shall, from time to time, direct and appoint. The taxes for
paying that proportion shall be laid and levied by the authority and
direction of the legislatures of the several States, within the time agreed
upon by the United States, in Congress assembled.

Arr. IX. The United States, in Congress assembled, shall have the
sole and exclusive right and power of determining on peace and war, ex-
cept in the cases mentioned in the sixth Article ; of sending and receiving
ambassadors ; entering into treaties and alliances, provided that no treaty

572 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT APPENDIX

of commerce shall be made whereby the legislative power of the respective
States shall be restrained from imposing such imposts and duties on
foreigners, as their own people are subjected to, or from prohibiting the
exportation or importation of any species of goods or commodities what-
soever; of establishing rules for deciding, in all cases, what captures on
land or water shall be legal, and in what manner prizes taken by land or
naval forces in the service of the United States shall be divided or appro-
priated; of granting letters of marque and reprisal in times of peace ;
appointing courts for the trial of piracies and felonies committed on the,
high seas; and establishing courts for receiving and determining finally
appeals in all cases of captures; provided that no member of Congress
shall be appointed as judge of any of the said courts,

The United States, in,Congress assembled, shall also be the last resort
on appeal, in all disputes and differences now subsisting, or that hereafter
may arise between two or more States concerning boundary, jurisdiction,
or any other cause whatever ; which authority shall always be exercised
in the manner following : Whenever the legislative or executive authority,
or lawful agent of any State in controversy with another, shall present a
petition to Congress, stating the matter in question, and praying for a
hearing, notice thereof shall be given by order of Congress to the legisla-
tive or executive authority of the other State in controversy, and a day
assigned for the appearance of the parties by their lawful agents, who
shall then be directed to appoint, by joint consent, commissioners*r judges
to constitute a court for hearing and determining the matter in question;
but if they cannot agree, Congress shall name three persons out of each
of the United States, and from the list of such persons each party shall
alternately strike out one, the petitioners beginning, until the number
shall be reduced to thirteen; and from that number not less than seven
nor more than nine names, as Congress shall direct, shall, in the presence
of Congress, be drawn out by lot; and the persons whose names shall be
so drawn, or any five of them, shall be commissioners or judges, to hear
and finally determine the controversy, so always as a major part of the
judges who shall hear the cause shall agree in-the determination ; and
if either party shall neglect to attend at the day appointed, without show-
ing reasons which Congress shall judge sufticient, or being present, shall
refuse to strike, the Congress shall proceed to nominate three persons out
of each State, and the secretary of Congress shall strike in behalf of such
party absent or refusing ; and the judgment and sentence of the court, to
be appointed in the manner before prescribed, shall be final and conclusive ;
and if-any of the parties shall refuse to submit to the authority of such
court, or to appear or defend their claim or cause, the court shall never-
‘theless proceed to pronounce sentence or judgment, which shall in like
manner be final and decisive ; the judgment or sentence and other pro-

APPENDIX ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION 573

ceedings being in either case transmitted to Congress, and lodged among
the acts of Congress for the security of the parties concerned ; provided,
that every commissioner, before he sits in judgment, shall take an oath,
to be administered by one of the judges of the supreme or superior court
of the State where the cause shall be tried, “ well and truly to hear and
determine the matter in question, according to the best of his judgment,
without favour, affection, or hope of reward.” Provided, also, that no
State shall be deprived of territory for the benefit of the United States.

All controversies concerning the private right of soil claimed under
different grants of two or more States, whose jurisdictions, as they may
respect such lands, and the States which passed such grants, are adjusted,
the said grants or either of them being at the same time claimed to have
originated antecedent to such settlement of jurisdiction, shall, on the peti-
tion of either party to the Congress of the United States, be finally deter-
mined, as near as may be, in the same manner as is before prescribed for
deciding disputes respecting territorial jurisdiction between different States.

The United States, in Congress assembled, shall also have the sole and
exclusive right and power of regulating the alloy and value of coin struck
by their own atthority, or by that of the respective States; fixing the
standard of weights and measures throughout the United States ; regulat-
ing the trade and managing all affairs with the Indians not members of
any of the States; provided that the legislative right of any State,
within it*sown limits, be not infringed or violated ; establishing and regu-
lating post-oflices from one State to another throughout all the United
States, and exacting such postage on the papers passing through the same
as may be requisite to defray the expenses of the said office ; appointing
all officers of the land forces in the service of the United States, except-
ing regimental officers ; appointing all the officers of the naval forces, and
commissioning all officers whatever in the service of the United States ;
making rules‘ for the government and regulation of the said land and
naval forces, and directing their operations.

The United States, in Congress assembled, shall have authority to ap-
point a committee, to sit in the recess of Congress, to be denominated
“A Committee of the States,” and to consist of one delegate from each
State ; and to appoint such other committees and civil officers as may be
necessary for managing the general affairs of the United States under
their direction ; to appoint one of their number to preside, provided that
no person be allowed to serve in the offica of president more than one
year in any term of three years; to ascertain the necessary sums of money
to be raised for the service of the United States, and to appropriate and
apply the same for defraying the public expenses; to borrow money or
emit bills on the credit of the United States, transmitting every half year
to the respective States an account of the sums of money so borrowed or

574 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT APPENDIX

emitted ; to build and equip a navy ; to agree upon the number of land
forces, and to make requisitions from each State for its quota, in propor-
tion to the number of white inhabitants in such State, which requisition
shall be binding ; and thereupon the legislature of each State shall ap-
point the regimental officers, raise the men, and clothe, arm, and equip
them in a soldier-like manner at the expense of the United States ; and
the officers and men so clothed, armed, and equipped shall march to the
place appointed, and within the time agreed ot by the United States, in
Congress assembled; but if the United States, in Congress assembled,
shall, on consideration of circumstances, judge proper that any Sfate
should not raise men, or should raise a smaller number than its quota, and
that any other State should raise a greater number of men than the quota
thereof, such extra number shall be raised, officered, clothed, armed, and
equipped in the same manner as the quota of such State, unless the legis-
lature of such State shall judge that such extra number can not be
safely spared out of the same, in which case they shall raise, officer,
clothe, arm, and equip as many of such extra number as they judge can
"be safely spared, and the officers and men so clothed, armed, and equipped
shall march to the place appointed, and within the time agreed on by the
United States, in Congress assembled.

The United States, in Congress assembled, shall never engage in a war,
nor grant letters of marque and reprisal in time of peace, nor enter into
any treaties or alliances, nor coin money, nor regulate the valug thereof,
nor ascertain the sums and expenses necessary for the defence and welfare
of the United States, or any of them, nor emit bills, nor borrow money
on the credit of the United States, nor appropriate money, nor agree upon
the number of vessels of war to be built or purchased, or the number of
land or sea forces to be raised, nor appoint a commander-in-chief of the
army or navy, unless nine States assent to the same, nor shall a question
on any other point, except for adjourning from day to day, be determined, un-
less by the votes of a majority of the United States, in Congress assembled,

The Congress of the United States shall have power to adjourn to any
time within the year, and to any place within.the United States, so that
no period of adjournment be for a longer duration than the space of six
months, and shall publish the journal of their proceedings monthly,
except such parts thereof relating to treaties, alliances, or military opera-
‘tions as in their judgment require secrecy ; and the yeas and nays of the
delegates of each State, on any question, shall be entered on the journal,
when it is desired by any delegate; and the delégates of a State, or any
of them, at his or their request, shall be furnished with a transcript of the
said journal, except such parts as are above excepted, to lay before the
legislatures of the several States,

Arr. X. The committee of the States, or any nine of ise shall be

APPENDIX ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION 75

authorized to execute, in the recess of Congress, such of the powers of
Congress as the United States, in Congress assembled, by the consent of
nine States, shall, from time to time, think expedient to vest them with ;
provided that no power be delegated to the said committee, for the exer-
cis¢ of which, by the Articles of Confederation, the voice of nine States,
in the Congress of the United States assembled, is requisite.

Art. XI. Canada acceding to this Confederation, and joining in the
measures of the United States, shall be admitted into, and entitled to all
the advantages of this Union ; but no other colony shall be admitted into
tl same unless such admissign be agreed to by nine States,

Art. XII. All bills of credit emitted, moneys borrowed,’ and debts
contracted by or under the authority of Congress, before the assembling
of the United States, in pursuance of the present Confederation, shall be
deemed and considered as a charge against the United States, for payment
and satisfaction whereof the said United States and the public faith are
hereby solemnly pledged.

Art, XIII. Every State shall abide by the determinations of the
United States, in Congress assembled, on all questions which by this Con-
federation are submitted to them. And the Articles of this Confederation
shall be inviolably observed by every State, and the Union shall be per-
petual ; nor shall any alteration at any time hereafter be made in any of
them, unless such alteration be agreed to in a Congress of the United
States, and be afterwards confirmed by the legislatures of every State.

And whereas it hath-pleased the great Governor of the world to incline
the hearts of the legislatures we respectively represent in Congress to
approve of, and to authorize us to ratify the said Articles of Confedera-
tion and perpetual Union, Know ye, that we, the undersigned delegates,
by virtue of the power and authority to us given for that purpose, do, by
these presents, in the name and in behalf of our respective constituents,
fully and entirely ratify and confirm each and every of the said Articles
of Confederation and perpetual Union, and all and singular the matters
and things therein contained. And we do further solemnly plight and
engage the faith of our respective constituents, that they shall abide by
the determinations of the United States, in Congress assembled, on all
questions which by the said Confederation are submitted to them; and
that the Articles thereof shall be inviolably observed by the States we re-
spectively represent, and that the Union shall be perpetual. In witness
whereof we have hereunto set our hands in Congress. Done at Phila-
delphia, in the State of Pennsylvania, the ninth day of July, in the year
of our Lord 1778, and in the third year of the Independence of America,

(These Articles were not ratified by all the States until Ist March
1781, when the delegates of Maryland, the latest in ratifying, signed
for her.]

a

CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES

We, the people of the United States, in order to form’a more
perfect union, establish justice, insure domestic tranquillity, provide
for the common defence, promote the gencral welfare, and secure
the blessings of liberty to ourselves and our posterity, do ordain
and establish this Constitution for the United States of America.

ARTICLE I

Section 1. All legislative powers herein granted shall be
vested in a Congress of the United States, which shall consist of a
Senate and a House of Representatives.

Sec. 2. The House of Representatives shall be composed of
members chosen every second year by the people of the several
States, and the electors in each State shall have the qualifications
requisite for electors of the most numerous branch of the State
legislature.

No person shall be a Representative who shall not have attained
the age of twenty-five years, and been seven years a citizen of the
United States, and who shall not, when elected, be an inhabitant
of that State in which-he shall be chosen.

{Representatives and direct taxes shall be apportioned among the
several States which may be included within this Union, according
to their respective numbers, which shall be determined by adding to
the whole number of free persons, including those bound to service
for a term of years, and excluding Indians not taxed, threc-fifths
of all other persons.]! The actual enumeration shall be made
within three years after the first meeting of the Congress of the
United States, and within every subsequent term of ten years, in

1 The clause included in brackets is amended by the XI Vth Amendment, 2dsection,

ArpenDIX. CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 577

such manner as they shall by law direct. The number of Repre-
sentatives shall not exceed one for every thirty thousand, but each
State shall have at least one Representative ; and until such enumer-
ation shall be made, the State of New Hampshire shall be entitled
to choose three, Massachusetts eight, Rhode Island and Providence
Plantations one, Connecticut five, New York six, New Jersey four,
Pennsylvania eight, Delaware one, Maryland six, Virginia ten,
North Carolina five, South Carolina five, and Georgia three.

eWhen vacancies happen in the representation from any State,
the executive authority thereof shall issue writs of election to fill
such vacancies.

The House of Representatives shall choose their speaker and
other officers ; and shall have the sole power of impeachment.

Sxc. 3. The Senate of the United States shall be composed
of two Senators from each State, chosen by the legislature thereof,
for six years; and each Senator shall have one vote.

Immediately after they shall be assembled in consequence of
the first election, they shall be divided as equally as may be into
three classes. The seats of the Senators of the first class shall be
vacated at the expiration of the second year, of the second class at
the expiration of the fourth year, and of the third class at the
expiration of the sixth year, so that one-third may be chosen every
second year; and if vacancies happen by resignation, or otherwise,
during the recess of the legislature of any State, the executive
thereof may make temporary appointments until the next meeting
of the legislature, which shall then fill such vacancies.

No person shall be a Senator who shall not have attained to the
age of thirty years, and been nine years a citizen of the. United
States, and who shall not, when elected, be an inhabitant of that
State for which he shall be chosen.

The Vice-President of the United States shall be President of
the Senate, but shall have no vote, unless they be equally divided.

The Senate shal] choose their other officers, and also a President
pro tempore, in the absence of the Vice-President, or when he shall
exercise the office of President of the United States,

The Senate shall have sole power to try all impeachments.
When sitting for that purpose, they shall be on oath or affirmation.
When the President of the United States is tried, the Chief Justice
shall preside; and no person shall be convicted without the con-
currence of two-thirds of the members present.

VoL. I 2P

578 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT APPENDIX

Judgment in cases of impeachment shall not extend further
than to removal from office, and disqualification to hold and enjoy
any office of honour, trust, or profit under the United States; but
the party convicted shall nevertheless be liable and subject to in-
dictment, trial, judgment, and punishment, according to law.

Sec. 4. The times, places, and manner of holding elections
for Senators and Representatives shall be prescribed in each State
by the legislature thereof; but the Congress may at any time by
law make or alter such regulations, except as to the placen of
choosing Senators.

The Congress shall assemble at least. once in every year, and
such meeting shall be on the first Monday in December, unless they
shall by law appoint a different day.

Src. 5. Each house shall be the judge of the elections, returns,
and qualifications of its own members, and a majority of each shall
constitute a quorum to do business; but a smaller number may
adjourn from day to day, and may be authorized to compel the
attendance of absent members, in such manner, and under such
penalties as each house may provide.

Each house may determine the rules of its proceedings, punish
its members for disorderly behaviour, and, with the concurrence of
two-thirds, expel a member.

Each house shall keep a journal of its proceedings, and from
time to time publish the same, excepting such parts as may in their
judgment require secrecy; and the yeas and nays of the members
of either house on any question shall, at the desire of one-fifth of
those present, be entered on the journal. |

Neither house, during the session of Congress, shall, without
tho consent of the other, adjourn for more than three days, nor to
any other place than that in which the two houses shall be sitting,

Sec. 6. The Senators and Representatives shall receive a
compensation for their services, to be ascertained by law, and paid
out of the Treasury of the United States. They shall in all cases,
except treason, felony, and breach of the peace, be privileged from
arrest during their attendance at the session of their respective
houses, and in going to and returning from the same; and for any
speech or debate in either house they shall not- be questioned in
any other place.

No Senator or Representative shall, during the time for which
he was elected, be appointed to any civil office under the authority

aprenDIx CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 579

of the United States, which shall have been created, or the emolu-
ments whereof shall have been increased during such time; and no
person holding any office under the United States shall be a member
of either house during his continuance in office.

Src. 7. All bills for raising revenue shall originate in the
House of Representatives ; but the Senate may propose or concur
with amendments as on other bills.

Every bill which shall have passed the House of Representatives
and the Senate shall, before it becomes a law, be presented to the
President of the United States; if he approve he shall sign it, but
if not he shall return it, with his objections, to that house in which
it shall have originated, who shall enter the objections at large on
their journal, and proceed to reconsider it. If after such recon-
sideration two-thirds of that house shall agree to pass the bill, it
shall be sent, together with the objections, to the other house, by
which it shall likewise be reconsidered, and if approved by two-
thirds of that house, it shall become a Jaw. But in all cases the
votes of both houses shall be determined by yeas and nays, and the
names of the persons voting for and against the bill shall be entered
on the journal of each house respectively. If any bill shall not be
returned by the President within ten days (Sundays excepted) after
it shall ‘have been presented to him, the same shall be a law, in
like manner as if he had signed it, unless the Congress by their
adjournment prevents its return, in which case it shall not be a law.

Every order, resolution, or vote to which the concurrence of
the Senate and the House of Representatives may be necessary
(except on a question of adjournment) shall be presented to the
President of the United States; and before the same shall take
effect, shall be approved by him, or being disapproved by him,
shall be repassed by two-thirds of the Senate and House of Repre-
sentatives, according to the rules and limitations prescribed in the
case of a bill.

SEo. 8. The Congress shall have power to lay and collect
taxes, duties, imposts, and excises, to pay the debts and provide for
the common defence and general welfare of the United States; but
all duties, imposts, and excises shall be uniform throughout the
United States ;

To borrow money on the credit of the United States ;

To regulate commerce with foreign nations, and among the
several States, and with the Indian tribes ;

580 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT APPENDIX

To establish an uniform rule of naturalization, and uniform laws
on the subject of bankruptcies throughout the United States ;

To coin money, regulate the value thereof, and of foreign coin,
and fix the standard of weights and measures ;

To provide for the punishment of counterfeiting the securities
and current coin of the United States ;

To establish post-offices and post-roads ;

To promote the progress of science and useful arts, by securing
for limited times to authors and inventors the exclusive right ,to
their respective writings and discoveries ;

To constitute tribunals inferior to the Supreme Court ;

To define and punish piracies and felonies committed on the
high seas, and offences against the law of nations.

To declare war, grant letters of marque and reprisal, and make
rules concerning captures on land and water ;

To raise and support armies, but no appropriation of money to
that use shall be for a longer term than two years ;

To provide and maintain a navy ;

To make rules for the government and regulation of the land
and naval forces ;

To provide for calling forth the militia to execute the laws of
the Union, suppress insurrections, and repel invasions ;

To provide for organizing, arming, and disciplining the militia,
and for governing such part of them as may be employed in the
service of the United States, reserving to the States respectively
the appointment of the officers and the authority of training the
militia according to the discipline prescribed by Congress ;

To exercise exclusive legislation in all cases whatsoever, over
such district (not exceeding ten miles square) as may, by cession
of particular States, and the acceptance of Congress, become the |
seat of the Government of the United-.States, and to exercise
like authority over all places purchased by the consent of the
legislature of the State in which the same shall be, for the
erection of forts, magazines, arsenals, dockyards, and other needful
buildings ; and

To -make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for
carrying into execution the foregoing powers, and all other powers
vested by this Constitution in the Government of the United
States, or in any department or officer thereof.

Sec. 9. The migration or importation of such persons as any

APPENDIX. CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 581

of the States now existing shall think proper to admit, shall not be
prohibited by the Congress prior to the year ,one thousand eight
‘hundred and eight, but a tax or duty. may be imposed on such
importation, not exceeding ten dollars for each person.

The privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall not be suspended,
unless when in cases of rebellion or invasion the public safety may
require it.

No bill of attainder or ex post facto law shall be passed.

® No capitation, or other direct tax, shall be laid, unless in propor-
tion to the census or enumeration hereinbefore directed to be taken.

No tax or duty shall be laid on articles exported from any State.

No preference shall be given by any regulation of commerce or
revenue to the ports of one State over those of another; nor shall
vessels bound to, or from, one State be obliged to enter, clear, or
pay duties in another.

No money shall be drawn from the Treasury but in conse-
quence of appropriations made by law; and a regular statement
and account of the receipts and the expenditures of all public money
shall be published from time to time.

No title of nobility shall be granted by the United States ; and
no person holding any office of profit or trust under them shall,
without the consent of the Congress, accept of any present, emolu-
ment, office, or title, of any kind whatever, from any king, prince,
or foreign state.

Src. 10. No State shall enter into any treaty, alliance, or con-
federation ; grant letters of marque or reprisal ; coin money ; emit
bills of credit ; make any thing but gold and silver coin a tender in
payment of debts ; pass any bill of attainder, ex post facto law, or law
impairing the obligation of contracts, or grant any title of nobility,

No State shall, without the consent of the Congress, lay any im-
posts or duties on imports or exports, except what may be absolutely
necessary for executing its inspection laws; and the net produce
of all duties and imposts, laid by any State on imports or exports,
shall be for the use of the Treasury of the United States ; and all
_ such laws shall be subject to the revision and control of the Congress.

No State shall, without the vonsent of the Congress, lay any
duty of tonnage, keep troops or ships of war in time of peace, enter
‘into any agreement or compact with another State, or with a
foreign power, or engage in war, unless actually invaded, or in such
imminent danger as will not admit of delay.

582 : THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT ARPENDIX

ARTICLE II

SECTION 1. The executive power shall be vested in a President
of the United States of America. He shall hold his office during
the term of four years, and, together with the Vice-President,
chosen for the same term, be elected as follows:

Each State ‘shall appoint, in such manner as the legislature
thereof may direct, a number of electors, equal to the whale
number of Senators and Representatives to which the State may be
entitled in the. Congress; but no Senator or ‘Representative, or
person holding an office of trust or profit under the United States,
shall be appointed an elector.

[The electors shall mect in their seaaive States, and vote by
ballot for two persons, of whom one at least shall not be an inhabit-
ant of the, same State with themselves. And they shall make a
list of all the persons voted for, and of the number of votes for
each ; which list they shall sign and certify, and transmit sealed to
the seat of the Government of the United States, directed to the
President of the Senate. The President of the Senate shall, in the
presence of the Senate and the House of Representatives, open all
the certificates, and the votes shall then ke counted. Th% person
- having the greatest number of votes shall be the President, if such
number be a majority of the whole number of electors appointed ;
and if there be more than one who have such majority and have an
equal number of votes, then the House of Representatives shall
immediately choose by ballot one of them for President ; and if no
person have a majority, then from the five highest on the list the
said House shall in like manner choose the President. But in
choosing the President, the votes shall be taken by States, the
representation from each State having one-vote; a quorum for this
purpose shall consist of a member or members from two-thirds of the.
States, and a majority of all the States shall be necessary to a choice.
In every case, after the choice of the President, the person having
the greatest number of votes of the electors shall be -the Vice-
President; ‘but if there should remain two or niore who have
equal votes, the Senate shall:choose from them, by ballot, the Vice-
President. ]?

The Congress may determine the time of choosing the electors,

? This clause in brackets has been superseded by the XIIth Amendment.

aprenDIx CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 583

and the day on which they shall give their votes; which day shall
be the same throughout the United States.

No person except a natural-born citizen, or a citizen of the United
States at the time of the adoption of this Constitution, shall be
eligible to the office of President ; neither shall any person be eligible
to that office who shall not have attained the age of thirty-five years,
and been fourteen years a resident within the United States.

In caso of the removal of the President from office, or of his
death, resignation, or inability to discharge the powers and duties
of the said office, the same shall devolve on tlie Vice-President, and
the Congress may by law provide for the case of removal, death,
resignation, or inability, both of the President or Vice-President,
declaring what officer shall then act as President, and such officer
shall act accordingly until the disabiNty be tentoved, or a President
shall be elected. ae

The President shall, at’ stated times, receive for his services a
compensation, which shall neither be increased nor dimiished
during the period for which he shall have been elected, and he shall
not receive within that period any other emolument from the
United States, or any of them.

Before he enter on the execution of his office, he shall take the
following oath or affirmation :

“YI do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully execute
the office of President of the United States, and will, to the best of
my ability, preserve, protect, and defend the Constitution of the
United States.”

Suc. 2, The President shall be commander-in-chief of the
army and navy of the United States, and of the militia of the
several States, when called into the actual service of the United °
States; he may require the opinion, in writing, of the principal
officer in each of the executive departments, upon any subject
relating to the dutiés of their respective offices, and he shall have
power to grant *reprieves and pardons for offences against the
United States, except in cases of impeachment.

He shall have power, by and with the advice and consent of the
Senate, to make treaties, provided two-thirds of the Senators
present concur ; and he shall nominate, and by and with the advice
and consent of the Senate, shall appoint ambassadors, other public
ministers and consuls, judges of the Supreme Court, and all other
officers of the United States, whose appointments are not herein

584 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT APPENDIX

otherwise provided for, and which shall be established by law ; but
the Congress may by law vest the appointment of such inferior
officers, as they think proper, in the President alone, in the courts
of laws, or in the heads of departments.

The President shall have power to fill upall vacancies that may
happen during the recess of the Senate, by granting commissions
which shall expire at the end of their next session.

Sec. 3. He shail from time to time give to the Congress infor-
mation of the state of the Union, and recommend to their consider-
ation such measures as he shall judge necessary and expedient ; he
may, on extraordinary occasions, convene both houses, or either of
them, and in case of disagreement between them, with respect to the
time of adjournment, he may adjourn them to such time as he shall
think proper ; he shall receive ambassadors and other public minis-
ters ; he shall take care that the laws be faithfully executed, and
shall commission all the officers of the United States.

Src. 4. The President, Vice-President, and all civil officers of
the United States, shall be removed from office on impeachment
for, and conviction of, treason, bribery, or other high crimes and
misdemeanours,

ARTICLE Iii

Section 1. The judicial power of the United States shall be
vested in one Supreme Court, and in such inferior courts as the
Congress may from time to time ordain and establish. The judges,
both of the Supreme and inferior courts, shall hold their offices
during good behaviour, and shall, at stated times, receive for their
services a compensation, which shall not be diminished during their
continuance in office.

Sxc. 2. The judicial power shall extend to all cases, in law and
equity, arising under this Constitution, the laws of the United
States, and treaties made, or which shall be made, under their
authority ; to all cases affecting ambassadors, other public ministers,
and consuls; to all cases of admiralty and maritime jurisdiction ;
to controversies to which the United States shall be a party; to
controversies between two or more States; between a State and
citizens of another State; between citizens of different States—
between citizens of the same State claiming lands under grants of
different States, and between a State, or the citizens thereof, and
foreign states, citizens, or subjects.

appenDIX. CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 585

In all cases affecting ambassadors, other public ministers and
consuls, and those in which a State shall be a party, the Supreme
Court shall have original jurisdiction. In all the other cases before
mentioned, the Supreme Courts shall have appellate jurisdiction,
both as to law and fact, with such exception, and under such
regulations as the Congress shall make.

The trial of all crimes, except in cases of impeachment, shall be
by jury ; and such trial shall be held in the State where the said
cyimes shall have been committed ; but when not committed within
any State, the trial shall be at such place or places as the Congress
may by Jaw have directed.

Suc. 3. Treason against the United States shall consist only
in levying war against them, or in adhering to their enemies, giving
them aid and contort No person shall be convicted of treason
unless on the testimony of two witnesses to the same overt act, or
on confession in open court.

The Congress shall have power to declare the punishment of
treason, but no attainder of treason shall work corruption of blood,
or forfeiture except during the life of the person attainted.

ARTICLE IV

SEcTION 1. Full faith and credit shall be given in each State to
the public acts, records, and judicial proceedings of every other
State. And the Congress may by general laws prescribe the manner
in which such acts, records, and proceedings shall be proved, and the
effect thereof.

Sec. 2. The citizens of each State shall be entitled to all
privileges and immunities of citizens in the several States.

A person charged in any State with treason, felony, or other crime,
who shall flee from justice and be found in another State, shall, on
demand of the executive authority of the State from which he fled,
be delivered up, to be removed to the State having jurisdiction of
the crime.

No person held to service or labour in any State, under the laws
thereof, escaping into another, shall, in consequence of any law or
regulation therein, be discharged from such service or labour, but
shall be delivered up on claim of the party to whom such service or
labour may be due.

Sec. 3. New States may be admitted by the Congress into this

586 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT APPENDIX

Union ; but no new State shall be formed or erected within the juris-
diction of any other State ; nor any State be formed by the junction
of two or more States, or parts of States, without the consent of
the legislatures of the States concerned as well as of the Congress.

The Congress shall have power to dispose of and make all
needful rules and regulations respecting the territory or other
property belonging to the United States; and nothing in this
Constitution shall be so construed as to prejudice any claims of the
United States, or of any particular State.

Src. 4. The United States shall guarantee to every State in
this Union a republican form of government, and shall protect cach
of them against invasion ; and on application of the legislature, or
of the executive (when the legislature cannot be convened), against
domestic violence.

ARTICLE V

The Congress, whenever two-thirds of both houses shall ‘deem it
necessary, shall propose amendments to this Constitution, or on the
application of the legislatures of two-thirds of the soveral States,
shall call a convention for proposing amendments, which, in either
. case, shall be valid, to all intents and purposes,‘as part of this
Constitution, when ratified by the legislatures of three-fourths of
the several States, or by conventions in three-fourths thereof, as the
one or the other mode of ratification may be proposed by the
Congress ; provided that no amendments which may be made prior
to the year one thousand eight hundred and eight shall in any
manner affect the first and fourth clauses in the ninth section of the
first article; and that no State, without its consent, shall be
deprived of its equal suffrage in, the Senate.

ARTICLE YI

All debts contracted and engagements entered into, before the
adoption of this Constitution, shall be as valid against the United
States under this Constitution as under the Confederation.

This Constitution, and the laws of the United States which shall
be made in pursuance thereof, and all treaties made, or which shall
be made, under the authority of the United States, shall be the
supreme law of the land; and the judges in every State shall be
bound thereby, any thing in the constitution or laws of. any State
to the contrary notwithstanding. .

‘APPENDIX, CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 587

The Senators-and Representatives before mentioned, and the
members of the scveral State legislatures, and all executive and
judicial officers, both of the United States and of the several States,
shall be bound by oath or affirmation to support this Constitution ;
but no religious test shall ever be required as a qualification to any
office or public trust under the United States.

| ARTICLE VIL
The ratification of the conventions of nine States shall be

sufficient for the establishment of this Constitution between the
States so ratifying the same.

Done in Convention by har inaniinois consent of the States
present,! the Seventeenth day of September, in the year of our Lord
1787, and of the Independence of the United States of America the
Twelfth.

In Witness whereof we have hereunto subscribed our names.

G2 WASHINGTON,
Presidt. and Deputy from Virginia.

New Hampshire—John Langdon, Nicholas Gilman. AJfassachu-
setts—Nathaniel Gorham, Rufus King. Connecticut—Wm. Sam.
Johnson, Roger Sherman. New York—Alexander Hamilton. New
Jersey — Wil. Livingston, Wm. Patterson, David Brearley, Jona.
Dayton. Pennsylvania —B. Franklin, Thos. Fitzsimons, Thomas
Mifflin, Jared Ingersoll, Robt. Morris, James Wilson, Geo. Clymer,
Gouv. Morris. Delaware—Geo. Read, Richard Bassett, Gunning
Bedford, Jun., Jaco. Brown, John Dickinson. Afaryland—James
M‘Henry, Dans Carroll, Dail Jenifer, of St Thomas, Virginia—
John Blair, James Madison, Jun. North Carolina—Wm. Blount,
Hugh Williamson, Rich’d. Dobbs Speight. South Curolina—J.
Rutledge, Charles Pinckney, Charles Cotesworth Pinckney, Pierce
Butler. Georgia—William Few, Abr. Baldwin.

Attest: WiLLIAM JACKSON, Secretary.

1 Rhode Island was not represented. Several of the delegates had left the
Convention before it concluded its labours, and some others who remained refused
to sign. In all, 65 delegates had been appointed, 55 attended, 39 signed.

The first ratificatiow was that of Delaware, Dec, 7, 1787; the ninth (bring-
ing the Constitution into force) that of New Hampshire, June 21, 1788 ; the last,
that of Rhode Island, May 29, 1790.

588 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT APPENDIX

Articles in addition to, and amendment of, the Constitution of the United
States of America, proposed by Congress, and ratified by the Legisla-
tures of the several States, pursuant to the fifth Article of the original
Constitution.

ARTICLE If}

Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of
religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the
freedom of speech or of the press; or the right of the people
peaceably to assemble, and to petition the Government for a redress
of grievances.

ARTICLE II

A well-regulated militia being necessary to the security of a
free state, the right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not
be infringed.

ARTICLE III

No soldier shall, in time of peace, be quartered in any house,
without the consent of the owner, nor in the time of war, but in a
manner to be prescribed by law.

ARTICLE IV

The right ‘of the people to be secure in their persons, houses,
papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall
not be violated, and no warrants shall issue, but upon probable
cause, supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing
the place to be searched, and the person or things to be seized.

ARTICLE -V¥

No person shall be held to answer for a capital, or otherwise
infamous crime, unless on a presentment or indictment of a grand
jury, except in cases arising in the land or naval forces, or in the
militia, when in actual service in time of war or public danger ; nor
shall any person be subject for the same offence to be twice put in
jeopardy of life or limb; nor shall be compelled in any criminal
case to be a witness against himself, nor be deprived of life, liberty,

1 Amendments I.-X. inclusive were proposed by Congress to the Legislatures
of the States, Sept. 25, 1789, and ratified 1789-91.

APPENDIX CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 589

or property, without due process of law; nor shall private property
be taken for public use, without just compensation.

ARTICLE VI

In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right
to a speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury of the State and
district wherein the crime shall have been committed, which district
shall have been previously ascertained by law, and to be informed
of the nature and cause of the accusation; to be confronted with
the witnesses against him ; to have compulsory process for obtaining
witnesses in his favour, and to have the assistance-of counsel for his

defence. ;

ARTICLE VII

In suits at common law, where the value in controversy shall
exceed twenty dollars, the right of trial by jury shall be preserved,
and no fact tried by a jury shall be otherwise re-examined: in any
court of the United States than according to the rules of the
common law.

ARTICLE VHI

Exvessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines imposed,
nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted.

ARTICLE IX

The enumeration of the Constitution, of certain rights, shall not
be construed to deny or disparage others retained by the people.

ARTICLE X

The powers not delegated to the United States by the Consti-
tution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the States
respectively, or to the people.

ARTICLE XI!

The judicial power of the United States shall not be construed
to extend to any suit in law or equity, commenced or prosecuted

? Amendt. XI. was proposed by Congress, Sept. 5, 1794, and declared to

590 THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT —— avvexmix

against one of the United States by citizens of another State, or by
citizens or subjects of any foreign State.

ARTICLE XII}

The electors shall meet in their respective States, and vote by
ballot for President and Vice-President, one of whom at least shall.
not bé an inhabitant of the same State with themselves ; they shall
name in their ballots the person voted for as President, and in
distinct ballots the person voted for as Vice-President, and they
shall make distinct lists of all persons voted for as President,
and of all persons voted for as Vice-President, and of the number
of votes for each, which lists they shall sign and certify, and trans-
mit sealed to the seat of the Government of the United States,
directed to the President of the Senate ;—The President of the
Senate shall, in the presence .of the Senate and House of Repre-
sentatives, open all the certificates, and the votes shall then be’
counted ;—The person having the greatest number of votes for
President shall be the President, if such ‘number be a majority of
the whole number of electors appointed; and if no person have’
such majority, then from the persons having the highest numbers
not exceeding three on the list of those voted for as President, the
House of Representatives shall choose immediately, by baiot, the
President. But in choosing the President, the votes shall be taken
by States, the representation from each State having ohe vote; a
quorum for this purpose shall consist of a member or members
from two-thirds of the States, and a majority of all the States shall
be necessary to a choice. And if the House of Representatives
shall not choose a President whenever the right of choice shall
devolve upon them, before the fourth day of March next following,
then the Vice-President shall act as President, as in the case of
the death or other constitutional disability of the President,

The person having the greatest number of votes as Vice-
President shall be the Vice-President, if such number be a majority
of the whole number of electors appointed, and if no person have
a majority, then from the two highest numbers on the list the
Senate shall choose the Vice-President ; a quorum for the purpose

have been ratified by the legislatures of the three-fourths of tho States, Jan. 8,
1798. ;

1 Amendt. XII. was proposed by Congress, Dec. 12, 1803, and declared to
have been ratified, Sept. 25, 1804,

appennix. CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES — 591

shall consist of two-thirds of the whole number of Senators, and a
majority of the whole number shall be necessary to a choice. But
no person constitutionally ineligible to the offich of President shall
be eligible to that of Vice-President of the United States.

ARTICLE XIII!

SEcTION 1. Neither slavery nor involuntary servitude, except as
a punishment for crime whereof the party shall have been duly
convicted, shall exist within the United States, or any place sub-
ject to.their jurisdiction.

Src. 2. Congress shall have ‘power to enforce this article by
appropriate legislation. ,

ARTICLE XIV?

Section 1. All persons born or naturalized in the United States,
and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the United
States and of the State wherein they reside. No State shall make
or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities
of citizens of the United States; nor shall any State deprive any
person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor
deny *> any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of
the laws.

Sec. 2. Representatives shall be apportioned among the several
States according to their respective numbers, counting the whole
number of persons in each State, excluding Indians not taxed.
But when the right to vote at any election for the choice of electors
for President and Vice-President of the United States, Representa-
tives in Congress, the executive and judicial officers of the State,
or the members of the legislature thereof, is denied to any of the
male inhabitants of such State, being twenty-one years of age, and
citizens of the United States, or in any way abridged, except for
participation in rebellion, or other crime, the basis of representation
therein shall be reduced in the proportion which the number of
such male citizens shall bear to the whole number of male citizens
twenty-one years of age in such State.

1 Amendt. XIII. was proposed by Congress, Feb, 1, 1865, and declared to have
been ratified by 27 of the 36S , Peo -rTay reds.
" Amendt. XIV. was pov iy Conyress, June 16, 1866, and declared to
been ratified by 80 of the 3u States, July 28, 1868.

|

592 THE NA TIONAL GOVERNMENT APPENDIX

Sec. 3. No person shall be a Senator or Representative in
Congress, or elector of President and Vice-President, or hold any
office, civil or military, under the United States, or under any
State, who, having previously taken an oath, as a member of the
Congress, or as an officer of the United States, or as a member of
any State legislature, or as an executive or judicial officer of any
State, to support the Constitution of the United States, shall have
engaged in insurrection or rebellion against the same, or given aid
or comfort to the enemies thereof. But Congress may, by a vote
of two-thirds of each House, remove such disability.

Sxo. 4. The validity of the public debt of the United States,
authorized by law, including debts incurred for payment of pensions
and bounties for services in suppressing insurrection or rebellion,
shall not be questioned. But neither the United States nor any
State shall assume or pay any debt or obligation incurred in aid of
insurrection or rebellion against the United : States, or any claim for
the loss or emancipation of any slave; but all such debts, obliga-
tions, and claims shall be held illegal and void.

Sec. 5. The Congress shall have power to enforce, by appro-
priate legislation, the provisions of this article.

ARTICLE XV}

Section 1. The right of citizens of the United States to vote
shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or any State on,
account of race, color, or previous condition of servitude.

Src. 2. The Congress shall have power to enforce this article
by appropriate legislation. ‘

1 Amendt. XV. was proposed by Congress, Fob. 26, 1869, and declared to,
have been ratified by 29 of the 37 States, March 30, 1870.

END OF VOL. I

Printed by R. & R. Cuark, Edinburgh.

TT
00102648

Digitized with financial assistance from

Shri Brihad Bhartiya Samaj
on 11 March, 2020
