The Life and Adventures of William Buckley
William Buckley (ed. John Morgan), 1852
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): The complete text of Buckley's 1852 narrative, with its settler bunyip accounts. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/lifeadventuresof00buck). This 1852 publication is in the public domain in the United States.

========================================================================

THE 

LIFE AND ADVENTURES 

OF 

WILLIAM BUCKLEY, 

THIRTY-TWO YEARS A WANDERER 

AMONGST THE ABORIGINES OF THE THEN UNEXPLORED COUNTRY 
BOUND PORT PHILLIP, 

NOW 

THE PROVINCE OF VICTORIA. 

BY JOHN MORGAN. 

AUTHOR OF THE EMIGRANT’S NOTE BOOK AND GUIDE, WITH 
RECOLLECTIONS OF THE WAR IN CANADA 

1812—15. 

“ 1 was indeed a lone man.” 

—Page 88 . 

TASMANIA: 

PRINTED^ AND PUBLISHED BY ARCHIBALD MAC DO U GALL, 
MELVILLE-STREET, HOBART* 

1852 , 

TO 

®aatUtain Hobertson, acquire, 

OF COLAC, 

IN THE PROVINCE OF VICTORIA, 

AND OP 

HOBART, VAN DIEMEN’S LAND, 

is 

MOST GRATEFULLY AND RESPECTFULLY 

INSCRIBED. 

TO 

®aatUtain Hobertson, acquire, 

OF COLAC, 

IN THE PROVINCE OF VICTORIA, 

AND OP 

HOBART, VAN DIEMEN’S LAND, 

is 

MOST GRATEFULLY AND RESPECTFULLY 

INSCRIBED. 

PREFACE. 

Editors of Newspapers seldom succeed as authors of 
works on reality, or of fiction; and the latter are also 
generally unsuccessful as conductors of public journals. 
Without making a claim to excellence either in one 
position or the other, I may, perhaps, be permitted to 
state my belief that these opinions are at least probable, 
and my reasons for arriving at that conclusion. 

The editor of a public journal—unless it be one o 
great consideration—goes to the performance of his 
every-day duty with a fall knowledge, that what he 
has to say, will—if read—be cast aside; not more 
than one number out of every hundred being favoured 
with a second thought, or honoured with even a brief 
preservation. However able he may be to give use¬ 
ful expression to his thoughts and feelings, the effects 
of the ability he displays are but slightly impressive, 
and, at the best, only transitory. He therefore thinks 
seriously for a time,—forms opinions upon his think- 

vi 

PREFACE. 

ing,—and then goes to work, running his ideas— 
as the sailors would say—•“right off the reel:” his 
great object being to express himself sufficiently cor¬ 
rectly, and intelligibly, so that u all who run may 
read;” and that be, running a race against time, 
may ha^e no part of his establishment for a moment 
at? a stand ptilL The very close, careful, pointing 
of sentences*—or ~ portions of them—he does not, and 
cannot attend to, as the least delay may occasion 
confusion. He carer very little about it in feet, be¬ 
cause' he has^m ought to have—sense enough to 
know, that* in: a very few hours—comparatively speak- 
ing-t-cill hisnlabonrs willbe scattered to the winds, as 
old gossip, old stories, or old information. 

This may ..wrong; I do not say the contrary, but, 
merely offer aacpimon; and that the book writer goes 
to his work very differently, because he may be per¬ 
mitted to hope thte labours of his mind will live a few 
years, e*en if it beonly in a first edition. With this 
feeling, so gratifying to the author, he will he careful 
as to What he puts before the world, knowing how many 
there are in it who cannot praise, bat, on the contrary, 
delight to censure. 

1 allude to these matters, because it may be said by 
some of the readers of this narrative, that many of the 
sentences are crude, and unnecessarily short: that they 
might hate been made more interesting by adopting a 
different style of relation. I beg those who may think 
this; to ^understand, that 'the Hero of these adventures 
can nettft&r' read nor* write, and, that consequently, I 

PREFACE. 

vii 

have had the laborious task of connecting chftnmstanoes 
together (so as to make them intelligible) from rough 
notes and memoranda* made at various tunes, and. by 
conversations, noting the points down in the shape of; 
questions and answers, as I went an. 

I trust this fret will be fairly considered by the 
critic, who may feel disposed—at his pleasure—to 
find fault with the style of this history, -written and 
published, as it has been, under circjtunstances of pe¬ 
culiar difficulty. As to tAe matter of wbioh it iscOBa- 
posed, I have only to say, that I believe it to he fitithr» 
ful: not only because he who is<tije subject of it, hm 
assured me of its. truthfulness, but from my own-per¬ 
sonal acquaintance for several , years with the habits of 
the Aboriginal inhabitants of the Australian Continent, 
and previously with those of other countries, in every 
quarter of the world. 

' This circumstanm, I belfeve, first induced him to 
solicit me to edit a history of his life, but it is several 
years since that applicationi f both of us haying during 
the interval been otherwise occupied. At length* he 
having been discharged from government employ, and; 
pensioned off on the large salary of twelve pounds per 
annum; and myself having retired from the very lu¬ 
crative occupation of aookmial newspaper editor, 1 un¬ 
dertook the task, for our mutual benefit, 

Fortunately, we found a generously disposed friend 
in William Robertson, Esquire, to whom this work ig 
respectfully inscribed in token of our gratitude? tbah 
gentleman having kindly undertaken to act as Trustee* 

viii 

PREFACE. 

for both parties, which, as Buckley can neither read nor 
write, as I have already said, was a safe and desirable 
arrangement. 

It may be proper to explain my reasons for consider¬ 
ing such an arrangement desirable. Header, do not do 
me an injustice; remember the comparatively humble 
may follow in the pathway of the exalted, and yet not 
presume to greatness. 

De Foe, the author of the fictitious history of Robin¬ 
son Crusoe, after the publication of that very popular 
narrative, and during the remainder of his Hfe, was as¬ 
sailed by the literary assassins of the time in a most 
unworthy and cowardly manner. They charged him 
with having surreptitiously obtained the journal of 
Alexander Selkirk, the shipwrecked mariner of Juan 
Fernandez. They said that having done so, and given 
his celebrated work to the world, he derived great an¬ 
nual profits from it, whilst he left poor Selkirk to pine 
in abject penury. Now although we certainly do not 
expect any such liberal share of fame and fortune by 
the publication of this truthfol history, I am most anxi¬ 
ous to avoid even the possibility of such a reproach, and 
hence arises the Trusteeship which Mr. William Robert¬ 
son has so kindly undertaken. 

For a long time a difficulty existed as to the risk of 
printing a narrative of the kind at so late a period, but 
at length, Mr. Macdougall, (late of Adelaide,) engaged 
on convenient terms, to bring the .work out; which he 
has done in a manner creditable to himself, and to the 

PREFACE. 

IX 

I am also much indebted to William Westgarth, 
Esq., M.L.C. for Melbourne, who has furnished me with 
the Statistics in the Appendix; which, I hope, will be 
considered a valuable addition, and especially at this 
time. 

I regret to say, the admirable likeness of William 
Buckley is the only illustration I can give, the great 
anxiety for gathering the golden harvest in Victoria, 
having driven not only the artizan, but the artist, from 
off the course of hiB usual industry. 

I have nothing’more to add by way of preface, or in¬ 
troduction : as for apologies for unavoidable imperfec¬ 
tions, I make none,—why should I ? 

In giving the history of a life in the first person, and 
under such peculiar circumstances, I have endeavoured 
to express the thoughts of a humble, unlearned man, in 
that language of simplicity and truth which, in my mind, 
is best suited to the subject, and to the circumstances as 
they passed in review before me. 

I have anxiously sought to induce a reliance upon 
Providence in all cases of danger and difficulty, having 
myself escaped so often from imminent and immediate 
peril. That man is the best able to judge of the value 
of God's Providence who has seen His power evinced in 
the various ways made manifest in the battle-field, in 
the boundless forest, on the ocean wave; of which those 
“ Who live at home at ease,” 

know nothing, except by reading, and by the labours 
of others,—the Sailors, the Soldiers, the Explorers— 
the Pioneers of the world. 

X 

PREFACE. 

To them, to all, I now respectfully submit this book, 
which will be found to contain an Appendix showing 
something of the vast resources of the magnificent 
Province of Victoria, within whose boundaries the hero 
of the narrative passed so many years, and at length 
submits his history to the world. 

John Morgan. 

Hobart , March 22 , 1852 . 

Note ,—At the close of this volume, under the head 
u Addenda,” will be found a most interesting early 
record. It has been taken, by permission, from the 
private journal kept by the late Reverend Robert 
Endpwobd, during 1803 and 1804. It will be read with 
interest by most persons, not only as regards the re¬ 
ference it makes to the voyage out, and to the early 
days of the Colony of Victoria, but also from respect to 
the memory, of the, Reverend Gentleman himself and 
those with whom he was associated. 

J. M. 

CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER X. 

Buckley’s Birth, Parentage, and Education.—Apprenticed to a > 
Bricklayer.—Runs away and Enlists for a Soldier.—Joins 
the Cheshire Militia, and then a Regiment of the Line.— 
Embarks for Holland;—Battle between the French and Allied 
Forces.—Returns to England,—Gets into bad company: tried 
and sentensed.—Goes in the Calcutta, with a party of convicts 
to Port Phillip.—Ship arrives.—Prisoners and the Guard of 
Marines land.—Abeoonds, with several others/—Separates 
from his companions.—Alone in the Wilderness.—Sufferings 
in the Bush.—Nooraki. - Pages 1—16 

CHAPTER II. 

Discovered by the Natives.—Visit the Tribe.—Alarmed by Sea 
Elephants.—Native Grave.—Found nearly dead by Native 
Women, whose husbands make me prisoner.—Fight.—Cor- 
robberree.—Unexpectedly find some very extraordinary Re¬ 
lations.—The first Paletdt—Another Battle, in which men 
and women are killed.—Bodies burnt—Challenge to fight 
given and accepted.—Elopements, and their consequences.— 
Kangaroo hunt. ------ 17—36 

Xll 

CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER III. 

Hunting the Kangaroo, Emu, and Opossom.—Wild Dogs.— 
Having the best of a Bargain.—Eel catching.—Spearing 
Fish.—Manner of Cooking.—General Fight: several Natives 
killed.—Disposal of the Dead.—Superstitious Ceremonies.— 
Reflections on Savage Life.—Swan hunting.—Gathering 
Eggs.—The Bunyip.—More Corrobberrees, Fights, and 
Murders..- - Pages 37—50 

CHAPTER IV. 

Marriage Ceremonies.—Destruction of Children.—The conse¬ 
quences of Jealousy.—Another Battle.—Another mode of 
disposal of the Dead.—Description of Natives.—Supersti¬ 
tions.—Origin of Fire.—War Implements.—Murderous As¬ 
sault.—Cannibalism. ----- 51—67 

CHAPTER Y. 

Dreadful Assassination.—Native Music.—Odd Habits and Su¬ 
perstitions.—The Kalkeeth Ant.—Ornaments.—Description 
of the Tomahawk.—More Fights and mischief.—Fatal 
Accident.—Venemous Snakes.—Loss of my Friends and 
supposed Relations.. 68—82 

CHAPTER VI. 

Fishing Hut on the Karaaf River.—Great Success.—The Wom¬ 
bat.—Domestic Ceremonies of the Natives.—Grey Hair.— 
Another Murder.—Cannibalism.—My Marriage.—My Wife 
elopes, and leaves me very disconsolate!—Her sad Fate.— 
Monster Snake.—Blind Boy.—Return to my home on the 
Haraaf River. 83—96 

CONTENTS. 

xiii 

CHAPTER VII. 

Murder of the Blind Boy.—Abandon the Natives.—A Native 
Woman my only companion for many months.—The Native 
Language.—Cannibal Tribe.—Vessel seen.—Consequences. 
—The White Man’s Grave.—Dreadful Massacre.—Wreck 
of a Ship.—The Bunyip again. - - - Pages 97—119 

CHAPTER VIII. 

News of another Ship.—Landing of Settlers.—My Reflections:— 
Liberty or Captivity? that’s the question.—Visit the new 
comers.—Received kindly by them.—Messrs. Wedge and 
Batman.—Hopes for the future.—Exploring Expedition.— 
Buckley’s Falls.—Receive a Free Pardon. - 110—121 

CHAPTER IX. 

Change of the Settlement.—Visit from the Putnaroos and the 
Wainworras.—Mr, Gellibrand.—Engage as Interpreter.— 
Another Arrival.—First House Built.—Colonising Excite¬ 
ment.—Disputes between the Settlers and Natives.—Two 
Settlers killed..122—126 

CHAPTER X. 

Arrival of Captain Lonsdale.—Stockmen Murdered.—General 
Bourke arrives.—Earthquake.—Loss of Messrs. Gellibrand 
and Hesse.—Exploring Parties go in search of them.—My 
Horse brutally maimed.—Visit Launceston.—Return to Mel¬ 
bourne.—Leave the Government Service. - 127—137 

CHAPTER XI. 

Charge against a Native.—How sustained.—The Climate.—Sail 
for Hobart Town.—Hospitable reception.—Narrow escape 
from becoming a Public Performer.—Government House.— 
Agam enter the Public Service.—My Marriage.—Discharge 
and Pension.—Narrative draws to a close. - 138—148 

XIV 

CONTENTS. 

APPENDIX. 

Historical Records of the Fourth, or King’s Own, Regiment of 

Foot ------- Pages 149—152 

The First Settlement of Port Phillip, 'and subsequent abandon¬ 
ment.—Settlement of Van Diemen’s Land.—Death of the 
Governor.—Colonel Collins. - 153—160 

Aborigines’ Superstitions and Jealousies - - 161—163 

Editorial Notes - - - - - - - 164—168 

THE CONTRAST. 

Statistics of the Province of Victoria, 1851.—The Census.—Public 
Revenues.—Commercial Results.—Effect of the Bathurst 
Gold discoveries.—Benevolent Asylum.—Imports and Ex¬ 
ports.—Acres in Cultivation.—Number of Sheep, Cattle, 
Horses, &c. -.169—178 

THE GOLDEN HARVEST. 

The Golden City ..180 

Province of Victoria.—Ports.—Additional Statistics.—Popula¬ 
tion.—Gold discovered. — Ballarat.—Mount Alexander.— 
Gold Diggers.—Escort.—Exports of Gold.—Consequences 
of the Golden Discoveries.—Statistics dated 1 st February, 
1852.—Increase of Population.—Commercial operations.— 
Customs’ Duties. — Pilotage. — The Harvest. — The Gold 
Fields.—Immense Nugget.—Escort Returns for January.— 
Export Returns for January.—Escort Returns to the 18th 
of February..181—189 

California in contrast with Victoria 

190—196 

Journal of the Reverend Robert Knopwood, U.A., Chaplain to 
the Expedition sent out under Governor Collins to form a 
Settlement at Port PhilKp, 1803-4. - - Pages 197—208 

I’ve run my story through, “ e’en from my boyish days, 
“ To the very moment that he bade me tell it, 

“ Wherein I spake of most disastrous chances, 

“ Of moving accidents by flood and field, 

“ And of the Cannibals, who did each other eat.” 

Othello. 

LIFE OF WILLIAM BUCKLEY. 

CHAPTER I. 

BIRTH, PARENTAGE, AND EDUCATION,—APPRENTICED TO 
A BRICKLAYER.—RUNS AWAY AND ENLISTS FOR A SOL¬ 
DIER.—JOINS THE CHESHIRE MILITIA, AND THEN A 

REGIMENT OF THE LINE.—EMBARKS FOR HOLLAND.- 

BATTLE BETWEEN THE FRENCH AND ALLIED FORCES. 
—RETURNS TO ENGLAND.—GETS INTO BAD COMPANY : 
TRIED, AND SENTENCED.—GOES IN THE CALCUTTA, 
WITH A PARTY OF CONVICTS TO PORT PHILLIP.—SHIP 
ARRIVES.—PRISONERS AND GUARD OF MARINES LAND. 
—ABSCONDS WITH THREE OTHERS.—SEPARATES FROM 
HIS COMPANIONS.—SUFFERINGS IN THE BUSH. 

“ Poor is the friendless Master of a World.” 

1 was born in the year 1780, at Macclesfield, in the 
County of Cheshire, England. My parents were humble 
people, who honestly provided for the support of them¬ 
selves, and a family of two girls and two boys, by cul¬ 
tivating a small farm in that neighbourhood. What has 
become of my brother and sisters, is not known to me; 

B 

2 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

but a short time since I heard the former was still living 
at Middlewitch, also a town in Cheshire, and celebrated 
for its salt works. 

The wandering, extraordinary life I have led, has 
naturally obliterated from my memory, many of the 
earlier scenes of my childhood; but few presenting 
themselves before me occasionally at this period, and 
those only as a dream. The following are however 
still vivid to my mind. 

I remember, that from some circumstance or other, 
I was adopted by my mother’s father, and that I 
was sent by him to an evening school, where 1 was 
taught to read; and that when about fifteen years of 
age, I was apprenticed by the same good old man to 
a Mr. Robert Wyatt, a Bricklayer, residing in that 
neighbourhood, to be taught the art and mystery of 
building houses for other people to live in—it being 
my fate, as will presently be seen, during thirty-two 
years, to inhabit dwellings of a very different descrip¬ 
tion, having for their roofs only the wide spread of 
Heaven. Having been removed in the first instance 
from the immediate charge of my parents, I was, I 
suppose, not so strictly treated by the old people as 
I should have been, as a boy, and hence the restraints 
imposed upon me by my master, and his very proper 
endeavours to make me useful and industrious, were 
considered hardships and punishments, unnecessarily 
and improperly inflicted. This feeling, in time, com¬ 
pletely unsettled me, and my uncontrolled discontent 
mastering my boyish reason, when I was about nine- 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

3 

teen, I determined to enlist as a soldier, and to win 
glorious laurels in the battle-field, taking my chances 
of becoming either a corporal, or a colonel,—I cared 
not which; neither did I very well understand the 
difference between the two positions, or the career of 
dangers, trials, and sufferings, upon which I was en¬ 
tering. 

Acting upon these impulses, I enlisted in the Cheshire 
Militia, receiving ten guineas as a bounty, which sum I 
thought would prove inexhaustible; but, at the end of 
about a year, I took another bounty, having volunteered 
into the Fourth, or King’s own Regiment of Foot, then 
laying at Horsham Barracks. The Regiment was com¬ 
manded by a Lieutenant-Colonel Dixon, a very excel¬ 
lent officer, and in about six weeks after joining, we 
were ordered to embark for Holland, where His Royal 
Highness the Duke of York, at the head of the British 
army, was endeavouring to sustain himself against the 
French Republican forces. My Regiment was in the 
division commanded by the late Lieutenant-General the 
Earl of Chatham. 

It is not the purpose of this narrative, to refer parti¬ 
cularly to that period of my life, neither shall I attempt 
to give the details of the campaigns in Holland: suffice 
it to say, that in a battle fought in that country, our 
regiment suffered heavily, and that I was wounded, 
rather severely, in the right hand. Almost immediately 
after this action, the Fourth, with other corps, embarked 
for England, and were landed at Chatham, where we 
lay some time. Here I received another bounty for 

b 2 

4 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

extended service, having now been about four years a 
soldier, and by attention to my duty, and general steadi¬ 
ness of conduct, having acquired the good opinion of my 
officers. Perhaps my unusual height, six feet five, may 
also have predisposed them in my favour. It would have 
been well had I continued in the same line of rectitude, 
but my imperfect education, and early feelings of dis¬ 
content returning upon me, I unfortunately became 
associated with several men of bad character in the 
Regiment, who gradually acquired an influence over my 
conduct, which very soon led me into scenes of irregu¬ 
larity, and riotous dissipation. At length, after a six 
weeks’ furlough, during which I visited my Mends in 
Cheshire, I was apprehended, as being implicated with 
those men in an offence which rendered me liable to 
punishment. The consequence was, that I #was tried 
at Chatham, and found guilty, but as the laws were 
strangely administered in those days, where soldiers 
and sailors were concerned, I do not know to this hour 
the precise character, or extent of my sentence. 

This may appear strange, but the reader will remem¬ 
ber, that transportation, as a punishment on any regular 
or fixed system, had then scarcely been thought of, and, 
that soldiers and sailors were dealt with more at the 
pleasure of the Chief Military, and Naval Authorities, 
than by Judges or Justices, many of whom considered 
the army and navy outside the pale of their protec¬ 
tion. With this sentence, whatever it was, ceased my 
connection with my family, and I have never since 
heard of either, or any of them, excepting as I have 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. £ 

already said, that my brother was supposed, a short 
time since, to be still living at Middlewitch. 

My fortune had now changed. I was a prisoner, 
working at the new fortifications being thrown up for 
the defence of Woolwich. In about six months, how¬ 
ever, a new light broke out over my unhappy exist¬ 
ence, and an opportunity was afforded me of ultimately 
retrieving my character, and acquiring freedom: this 
was by the determination of the British Government 
to found a penal settlement at Port Phillip, on the 
south-eastern coast of New Holland; that part known 
as New South Wales being the only portion of the 
Continent then occupied. Being a mechanic, I, with 
others, was selected and placed on board His Majesty's 
ship Calcutta, Captain Woodriff. Lieutenant-Colonel 
Collins, of the Royal Marines, was appointed Governor, 
and he accompanied the expedition, having with him in 
the same ship, several officers and a detachment of his 
corps, as a guard over the prisoners during the voyage, 
and after their landing. The treatment I received on 
the passage was very good, and, as I endeavoured to 
make myself useful on board, I was permitted to be the 
greater part of my time on deck, assisting the crew in 
working the ship. In justice to the officers placed 
over us, I must say, the treatment all the prisoners 
received at their hands, was as far from suffering, as 
could be expected, at a time when prison discipline 
was generally carried out by ooercion, and the lash 
and the rope were, in too many instanoes, considered 
too good for all who had been convicted. To amend 

LIFE OP BOOKLET. 

and reclaim, to bring back to society, and to admin 1 * 
inter hope and consolation, were, in those days, con¬ 
sidered the encouragement of mutiny, and hence, to 
be permitted to live without additional sentences, and 
summary punishments, was looked upon,—as mercy. 

At length our voyage was at an end, and the Cal¬ 
cutta came to an anchor within the Heads, at about 
two miles from what is now known as Point Lonsdale. 

The Natives call that place Koonan, which means 
eels, that fish being in great abundance in almost all 
the streams running into Port Phillip* The particular 
locality had been chosen as the scite of a penal station, 
it being six hundred miles from the nearest settlement, 
Sydney, and the chances of escape offered to the pri¬ 
soner being, therefore, very few. In a short time the 
Marines and convicts landed, and encamped. A dis¬ 
tinction was made between the mechanics and the rest 
of the prisoner people, the former being permitted to 
hut themselves outside the line of sentinels, whilst the 
labourers were placed under a more careful controul. 
This was necessary, as the lime-burners, brickmakers, 
and sawyers, were compelled to work in all directions, 
and at a distance from the encampment. A magazine 
and a store-house were the first public buildings com¬ 
menced, and at the former I had been employed about 
three months, when I determined on endeavouring to 
make my escape, and to get, if possible, to Sydney. 
The attempt was little short of madness, for there was 
before me the chances of being retaken, and probable 
death, or other dreadful punishment; or again, starva- 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

7 

tion in an unknown country inhabited by savages; with 
whose language and habits, I was totally unacquainted, 
besides the dangers innumerable which the reader may 
in part imagine, but which no man can describe—no, 
not even myself; although, by the merciful providence 
of God, I surmounted them all. 

These perils and difficulties are now passed; they 
were then staring me in the face; but possessed of great 
personal strength, a good constitution, and having 
known what might be done by courageous men when 
combating for life and liberty, I determined on braving 
everything, and, if possible, making ipy escape. Per* 
haps my unsettled nature in a great measure induced 
this, and, that my impatience of every kind of restraint, 
also led to the resolution. However this may be, four 
of us agreed to take to the bush, as absconding is called, 
and being allowed the use of a gun for killing kangaroo^ 
and opossums, we made up our minds to start the first 
dark night, taking it with us, and as much provisions as 
we could muster. 

The opportunity soon offered and we left, as we hoped, 
unobserved; we however were not so fortunate, for one 
of the sentinels challenged, and receiving no answer, im¬ 
mediately fired, shooting the last man of the four of us, 
as I thought, dead; at least, I never after saw, nor heard 
of him. After running the greater part of the first three 
or four hours, to make our escape the more certain, we 
halted for rest and refreshment. We were now fairly 
launched on our perilous voyage, and it* became neces¬ 
sary to reflect' on our position, and to exhritftte our re- 

8 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

sources. The latter consisted of sundry tin pots, an 
iron kettle, the fowling-piece already mentioned, and 
a few days 1 rations. We now pushed on again until 
we came to a river, and near the bay; this stream 
the natives call Darkee Barwin: here we rested until 
daylight, and then prepared to renew our march. Early 
in the morning, a large party, or tribe of the natives, 
was seen, armed with spears; and, thinking to alarm 
them by so unusual a sound, I fired the piece, on hear¬ 
ing which, they retired hurriedly into the bush. 1 
should here observe, that we had now very little ap¬ 
prehension of being retaken, believing the opinion of 
Governor Collins to be, that any prisoner attempting 
to escape, would gladly deliver himself up, rather than 
perish of hunger; besides, we had, by the rapid rate at 
which we had travelled during the night, placed a con¬ 
siderable distance between us and the encampment. 
Light marching order being very desirable, when start¬ 
ing on our first day's march, we resolved on parting 
company with the iron kettle, as a useless article, and 
therefore threw it into the scrub, where it was found, 
thirty-two years after, by a party of men clearing 
ground for agricultural purposes. 

Our next business was to cross the river, but as all 
of us could not swim, I passed first to try its depth, and 
after considerable difficulty succeeded in getting my 
companions over, and then I swam over again for their 
clothes, being the beat swimmer of the party. That 
night we reached to about twenty miles distant from 
wb«t ip now the City of Melbourne, and halted there 

LITE OF BUCKLEY. 

ft 

totil the morning, when we crossed the Yarra River; 
and, after passing over extensive plains, reached the 
Yawang Hills, where we finished the last particle of 
bread and meat that we had, not having divided our 
rations properly, and taken the precautions necessary to 
avoid starvation. Here we remained the night; the 
next morning, I told my companions that we must 
make for the beach to look for food, or death was cer¬ 
tain. They agreed with this suggestion, and after a 
long and weary march we again made the shore of the 
bay, and finding a few shell fish, with them appeased 
our hunger. At a place the natives call Kooraioo, in 
an extensive bay, we were so fortunate as to find a well 
of fresh water, and here we remained the night:—the 
following day continuing our course along the beach 
gathering shell fish, until we reached a place called 
Woodela, signifying rock. Here we again rested, if 
rest it might be called, suffering as we were from the 
want of the absolute necessaries of life: the fish al¬ 
though preserving it, affecting us all very severely. 
The next day our route was the same, and as we saw 
several native huts in our journey, we were hourly ex¬ 
pecting to fall in with one of the tribes, hunting or 
fishing on that part of the coast. Another day's travel 
brought us to a little island, called Barwal, which we 
could reach at low water, and here we halted several 
days to recover our strength, which was by this time 
greatly exhausted. We found about this place a sort 
of gum, which, when placed over a fire became soft, and 
palatable; on this, and fish, we subsisted. From Bar- 

10 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

wal, we could see the Calcutta at anchor on the opposite 
side of the bay. The perils we had already encountered 
damped the ardour of my companions, and it was anxi • 
ously wished by them that they could rejoin her, so we 
set about mating signals, by lighting fires at night, and 
hoisting our shirts on trees and poles by day. Aflengtli 
a boat was seen to leave the ship and come in our direc¬ 
tion, and although the dread of punishment was natu¬ 
rally great, yet the fear of starvation exceeded it, and 
they anxiously waited her arrival to deliver themselves 
up, indulging anticipations of being, after all the suffer¬ 
ings they had undergone, forgiven by the Governor. 
These expectations of relief were however delusive- 
when about half way across the bay, the boat returned, 
and all hope vanished. We remained in the same place, 
and living in the same way, six more days, signalizing 
all the time, but without success, so that my companions 
seeing no probable relief, gave themselves up to despair, 
and lamented bitterly their helpless situation. 

At the end of the next day they determined on re¬ 
tracing their steps round the head of the bay, and if 
possible, rejoining their companions at the encampment. 
To all their advice, and entreaties to accompany them, I 
turned a deaf ear, being determined to endure every 
kind of suffering rather than again surrender my liberty. 
After some time we separated, going in different directions. 
When I had parted from my companions, although I had 
preferred doing so, I was overwhelmed with the various 
feelings which oppressed me: it would be vain to 
attempt describing my sensations. I thought of the 

1LFE OF BUCKLEY. 

11 

friends of my youth, the scenes of my boyhood, and 
early manhood, of the slavery of my.punishment, of the 
liberty I had panted for, and which although now re¬ 
alized, after a fashion, made the heart sick, even at its 
enjoyment. I remember, 1 was here subjected to the 
most severe mental sufferings for several hoars, and then 
pursued my solitary journey. 

How I could have deceived myself into a belief of 
ever reaching Sydney, and particularly by travelling 
in that direction, is to me astonishing; and even if I 
had found it possible to do so, of course I should, on my 
arrival there, have been confined as a runaway, and 
punished accordingly. The whole affair was, in fact, a 
species of madness. 

During my first day’s lonely march, I saw, at a dis¬ 
tance, about a hundred natives, in and about some huts 
built of bark, and boughs of trees, and others of the 
Tribe making toward me* Being greatly alarmed, I 
took to the river, and swam across it with my clothes 
on, and in so doing extinguished my fire-stick, so that 
I was deprived of the, means to cook my food. This 
was a sad loss, not only as respected the way of making 
what I could obtain to eat, palatable, but of preserving 
my health, under the great privations to which I was 
subjected. I was glad however to observe the natives 
retiring from the bank of the river to their huts, instead 
of following me as 1 expected, and, with thisconsol&tion, 
when I had made my way to the v beach, I laid myself 
down to sleep in the thick scrub, covering myself over 
with leaves, rushes, mid broken bpqghs* It was a 

12 

LIFE. OF BUCKLEY. 

miserable night, my clothes being wet, and the weather 
cold, it being the early part of the spring of the year. 
At daylight, I endeavoured to ascertain if the natives 
were moving, as their huts and fires were within Bight,' 
and finding them not astir, I left my uncomfortable 
lodging, and took again to the beach. 

As it was low tide, I found a considerable supply of 
the shell fish before mentioned, which the natives call 
Kooderoo; It is the same as the English describe as 
mutton fish. Its shape is something Hke that of the 
oyster, but it is tougher, and larger, and consequently 
not so digestable. The shell is inlaid with what ap¬ 
pears to fie'riidther of pearl. These fish I was now 
obliged to e&t raw, and having no fresh water I suf¬ 
fered exceedingly from thirst until the evening, when 
I reached the river Raaraf, a stream of considerable 
width and depth, I there laid myself down for the 
night. It was one, far worse than the last, for I had 
taken off my clothes and hung them up in the trees to 
dry, covering myself with the long grass as my only 
shelter from the weather. The next day, I forded the 
Raaraf, and having left it and taken to the bush, I 
suffered dreadfully during the day from thirst, having 
nothing to allay it but the dew from the boughs which 
I collected with my hands in passing. Even this sup¬ 
ply was very uncertain, on account of the strong breezes 
which prevailed during the nights. 

Continuing my course along the beach, I reached the 
Doorangwar River, where I took up my quarters in my 
usual manner, having the sky for my canopy, and the 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

13 

earthy scrub for my resting-place. I did so this night with 
increased anxiety, having seen several deserted native 
huts in my day's march, by which I concluded they 
were somewhere in the neighbourhood; on this account 
I had avoided going into the bush as much as possible, 
although compelled occasionally to leave the beach, in 
order to ford the rivers I had met with on my journey. 

The following day I came to a stream the natives call 
Kuarka Dorla, without having seen any living creature 
excepting birds, mid a few wild dogs; the latter fled at 
my approach, but their dismal howlings, and especially 
during the night, added to the solitary wretchedness of 
my situation. Although so very short a time had elapsed 
since 1 commenced my gloomy pilgrimage, I began to 
find, the weather, as I thought, warmer—as if I had 
travelled into another climate. This increased my 
thirst, and the consequent distress, which I could in 
no way alleviate, the streams I crossed being, even 
at low water, all brackish from the flow of the tide 
water. Added to this, my only food being shell fish, 
I suffered much, so exceedingly indeed, that almost 
regardless of life, I lay myself down for the night in 
a state of total exhaustion. With the morning’s light, 
however, I pursued my journey, but this day 1 was 
more unfortunate than the one preceding, for I could 
not find a single fish, or particle of any other kind of 
food or water, and in great pain and misery that day 
ended. The following was one which I anticipated 
would be my last, for I could scarcely move my limbs 
along, and the stages I made, were* in consequence, 

14 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY.. 

very short. At length I came to two rocks nearly close 
to each other on the beach; weary and tired, foot sore and 
nearly heart broken, I laid myself down between them. 
I had not been there long, when the tide came in so 
rapidly, that I found it necessary to climb some way up 
one of them, and remain there until it had receded. 
The descent was a work of difficulty, having now been 
three days without a particle of food or drop of fresh 
water: however, I resolved on making another effort 
to hobble along the beach, and at length came to the 
Mangowak, another salt water stream which I forded. 
I found the natives had been burning the bush about 
this place, so I carefully examined it hoping to find 
some remains of fire; and, at length to my great joy,, 
discovered a tree still smoking, and by this means 
again provided myself with a fire-stick. For a time, 
however, this was useless, as I had no kind of eatables 
to cook, and was still without fresh water. At length 
I discovered a high shrub bearing a kind of berry, 
many of which I knocked down; but not knowing what 
effect they might have upon me, I ate of them very 
sparingly. These berries I found very refreshing, and 
soon after I was so fortunate as to discover a native 
well near the bank of the stream, and close to the beach, 
in which there was excellent water—of which I drank 
abundantly. *The Almighty indeed, appeared that day 
to favour me—especially, as I thought, in pity to my 
sufferings, for I found also a great supply of shell fish: 
so that I had now food, and fire, and water. 

I should have mentioned, that when I parted com- 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

15 

pany with my companions, one of them took with him 
the gun I spoke of, as having been brought with us 
from the encampment; indeed, I munt here state, that 
if I omit to place any very precise details, in their par¬ 
ticular order, I hope to be excused; because, so many 
years’ wanderings must have impaired my recollection— 
except as to the more prominent and material incidents 
of my life. 

At this spot I remained more than a week, perhaps it 
may have been two or three, for I seem henceforward 
to have lost all record of time, except by the return of 
the seasons, and the rising and setting sun. With such 
luxurious living, for one in my situation, I soon re¬ 
covered my strength, and be assured, I did not fail to 
offer up fervent prayers of thankfulness to the God who 
had hitherto sustained me, and for his support under 
the other trials and sufferings, to which I might be sub¬ 
jected. At this place it rained very heavily during a 
whole day and night; being the first that had fallen 
since my wanderings commenced, but I found a cavern 
near the beach, and in it I sheltered myself very com¬ 
fortably. At length, being sufficiently recovered, I 
resolved on resuming my journey, and by keeping along 
the beach, found abundance of fish, but very little fresh 
water—the streams being all salt, or brackish. 

In two days I came to a large rock, about a mile 
long, which the natives call Nooraki. It is sheltered 
by very high overhanging land, so that the sun seldom 
shines upon it, the tide apparently never receding from 
it, as the depth of water seemed to be always the same. 

16 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

I may consider this as being my first permanent resting- 
place; for the sort of food I had had since I left the 
ship, and particularly latterly, and the irregularity of 
my supplies, sometimes starving, and at others, eating 
to repletion, had occasioned sores, and painful eruptions 
to break out all over my body, so as to make walking 
very difficult and painful. I resolved therefore on re¬ 
maining at this place until I was recovered, and par¬ 
ticularly as there was a fine stream of fresh water rush¬ 
ing out of a high rock, near which, I had determined to 
erect a shelter of branches of trees, and sea-weed. It 
was a work of great labour for a sick man, but I per¬ 
severed and finally completed my sea-beach home in 
about three or four days; there I remained several 
months. In addition to my supply of shell fish, I 
found also in great abundance a creeping plant, the 
flavour of which is very much like that of the common 
water melon—rather insipid, but very refreshing. I 
also discovered a kind of currant, black and white, so 
that I fared sumptuously every day, and rapidly re¬ 
covered my strength, mentally and bodily. I remember 
a fancy coming over me, that I could have remained at 
that spot all the rest of my life; but this solitary desire 
was but temporary, for, as it was never intended that 
man should live alone, so are implanted in his nature, 
social feelings, and thoughts instinctively leading to the 
comforts of home, be it ever so homely, and yearnings for 
society, be it ever so humble. 

LIFE Or BUCKLEY, 

IT 

CHAPTER II, 

DISCOVERED BY NATIVES.—VISIT THE TRIBE.—ALARMED 
BY SEA ELEPHANTS.—NATIVE GRAVE.—POUND NEAR¬ 
LY DEAD BY NATIVE WOMEN, WHOSE HUSBANDS MAKE 
ME PRISONER.— FIGHT.— CORROBBERREE.— UNEXPEC¬ 
TEDLY FIND SOME VERY EXTRAORDINARY RELATIONS. 
—THE FIRST PALET&T.—ANOTHER BATTLE, IN WHICH 
MEN AND WOMEN ARE KILLED. — BODIES BURNT.— 
CHALLENGE TO FIGHT GIVEN AND ACCEPTED.—ELOPE- 
NENTS, AND THEIR CONSEQUENCES. 

“ He stood alone,—beneath the deep dark shade 
Of the Australian forest, where the trees, 

A century old the youngest of them, made 
Hollow and mournful music in the breeze.” 

One day when I was indulging in these meditations, 
and gazing round from my Robinson Crusoe hut upon 
the surface of the waters, I thought 1 heard the sound 
of human voices; and, on looking up, was somewhat 
startled at seeing three natives standing on the high land 
immediately above me. They were armed with spears, 
and had opossum skins thrown over their shoulders, 
partially covering their bodies. Standing as they did, 
on an elevated position! armed too, and being myself 

c 

IS LIPB OF BUCKLSy. 

totally defenceless, I confess I felt alarmed; so that 
hoping I had not been seen, I crept into a crevice in a 
rock near at hand, where I endeavoured to conceal my¬ 
self. They were however soon upon my track, and 
shouting what I considered to be a call for me to come 
out, I resolved to do so; indeed I could not have re¬ 
mained there long on account of the water. With but 
faint hopes of meeting with good treatment at their 
hands, I crawled out from my shelter, and surrendered at 
discretion. They gazed on me with wonder : my size 
probably attracting their attention. After seizing both 
my hands, they struck their breasts, a$4 mine also, 1 
making at the same time a noise between singing and 
crying: a sort of whine, winch to me sounded very like' 
premeditated mischief. Pointing to my hut, they evinced v 
a desire to examine it—so we entered. My new friends, 
if friends they were to he, made themselves very much 
at home, although uninvited. One made up a large 
fire, another threw off his rug and went into the sea for 
crayfish, which, on his retfrrn, he threw alive into the 
flame—at the same time looking at me with an expres¬ 
sion as much as to intimate that they intended to grill 
me next, by way of a change of diet. I can afford to 
smile, and even laugh now at the recollection; but, at the 
time, I assure the reader, I was by no means satisfied 
with the prospect before me, or with my visitors. At r 
length my suspense ended, by their taking the fish, 
fairly dividing them, and handing to me the first and 
best portion. Having finished our meal, they gave me J 
to understand they wished me to follow them. To this 

ism AT 3PC&LSSV 

Ip 

1 hesitated, u<# being satisfied as to their intention, 
but After a time consented. On leading the but, two 
of them went before, and having thus only one to con¬ 
tend against, I thought of making my escape, bat my 
armed guard was too vigilant; so that, defenceless as I 
was, np safe opportunity was afforded. We proceeded 
in this .way until we came to their huts, two small turf 
cabins—in each of which there was just room enough 
for two persons to lay at length under their shelter. It 
was nearly dark, and finding that I was to have my 
sentry friend beside me, and that the other two were to 
occupy the second cabin, my hopes revived—nthat during 
the night an opportunity for my escape would offer. 
He however did not sleep a wink, but kept muttering 
to himself all the night, so that by the morning I was 
fairly worn out by anxiety and watching. At day¬ 
light they gave me to understand they were going 
farther, and that I must accompany them. I, on the 
contrary, thought it .safer to come to an understanding 
at .once, and .with this view, mustering aU my resolution, 
I intimated a refusal, that 1 would not do so. After a 
warm, discussion by aignq, and, to both ipaftic*, fey suffi¬ 
ciently s i g n i ficant sounds, they apparently consented 
that I should remain; but, as they wished me not fe> 
leave until .their’ return, my old and nearly worn-out 
stockings were requited by them as an assurance offer¬ 
ing. This I.steadily declined cosoplyeug with, so rfcbat 
after sundry jtriking>of the .breastq, and stWBping with 
the feet, they .were content to leave me «*«n<*feated- 1 
watched thorn until 1 thought the coast, me dinar, and. 

c 2 

Utt Ot BXJCKL if. 

sa 

then began to consider in what direction I should steer, 
for I had not now the beach as a guide for my move¬ 
ments. Whilst thinking over the matter, one of them 
returned, bringing with him a rude kind of basket made 
of rushes. In it was some of the berries I have already 
mentioned, which he wished to barter for one of my 
much courted stockings. I however objected, being re¬ 
solved on letting him know I was positive in that matter, 
hoping by so doing to give him a favourable opinion of my 
determination, on questions which might arise between 
us of greater consequence. Finding his negotiation use¬ 
less, he left the fruit and followed Ms companions. When 
I thought them sufficiently far off, I took to my heels, 
in the direction, as I thought, for the sea coast, and for¬ 
tunately I made it without much difficulty. Going 
musing along, I came to a high rock against wMch the 
waves were beating violently, the sea at the time being 
very tempestuous: it was a very grand but a dreary 
and melancholy scene. Whilst viewing it with a very 
aching and downcast heart and spirit, I observed a 
small rocky island a short distance from the beach, 
covered with the strangest looking animals I had ever 
seen. They appeared to be about four, or from four to 
six feet long, having a, head similar to that of a pig, 
without feet, with tails like those of a fish, a large fin 
on each side, and a body covered with short glossy hair: 
I suppose them to be the fur seal, or sea elephant. 

Findihg night corning on, having no fire to warm me, 
and with so dreary a prospect of the future—without 
food c of v any^kind,^I^began to repent having left the 

um OF BUCKLIfT« 

81 

natives, and resolved on returning to their huts from 
whence I had made my escape. I accordingly traced 
my way back, but on my arrival found they had not 
returned. After remaining some hours, I decided on 
going in the direction I supposed them to have taken, 
but after a weary march, I found 1 had completely lost 
myself and very much distressed, I laid myself down 
for the night, within the shelter of a large hollow tree, 
such as are to be found in the Australian forests. Having 
secured a fire-stick during the day, I made a good fire, 
it being very cold, and raining heavily. 

1 remember I had no sleep that night, for my fire 
attracted the notice of the wild dogs and opossums, 
whose horrid howls and noises were such as to render 
sleep impossible. The cries of the latter were like the 
shrieks of children, appearing to be at times over me, 
and at others dose to my ear. Under these circum¬ 
stances, I hailed the daylight very thankfully, and then 
proceeded on my solitary way, endeavouring to get upon 
the trail of the natives, who, as I supposed, had goqe 
in that direction. In this I was not successful, and 
having entangled myself in the labyrinths of the forest, 
in a country entirely unknown to me, I became at 
length lost, and remained so for three days, without a 
morsel of food, or a drop of water, excepting small 
quantities which I occasionally met with in the clay 
„ holes. When I laid myself down to rest hoping to 
sleep, the same unearthly noises appeared to have fol¬ 
lowed me, and my mind for want of relaxation was 
failing, as the minds of the strongest men will 

#2 

it M or Btrexift?. 

wndefsUch (rf^ctrtndtiiiccd. I continued fr> wander abotft 
■inSMsWay, subsisting upon sucfcufetft shrubs* and Ber¬ 
ries, until I came to a large Wee, upon which I cOcdd 
'tee an abundance of duck*, and geese, and swans, and 
btftesr' Wild fowl. Prom that lake f found a very con¬ 
siderable river flowing, as I concluded, toward the tea. 
f at onee resolved to follow its course' and crtt reaching 
its entrance, saw the little rocky island already men¬ 
tioned as having the seal, or sea elephants upon it; and 
it was a great comfort to me, to fond myself once more 
not far from my old quarters Where the three natives 
had left me. I soon after arrived at the turf cabins, 
having how acquired some acquaintance With the lo¬ 
cality, and although Suffering much from hunger, lay 
myself down and slept soundly. At daylight, I had 
the satisfaction to find some of the 1 same kind of fruit 
the native had brought me in the rush Basket. Oh 
these I made a great feast, and after remaining there 
that day, returned to my own hut on the Beach. Here 
I must have remained many months-Aow long I cannot 
tefl—subsisting as Before; but at length it appeared 
lfkely that my supplies would foil, and I began again 
to reflect on my deplorable condition. My clothes 
were all in tatters, my shoes were Worn out, my health 
was much impaired By want and exposure, and my 
spirits Brokett^-so much so, that I determined on re¬ 
tracing my Steps in order to regain the ship hi the 
event of her remaining in the Bay, and With the hopes 
of -rejoining my companions, should they be still In ex¬ 
istence. The Wffcfer WUs feat approaching, the weaflfc* 

ptf ti OX BUCKL1Y. S8 

had set in dreadfully cold and tempestuous, So that it 
was not without great difficulty I could go down amouget 
the rocks for shell fish, which, as I have akready Mid, 
.were now, from some cause or other, getting very rare* 
in that locality, I therefore bade gbod bye to my body 
habitation and started on my return. 

One night, whilst travelling along the beach, 1 w m 
completely bewildered, having been stopped m my pro¬ 
gress by a high perpendicular rock stretching out fiwnft 
the eliffs some distance into the sea. The tide funning 
in fast,* my only chance of escape was by c&hbiag 
the rock. This I did with great difficulty, iftd jaut 
above high water mark I found a large Cavern, into 
winch I crept for shelter. Having had no fire for some 
time I was again living: upon such raw shell fish a* 1 
could find in each day's journey, and with these was 
making my wretched meal, when I found I had intruded 
upon the lodgings of some of the tenants of the deep, 
who eould only reach their rocky quarters when the 
tide was at the highest. I was completely horrified 
and knew not what to dp,, as it was hearly dark, and 
they were waddling in at, the entrance. To rush out, 
appeared to be nothing less than certain death; but 
happening to make a noise, /it struck terror into them, 
tad tumbling one over the, pther into the sea, they left 
aoe once more master of the cavern. I remained during 
the rest of the night undisturbed, and the following 
morning again pursued my weary way. 

Being now very weak fitom Jhe pSvr&$OM I had lift- 

datgopt, i «niy 

24? 

M»l0r BUMLHTV 

dav^and; a* ttemghte were verycoldfmy suffering* 
wmig*^ Scuwrack occasionally as to overpower my 
retMtni^ 4trengtfband resolution. After several days 
I reached a, stream which the natives call Dooangaw% 
where I mada myself a sort of shelter in the scrub, and 
in the morning saw a mound of earth, with part of 
native’s spear stuck upright on the top of it, to indicate 
its being a grave. I took the spear out and used it as 
a walking-stink to help me on my journey. 

; The next day I reached the Kaarof at high water; 
In attempting to swim across I had nearly lost my life, 
the- stream being too rapid for my enfeebled state, so 
that I/was carried some way down by the force of the 
current.. 2 however succeeded in reaching the opposite 
bank, and .then crawled on my hands and feet into the 
bush, where I laid myself down nearly exhausted, and 
perishing with cold and hunger, not expecting to see 
Ihe light of another morning. In this state I lamented 
deeply the imprudence winch had placed me in such a 
pitiable position, and prayed long and earnestly to God, 
for his merciful assistance and protection. All night 
the wild dags howled horribly, as if expressing their 
impatience for my remains: even before death, I fancied 
they would attack me. 

At daybreak I went again onward, looking for any. 
kind <ofv food by which to appease my hunger, and at 
length came to a place the natives call Maamart, 
where there is a lake, or large lagoon, surrounded by 
tkiekly growing scmib and timber. Whilst searching 
forthtfgmalmdj mentioned, I was seen by two 

Lira: or 'Bue&wv 

motive women, wise watched mt unperceifed* Aklength^ 
I threw myself down at the loot of a large tree to r®§4« 
On observing me thus prostrate* andr helpless, these > 
women went in search of their husbands with theinteK 
ligence that they had seen a very tall white man. Pre¬ 
sently "they all came upon me unawares* and. seizing me 
by the arms and hands, began heating their breasts, and 
mine, in the manner the others had done. After a short, 
time, they lifted me up, and they made the some sign*, 
giving me to understand by it, that I was hi want of 
food. The women assisted me to walk, the mm shooting, 
hideous noises, and tearing their hair. When we a& 
rived at their huts, they brought a kind of bucket; 
made of dry hark, into which they put gum and water, 
converting it by that means into a sort of pulp. This* 
they offered me to eat, and I did. so very greedily. 
They called me Murrangurk, which I afterwards learnt,: 
was the name of a man formerlybelonging to * their: 
tribe, who had been buried at the spot where I had 
found the piece of spear I still carried with me. They 
have a belief, that when they die, they go to some place 
or other, and are there made white men, and that they 
then return to this world again for another existence. 
They think all the white people previous to death wear© 
belonging to their own tribes, thus returned to life in a 
different colour. In cases where they have killed whit# 
men, it has generally been because they imagined them 
to have been originally enemieB, ©^belonging to tribes 
with whom they were hostile. In accordance with tMi 
belief, they fancied me tabe oua of theirtiibewho- bad 

26 LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

V XL<■} 

been recently killed in a in which Ms daughter* 
bad bdear speared' alsb. 'As I have before said, he Wai 
%tfriOd atr the mound t s#w,and my having the rd- 
feiaftis ef hfs spear With me, conformed them in this 
opinion, To tins providential superstition, I was in- 
idbtedfurall the kindnesses afterwards shown hie. In 

short titire fhdy wetit away, making signs for me to 
remain; ahd orr returning, they brought with them 
several targe fat grubs, Which are found buried in 
decayed frees, and more particularly shout time roots. 
These grubsthey gave me to eat, and by this time* so 
changed was my palate, that I did so, thinking them 
M&itjds. 

I 1 remained with them all that night, but in great 
«§W£Ifety ,* iiot ] 1 khowing their intentions; I thought 
sdtMtid times of endeavburing to make my escape, but 
i# my Wdak storto it was impossible. The women 
wfcrfr aMttatime making frightful kraentatioris and 
WsSfegs^lafeerating their faces in a dreadful manner. 
All fMs increased my anxiety and horror, which was 
addbd- to in 5 the morning, When I saw the frightful 
looking demons they had made themselves. They were 
covered with' blood from the Wounds they had indicted, 
having cut theft* frees and legs into ridges, and burnt 
the' edges With ffre^ sticks. I understood by their signs, 
and manner, ^hat* they wished me to accompany them 
to 'the taribe ji thdy tied left to procure gum, which 
W^ in gtodt Wbunfeanee at the spot where they die- 
chVetod lie. 1 ,U 1 J ‘fiwiefented^ and after journeying for 
' tome 0 milto 1 the 1 scrub, and over pl£mg, wa 

6x~ vsrit \iC fcfN j- ' r - -• 

Xm OF BtCKLPY. 

27 

came to the Barwin, which we crossed,, and then could 
plainly see the black heads of a number of natives 
amongst the reeds: appearing to me like a large flock 
of Crows. About a hundred men came to meet us, 
but the women remained digging for roots, which they 
use as fbod: their huts being situated near an exten¬ 
sive lagoon. My friendly natives, or rather new ater 
ijuaintance whom I had accompanied'/ took me to th^ir 
homes, which were merely brandies of frees thrown 
across each other, with slips of tea-tree and* pieces of 
bark placed over as an additional shelter. They mo : 
turned me to be seated, hut I preferred at first keeping 
a standing position, in order to be the better able to 
watch their movements: in the mean time, the women* 
behind the huts were all fighting with dubs and sticks* 
Presently the men, excepting the two with me, rushed 
toward them, in order to separate the combatants, afte* 
which they brought roots which they roasted and offered 
me. What the fight was about I could not under¬ 
stand, but think it must have originated in the unfeir, 
division of the food. 

My presence now seemed 1 to attract general attention; 
all the tribe, men and women, closed up around m£* 
some beating their breasts and heads with their clubs, 
the women tearing off their own hair by haadfulls. J L 
was much aMrmed, but they made me to understand 
these were the customs they followed, and thatnobarm? 
to me was intended. This was the manner by which 
they evinced their sorrow when any . <£ them died t or,, 
had been a long time absent; and, as they believed mb 

*8 

LIFE OF BUCKL&T. 

jo hfve been dead, they were lamenting the sufferings 
must have undergone when I was killed, and, perhaps, 
pujtil my reappearance again on this earth. 

. j They eventually dispersed, leaving me in the charge 
pf the two who had found me in my perilous situation. 

wastben quiet for about three hours, for they had 
gjjnp, it seemed, to their respective huts to eat their 
then there was a great noise amongst them, 
and a trampling backwards and forward from hut to 
hut,, as if something of importance was going on. I 
was naturally anxious at this, not knowing how it 
would all end; at last it came on night, and the boys 
and girls set to work making a very large fire, pro¬ 
bably to roast me—who could tell? At any rate I 
supposed it not at all improbable, surrounded as I was 
l>y such a host of wild uncultivated savages: however 
that might be, it was impossible to escape, as I was top 
weak and terrified at the appearance of all around. At 
last all the women came out naked—having taken off 
their skin rugs, which they carried in their hands. I 
was then brought out from the hut by the two men, the 
women surrounding me. I expected to be thrown im¬ 
mediately into the flames; but the women having seated 
themselves by the fire, the men joined the assemblage 
armed with dubs more than two feet long; having 
painted themselves with pipe-clay, which abounds on 
the banks of the lake. They had ran streaks of it 
round the eyes, one down each cheek, others along the 
forehead down to the tip of the nose, other streaks 
meeting at the chin, others from the middle of the body 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 2$ 

€own each leg; so that altogether, they made a most 
horrifying appearance, standing round and about the 
blazing night fire. The women kept their rugs rolled 
tight up, after which, they stretched them between the 
knees, each forming a sort of drum. These they beat 
with their hands, as if keeping time with one of the 
men who was seated in front of them, singing* Pre¬ 
sently the men came up In a kind of close column, they 
also beating time with their sticks, by knocking them 
one against the other, making altogether a frightful 
noise. The man seated in front appeared to be the 
leader of the orchestra, or master of the band—indeed T 
may say, master of the ceremonies generally. He 
marched the whole mob, men and women, boys and 
girls, backwards and forwards at his pleasure, directing 
the singing and dancing, with the greatest decision and 
air of authority. This scene must have lasted at least 
three hours, when, as a wind-up, they gave three tre¬ 
mendous shouts, at the same time pointing to the sky 
with their sticks; they each shook me heartily by the 
hand, again beating their breasts, as a token of friend¬ 
ship. By this time I was greatly relieved in my mind, 
finding no injury to me was contemplated, and particu¬ 
larly when they all dispersed to their huts, and I was 
left again with my guardians. 

The reader, in these colonies, will be aware that what 
I had witnessed was nothing more than a great Corrob- 
berree, or rejoicing, at my having come to life again} as 
ihey supposed. After eating some roots I lay down by 
4ha side of my new friends, and although SO recently 

30. 

UF? OF BUCKLEY. 

highly excited, yet I enjoyed a sleep um&tnrbed 8jjr 
dreamy either of the past, the present* or the future. 
In reality, nature had been exhausted by hunger, thirsty 
and continued apprehension, In the morning I nose 
greatly refreshed, and found the tribe already upon the 
move, gathering roots and spearing eels, a few only 
remaining with me hi 4he encampment. I observed, 
that one man was dispatched on some errand, apd as 
he was leaving, they pointed out to me the way he 
was going for some particular kind of food, or on a 
message to another tribe, in which message I was m 
some way or other interested. 

Finding myself now tolerably .at homey I evinced a 
desire to make myself useful, by fetching water, carry¬ 
ing wood, and so forth. I went to the river one day 
for the purpose of having a bathe, hut was not long 
absent before I was missed and an alarm -raised; for 
they thought I had deserted. Search was made in aU, 
directions, and just as I returned the messenger came 
back who had been sent away, as I supposed* to another 
tribe, bringing with him a young man; who came, an 
it appeared, to invite the others to their encampment. 
The following day therefore, our tribe left the borders 
of the lagoon, taking me with them, and after a tramp 
through the hush of a few miles, we arrived and took 
up our quarter^, not with the strangers, but at some 
distance from them, where we erected our temporary 
huts, or shelters for the night. I was .span afterwards 
transferred ty the, charge of a man and woman of the 
tribe we had come, to visit* the man being brother to 

.LIFE <Mr BUCKLEY. 

81 

the one who had been killed, from whose grave I had 
taken the spear; the woman was my new guardian^ 
wife, and the young man who had visited 1 ns, was their 
son; and, consequently, according to their order of* 
thinking, my very respectable and interesting nephew. 

It may be taken as certain, that I looked on him, as a 
very unaccountable redative, one I little thought of 

• • - _ m , '£ f 1 J 

meeting m such a place, or m that manner; at any 
rate there was one consolation, M he wad not very wise * 
after the fashion of more ciyiUzed men, he couldnot 
display great foolishness in his expenditure; {^nd, lhil m 
there was, therefore, no great chance of his me leV* 
having to pay his tailor's, or other bills: a consol^ipn 
many uncles would be very glad to possess with equal 

„ i r 

security. " n 

That night there was another great Corrobfearree, 
with shakes of the hand, and congratulation at my *’ 
return. When these ceremonies Were over, I went 
with my new relations to their hut, where they bpspi- , 
taWy regaled me with roots, and gum, and with <®os- 
sntn roasted after their fashion. This w the first 
animal food I had taken since parting with my com¬ 
panions from the Calcutta, and it ,w w to me $ most 
delicious feast. They presented me nlpo .whjh opos¬ 
sum-akin xn£, for which I gave my new aisftor'in-law 
my old jacket in exchange, although it by this 
time very much the worse for wear. I need scarcely 
say, this paletdt added much to the oleganqe of her ap¬ 
pearance, or,stiiat these interchanges of a&r^otiye civility ' 
had great affect 1 in cementing otir fomjly .ac^intance. 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

32 

At break of day, I heard a great noise and talking; 
at length I saw that a quarrel had ensued, for they 
began to flourish their spears as a token of hostilities. 
I should here observe, that these spears are very for¬ 
midable weapons, about twelve feet long, sharp at one 
end; others are about half that length, being made of a 
kind of reed with pointed sticks joined to them; these 
are sharpened with hard cutting stones, or shells. The 
boomerang is another weapon of war, something like a 
half-moon. The throwing-stick is one made, or shaped, 
for flinging the spears. 

The colonial reader is aware of all this, but I beg 
him, or her, to remember, that 1 cherish the hope of 
my adventures being read elsewhere, as well as in the 
Australian Colonies; and that this circumstance will 
be received as a sufficient apology for the insertion of 
particulars, which, otherwise, might very properly be 
considered useless. 

After a little time, and a great deal of challenging 
bluster, the two tribes commenced fighting in reality. 
When my relations, for so for convenience, I suppose, 
I must sometimes call them, saw what was going on, 
they led me a short distance off, where they remained 
with me, looking at the conflict. It was any thing but 
play work—it was evidently earnest. One man waa 
speared through the thigh, and removed into the bush, 
where the spear was drawn. A woman of the tribe to 
which I had become attached, was also speared under 
the arm, and she died immediately. At last peace waa 
restored, and the parties separated, except about twenty 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

33 

of the tribe to which the woman belonged who had 
, been killed; these made a large fire, threw her body 
upon it, and then heaped on more wood, so that she 
was burnt to ashes; this done, they raked the embers 
of the fire together, and stuck the stick she used to dig 
roots with upright at the head. After this cere¬ 
mony they all left, except my supposed relations, in 
whose care I was, and one other family, with whom we 
went into another part of the bush, where we remained 
for a considerable time without anything particular 
occurring, subsisting almost entirely uj>on roots which 
the women sought daily, whilst the men procured 
opossums occasionally, which they dragged from the 
hollow and decayed branches of trees. They sometimes 
speared kangaroo, which they skin with sharp stones 
and muscle-shells.. That was the first time I tasted 
the flesh of the boomer, and found it very excellent. 
Relying upon my friendship, they now furnished me 
with a spear, and a wooden tomahawk. In a few weeks 
—but as I have already said, I have now no recollection 
of time—we left this place, and joined a friendly tribe, 
about fifty in number, and on the evening of our meet¬ 
ing had a Corrobberree. The next day we all started 
together to meet another tribe; but on joining, from 
some cause or other, they quarrelled, commenced fight- 
. ing, and two boys were killed. I could not then under¬ 
stand what all these quarrels were about, but afterwards 
understood that they were occasioned by , the women 
having been taken away from one tribe by another; 
which was of frequent occurrence. At other times they 

34 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

were caused by the women willingly leaving their 
husbands, and joining other men, which the natives 
consider very bad. 

When these fights occurred, I was always kept in 
the rear. After the skirmish just mentioned was over, 
the tribe to whom the boys belonged retired farther 
into the bush, when we made our huts, as I have 
described, with boughs and bark. Suddenly in the 
night, the others came upon our party and drove us 
away. The bodies of the two boys who were killed 
were laying in one of the huts, so they cut off their 
legs and thighs, carrying them away; the remains of 
their bodies our people burned in the usual maimer; 
we then left for the sea side. Soon after a messenger 
was sent to another tribe, with whom they had a 
quarrel about the women; the message was to say 
they would meet them at a certain place to fight it out. 
In about four days he returned, with information that 
the challenge was accepted; so we went there, I, of 
course, not then being conscious of what we were going 
for. On our arrival at the battle ground, about twenty 
miles distant, we found five different tribes all collected 
together, and ready for action. The fight commenced 
immediately, and it lasted about three hours, during 
which three women were killed—for strange to say, 
the females in these quarrels generally suffered the 
most. These continual contests alarmed me, for the con¬ 
tending parties were always pointing toward me, as if I 
had been their origin; and I again began to think I 
should be sacrificed as a peace offering. Quiet was at 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

35 

length restored, and the tribe we had joined separated 
from the others, and came toward where I was standing. 
Having formed themselves into a sort of guard, they 
marched me back to the other tribe, who placed them¬ 
selves in square, on the spot where the fight had been. 
On our arrival solemn silence was observed—not even 
a whisper was uttered, but all eyes were directed to¬ 
ward me, and I again felt that some serious event 
might be expected, in which my safety was involved. 
I had a few minutes before seen women and boys mur¬ 
dered in their fury, and it was natural for me to feel 
alarm under such circumstances. -After a while, they 
all began talking together rapidly, shaking their spears, 
and jumping wildly about, as if they were going mad; 
this ended, they gave three loud shouts, and returned 
to their respective huts—so I was relieved from my 
fears once more. In the morning, I found the other 
tribe had gone away, and soon after we left for the 
place my friends chiefly inhabited, and there we lived 
for a very long time unmolested, and without anything 
particular occurring. We remained in peace and quiet¬ 
ness, until a messenger came from another tribe, saying 
we were to meet them some miles off. Their method 
of describing time is by signs on the fingers—one man 
of each party marking the days by chalkings on the 
arm, and then rubbing one off as each day passes. 
After travelling two or three days, we arrived at the 
appointed place, and found there a great number assem - 
bled, not one of whom I had seen before; and that even¬ 
ing we had the usual Corrobberree. In the morning 

LIFE or BUCKLST. 

we all went on a hunting excursion in perfect good 
humour, so that I had nothing to apprehend. It was a 
kangaroo hunt, and, as this was the first I had been at, 

I looked on with great interest, for I began to consider 
myself by compulsion, a native, and to take a part in 
ail their exercises. Considerable dexterity is used by 
them in catching and killing kangaroo; for they place 
themselves at particular spots and distances, so as to 
drive them into corners like flocks of sheep, and then 
they spear them without difficulty. We killed several 
very large ones, on which, with roasted roots, we 
made a great feast. After that, they all pipe-clayed 
themselves, and had another Corrobberree, and then, as 
usual, began to throw their spears about. This I thought 
would end in mischief, and the women appeared to think 
so too, for they ran into their huts. My guardians, as 
a precaution, took me with them. Nothing serious, , 
however, occurred that night. In the morning it ap¬ 
peared that the Pootmaroo tribe had taken two women 
from the Yaawangis in the course of the night; or,that 
they had gone away willingly with their seducers. The 
consequence was another fight, but it ended without 
bloodshed. The affair, however, was not forgotten. 
After that, the tribes separated, each going to its 
respective locality. 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

37 

CHAPTER III. 

HUNTING THB KANGAROO, EMJJ, AND OPOSSUM.—WILD 
DOGS.—HAVING THE BEST OF A BARGAIN.—SPEARING 
FISH.—EEL CATCHING.—MANNER OF COOKING.—GENE¬ 
RAL FIGHT: SEVERAL NATIVES KILLED.—DISPOSAL OF 
THE DEAD.—8UPERSTITIOUS CEREMONIES. — REFLEC¬ 
TIONS ON SAVAGE LIFE,—SWAN HUNTING—GATHERING 
EGGS.—THE BUN YIP.—MORE CORBOBBERREES, FIGHTS, 
AND MURDERS. 

“ Outcast and hopeless, hare I dwell, 

A dreary desert where I roam,” n 

I now begin to understand something of their lan¬ 
guage : of their customs I had seen quite enough; but 
what oould I do?—how could I escape? 

We next joined, the Bengali tribe, and went with 
them to their hunting ground, a place surrounded by 
the sea and the Barwin River—each. tribe having its 
particular locality, which they considered a sort of in¬ 
heritance. Here we erected our huts, and killed a 

38 

MU & OF BUCKLEY. 

great number of kangaroo. By eating this food con¬ 
tinually, I soon recovered my usual health and strength; 
for my friends, in their kindness, always served me with 
the choicest portion of everything they had; so that I 
had great occasion to be thankful.. That I was suffi¬ 
ciently grateful to the Almighty, who had so wonder¬ 
fully preserved me through such extraordinary suffer¬ 
ings and dangers, I cannot say; for my early notions 
of religion had been nearly destroyed by the unsettled 
life I had led, and the want of proper moral instruction. 
The excellent precepts instilled into nm mind by my 
good old grandfather and grandmother haft been long 
since neutralized, or smothered in the camp, Mn riotous 
company, and in the bad society into which I had been 
thrown by my imprudence. Nevertheless, in the wil¬ 
derness, as I have already said, I often prayed earnestly 
and fervently to the great Creator of the Universe for 
health, and strength, and forgiveness. 

At this time we killed an emu, a sort of ostrich, a 
bird of very huge size, and excellent for its flavour. It 
cahnot rise upon the wing, but runs with amazing swift¬ 
ness. 

Alter staying on this hunting ground for some months, 
I know not how long, we started again for a new lo¬ 
cality, our supplies of game beginning to fell short in 
consequence of our continued hunting. Having arrived 
at a place good for this purpose, as they thought, we 
pitched, or rather erected our bark tents, having killed 
two immense large wild dogs on our way. The limbs 
of these animals: they broke, and flinging them on 

LIFK OF BUCKXEY. 

39 

the fire, they kept them there until the hair was 
singed, they then took out the entrails, and roasted the 
bodies between heated stones, covering them over with 
sheets of bark and earth. After this process, which 
lasted two hours, they were ready for eating, and were 
considered a dish fit for an Exquisite. They handed 
me a leg of one, as the best part, but I could not fancy 
it; and on my smelling it, and turning up my nose, 
they were much amused, laughing away at a great rate. 
No doubt, they thought my having died and been made 
white had strangely altered my taste in such matters. 
As for themselves, they set to work with great zest, 
making all the time motions to me to fall too also. At 
length, I exchanged my portion with a neighbour, who 
gave me for my dog’s leg a fine piece of kangaroo, 
my Mend laughing very much at the idea of having 
the best of the bargain. 

The natives consider the wild dogs, and kangaroo 
rats, great luxuries. They take the former whilst 
young, and tame them for hunting. The man who 
kills the game seldom claims the first portion of it, 
but of the second animal speared, if it be a kangaroo, 
he has the head, and tail, and best part of the back and 
loins. As for myself, they always gave me a share, 
whether I hunted with them or not. 

My not being able to talk with them they did not 
seem to think at all surprising—my having been made 
white after death, in their opinion, having made me 
foolish; however, they took considerable pains to teach 
me their language, and expressed great delight when I 

40 

LIFE OF BUCKLEV. 

got hold of a sentence, or even a word, so as to pro¬ 
nounce it somewhat correctly; they then would chuckle, 
and laugh, and give me great praise. 

I now became a tolerable efficient sportsman, being 
able ta throw the spear, and handle the tomahawk very 
adroitly. They also instructed me in every art they 
knew. They taught me to skin the kangaroo and 
opossums with muscle-shells, in the same way sheep 
are dressed with the knife; to stretch and dry them in 
the sun; to prepare the sinews for sewing them together 
for rugs; and to trim them with pieces of flint. I be¬ 
came, also, expert at catching eels, by spearing them in 
the lakes and rivers; but in the latter they generally 
catch them with lines—the bait being a large earth 
worm. Having these worms ready, they get a piece of 
elastic bark, and some long grass, on which they string 
them; this is tied to a rod, and as the eel, after biting, 
holds on tenaciously, he is thrown or rather jerked upon 
the bank, in the same way as boys catch the cray-flsh 
in England. Some of these eels are very fine, and 
large. They are generally—and more easily—caught 
by the natives during the night, and are eaten roasted. 
They used to take me out on calm evenings to teach 
me how to spear salmon, bream, &c. Their manner is 
to get some very dry sticks, cut them into lengths of 
ten or twelve feet,, tie several of these together into a 
kind of faggot, and then light the thickest end; with 
this torch blaring in one hand, and a spear in the other, 
they go into the water, and the fish seeing it, crowd 
round and are easily killed and taken. This—as the 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

41 

loader is perhaps aware—is the general practice through¬ 
out all the world: and I mention the custom merely 
as one amongst others. They cook their fish by roast¬ 
ing, but they do so somewhat more carefully than their 
other food; for they put thick layers of green grass on 
the hot ashes, and lay their fish upon them, covering 
them with another layer, and then some hot ashes upon 
the top. In this way they 4 bake as well—but not so 
cleanly—as in an oven. 

Before we left this place, we were unexpectedly in¬ 
truded upon by a very numerous tribe, about three 
hundred. Their appearance, coming across the plain, 
occasioned great alarm, as they were seen to be the 
Waarengbadawh, with whom my tribe was at enmity. 
On their approach, our men retreated into the lake, 
and smeared their bodies all over with clay, preparatory 
to a fight. The women ran with their children into 
the bush, and bid themselves, and being a living dead 
man, as they supposed, I was told to accompany them. 
On the hostile tribe coming near, I saw they were all 
men, no women being amongst them. They were 
smeared all over with red and white clay, and were by 
far the most hideous looking savages I bad seen. In a 
very short time the fight began, by a shower of spears 
from the contending parties. One of our men advanced 
singly, as a sort of champion; he then began to dance 
and sing, and beat himself about with his war imple¬ 
ments; presently they : all sat down, and he seated 
himself also. For a few minutes all was sileht; then 
our champion stood up, and commenced dancing and 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

42 . 

singing again/ Seven or eight of the savages—for so 
I must call them—our opponents, then got up also, and 
threw their spears at him; but, with great dexterity, 
he warded them off, or broke them every one, so that 
he did not receive a single wound. They then threw 
their boomerangs at him, but he warded them off alsop 
wkh ease. After this, one man advanced, as a sort of 
champion from their party, to within three yards of 
him, and threw his boomerang, but the othefr avoided the 
blow by falling on his hands and knees, and instantly 
jumping up again he shook himself like a dog coming 
out of the water. At seeing this, the enemy shouted 
out in their language “ enough ,’ 7 and the two men went 
and embraced each other. After this, the same two 
beat their own heads until the blood ran down in 
streams over their shoulders. 

A general fight now commenced, of which all this 
had been the prelude, spears and boomerangs flyinjg in 
all directions. The sight was very terrific, and their 
yells and shouts of defiance very horrible. At length 
one of our tribe had a spear sent right through his 
body, and he fell. On this, our fellows raised a war 
cry; on hearing which, the women threw off their rugs, 
and each armed with a short club, flew to the assistance 
of their husbands and brothers; I being peremptorily 
ordered to stay where I was: my supposed brother’s 
wife remaining with me. Even with this augmentation, 
our tribe ibught to great disadvantage, the enemy 
being all men, and much more numerous. . 

As I have said in the early part of this narrative, I 

lilFE OF BUCKLEY. 

liad seen skirmishing and fighting in Holland; and 
knew something therefore, of what is done when men 
are knocking one another about with powder and shot, 
in real earnest, but the scene now before me was much 
more frightful—both parties looking like so many devils 
turned loose from Tartarus. Men and women were 
fighting furiously, and indiscriminately, covered with 
blood; two of the latter were killed in this affair, 
which lasted without intermission for two hours; the 
Waarengbadaw&s then retreated a short distance, ap¬ 
parently to recover themselves. After this, several 
messages were sent from one tribe to the other, and 
long conversations were held—I suppose on the matters 
in dispute. 

Night approaching, we retired to our huts, the women 
making the most pitiable lamentations over the mangled 
remains of their deceased friends. Soon after dark the 
hostile tribe left the neighbourhood; and, on discover¬ 
ing this retreat from the battle ground, ours determined 
on following them immediately, leaving the women and 
myself where we were. On approaching the enemy's 
quarters, they laid themselves down in ambush until 
all was quiet, and finding most of them asleep, lay¬ 
ing about in groups, our party rushed upon them, 
killing three on the spot, and wounding several 
others. The enemy fled precipitately, leaving their 
war implements in the hands of their assailants and 
their wounded to be beaten to death by boomerangs, 
three loud shouts closing the victors triumph. 

The bodies of the dead they mutilated in a shocking 

44 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

manner, cutting the arms and legs off, with flints, and 
shells, and tomahawks. 

When the women saw them returning, they also 
raised great shouts, dancing about in savage extacy. 
Ihe bodies were thrown upon the ground, and beaten 
about with sticks—in fact, they all seemed to be per¬ 
fectly mad with excitement; the men cut the flesh off 
the bones, and stones were heated for baking it; after 
which, they greased their children with it, all over. 
The bones were broken to pieces with tomahawks, and 
given to the dogs, or put on the boughs of trees for the 
birds of prey hovering over the horrid scene. 

Having apparently gratified their feelings of revenge, 
they fetched the bodies of their own two women who 
had been killed; these they buried with the customary 
ceremonies. 

They dug two round graves with their sticks, about 
four feet deep, then coiled up the bodies, tying them in 
their skin rugs, and laying them in the holes, with some 
boughs, and filling them up with earth: a ring being 
made round each place by clearing away, and lighting 
fires. After raking up the ashes over each, the sticks 
which they had used for digging roots were put over 
them, as I have already described the spears of the men 
are, who are killed. 

They have an idea that they will want them when 
they come to life again, and the fire left: they think will 
do for them to cook their roots with. Of this provision 
they generally leave a few days' supply, and whenever 
they pass near these graves they re-light the fires* 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

45 

The bodies are laid on their sides when they bury them y 
in the same manner as they mostly lie when living. 

We remained by the graves the remainder of that 
day and the next night, and then proceeded to the 
borders of another large lake, which they call Tin- 
wangcontes, in the centre of an extensive plain. There 
we made our huts with reeds and stones, there being 
no wood; so bare was it indeed, that we had to go 
nearly three miles for fuel to cook our food with. We 
remained there for many months; perhaps for a year or 
two, for I had lost all recollection of time. I knew 
nothing about it in fact, except by the return of the 
seasons. I had almost given up all hope of ceasing 
my savage life, and as man accustoms himself to the 
most extraordinary changes of climate and circum¬ 
stances, so I had become a wild inhabitant of the wil¬ 
derness, almost in reality. It is very wonderful, but 
not less strange than true. Almost entirely naked, 
enduring nearly every kind of privation, sleeping on 
the ground month after month, year after year, and 
deprived of all the decencies, and comforts of life, still 
I lived on, only occasionally suffering from temporary 
indisposition. I look back now mentally to those times, 
and think it perfectly miraculous how it could have 
been. 

After this very long stay, we received a message to 
visit another very large lake, many miles round, 
which they call Kongiadgillock. On one side it is 
very rocky, and on the other are extensive plains, 
lightly timbered. About four miles from the shore is 

I 

46 LIFE OF BUCKLEY j 

a small island about two miles square; this island 
may be reached on one side the lake, the water being 
only knee deep, a high bank running out from the 
shore towards it, and forming a sort of isthmus. On 
this island we found an immense number of swans and 
other wild birds. We made our huts a short distance 
from the tribe who had invited us to visit them, and 
here we had as many swan's eggs as we could con¬ 
sume; and there were many more: they were the first 
I had eaten, and I thought them, by way of change, a 
great treat. The first day we passed at our new lo¬ 
cality, the other tribe said they would take us home 
with them and have a Corrobberree, after visiting the 
island. On arriving there we found it literally covered 
with eggs, so that we very soon filled all our rush 
baskets; they were laying about in heaps, there being 
nothing like nests. Our friends whom we visited, al¬ 
lowed us to fill our baskets first, and then they loaded 
theirs. This continued for several days, and each night 
we had a Corrobberree. At length the tribe left us, 
apparently in great haste, but for what cause I could 
not make out, but I anticipated mischief from their 
manner, and thought some dispute had occurred amongst 
them on one of the days when I did not go with them 
to the island. Our tribe did not interfere in any way. 
At length we started further up the lake, and arrived 
at a part that is very narrow. Here we killed a great 
many swans, which were served out to each family 
according to its wants; their method of dressing these 
birds is bv roastin?. as before described. The next 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

47 

day the women separated from the men, and painted 
themselves all over with white clay; and the men did 
so with red, at the same time ornamenting themselves 
with emu feathers, which they tied round their waists: 
they were in every other way quite naked. Some of 
them acted as Musicians, beating their skin rugs with 
sticks, which they stretched across their knees, whilst 
they were squatted on the ground. They then set up a 
dance, the men remaining as spectators, encouraging 
them with cheers, and all sorts of noises. This diver¬ 
sion finished, as usual, with a regular fight, beating 
each other about with their clubs most unmercifully. 

I afterwards understood this quarrel to be occasioned 
by a woman having been forcibly carried away by 
another tribe: one of those with us. She was living 
with the man who had taken her, and, as the man 
and woman were then both present, they wanted to 
chastise her for not returning to the tribe to which she 
belonged. In the skirmish this woman wits felled by a 
heavy blow; seeing this, the men began to prepare for 
a fight also; one man threw a boomerang amongst the 
women, when they all ran away. The native who had 
stolen the girl, then came forward by himself and told 
them to take their revenge on him, and began to sing 
and jump and dance, upon which her father went up^ 
to him. They both remained quiet for some time, when 
the men called out to the father, telling him to let him 
have her, as the man she had been promised to was not 
worthy of her. Eventually the girl returned to her 

48 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

fatHei*. ' She appeared to be about fifteen years of age, 
' and certainly was ho beauty to fight about. 

- *We next went about forty miles, I should think, to a 
place they call Kironama&t; there is near to it a lake 
•bout ten miles in circumference. It took us several 
days to accomplish this march, as we hunted all the 
way; we halted near a well of fresh water, the lake 
‘ being brackish, and there was a great plain near us. 
'We here made nets with stripe of bark, and caught with 
them great quantities of shrimps. We lived very 
sumptuously and in peace for many months at this 
place, and then went to the borders of another lake, 
•called Moodewarri: the water of which was perfectly 
fresh, abounding in large eels, which we caught in 
great abundance. In this lake, as well as in most 
of the others inland, and in the deep water rivers, is 
a very extraordinary amphibious animal, which the 
natives call Bunyip, of which I could never see any 
part, except the back, which appeared to be covered 
with feathers of a dusky grey colour. It seemed to 
be about the size of a full grown calf, and sometimes 
larger; the creatures only appear when the weather 
is very calm, and the water smooth. I could never 
learn from any of the natives that they had seen either 
the head or tail, so that I could not form a correct idea 
of their size; or what they were like. 

Before we left this place a Bihar, or messenger, came 
to us ; he had his arms striped with red clay, to denote 
the number of days it would take us to reach the tribe 

LITE or BUCKLEY. 

49 

h* came from; and the proposed visit was, for us to 
exchange with them, eels for roots. The tune stated 
for this march would be fourteen days, and the place 
was called Bennongo, on the Barwin River. We car¬ 
ried our fish in kangaroo skins, and reaching* the ap¬ 
pointed place of rendezvous, we found about eighty men, 
women, and children gathered together. The exchange 
was made in this way; two men of each party delivered 
the eels and roots, on long sheets of bark, carrying them 
on their heads, from one side to the other, and so on, 
until the bargain was concluded. In the evening there 
was another great Corrobberree, and the next morning 
a fight; because one of the women had run away with 
a man, leaving her husband. It resulted by her being 
speared very badly. After a short time the tribes 
separated, making an appointment to meet again for 
an exchange of food. 

From this place we went to Beangala, which is now 
called Indented Heads, where we remained some months, 
until the time had arrived when we agreed to return for 
the exchange of fish for roots. On this occasion, how¬ 
ever, we took kangaroo instead, to a place called 
Liblib, by the side of a large lake of shallow water, 
surrounded by reeds, and which they call Bangeballa. 
Whilst I was at this place, there was one of the most 
severe hail storms I think man ever saw. The stones 
were so very large as to strip the bark off the trees 
as they descended. 

Their language had now become familiar to me, and 
I began to learn by degrees, and by frequent inter- 

E 

50 

JgFE, OF BBCK&fiY. 

course with the various tribes, something about my 
shipmates, and former companions. It seemed, that 
one of them, having, after a few days, separated from 
the others, was found by the natives and kindly re¬ 
lieved by them ; but after some time, they—as it was 
said—had reason to be jealous of him—he having made 
too free with their women—so they killed him. The 
others I never heard anything more about until my 
arrival in Van Diemen's Land. 

h . a 

▼ -1 v > u: ' : A v 

- . V i ,<A i 

LIFE OP BHGKLEY. 

51 

• '■“*/ •' /- • • ■ <[,. ' 

CHAPTER IV, 

MARRIAGE CEREMONIES .—DESTRUCTION OF CHILD RE N.-r-r 

THE CONSEQUENCES OP JEALOUSY.-ANOTHER. B£T?L& 

—ANOTHER MODE OP DISPOSING OP THE DEAD.—DE¬ 
SCRIPTION OP NATIVES.—SUPERSTITIONS.-ORIGIN OF 

FIRE.— WAR IMPLEMENTS.—MURDEROUS ASSAULT.— 
CANNIBALISM. 

“ My far off friends, whose memories fill 
My throbbing bosom,—do they speak 
Of him whose heart is with them still, 

Though joy has ceased to light his cheek ?” 

The only ceremonies they use preparatory to mar¬ 
riage are, in the first place, to get the parents’ consent, 
the suitor’s best claim is being a good fighter, and an 
expert hunter—so as to be able to protect and provide 
for a family. They are not at all particular as to the 
number of wives such men have; consequently some 
have five or six wives, and others none at all. If a man 
wishes to have a man’s grown up sister for a wife, he 
must give his own—if he has one—in exchange; but 
they are very averse to marrying one of their own 
relations—even of a distant degree. If a woman is 
supposed to have a child who is not her husband’s, they 
consider it a great disgrace; and to the infant, death is 

s 2 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY". 

52 

almost certain. If again, a family increases too rapidly, 
for instance, if a woman has a child within twelve 
months of a previous one, they hold a consultation 
amongst the tribe she belongs to, as to whether it shall 
live or not; but if the father insists upon the life of 
the child being spared, they do not persist in its de¬ 
struction, and especially if it is a female. At their 
confinements they receive no assistance whatever, but so 
soon as the child comes into the world, they wrap it up 
ip a piece of shin rug ; and, if on a journey, move on; 
ijt has no nourishment, but the breast. They name 
them according to any circumstance tha£ ipay happen; 
perhaps after the lake, or river they are near ; or any 
accident or event which may have occurred—the whole 
family changing their names also, until another child is 
bom—when tjbey change again. 

It will be seen by the foregoing,* that jealousy is 
the prevalent cause of all their quarrelh, for the women 
and the men axe equally under the influences of the 
Green-eyed Monster. In the fights, however, which 
ensue,. the poor women get much the worst of it, for 
after having had their furious combats amongBt them¬ 
selves^ the husbands think it necessary to turn too also, 
and thrash them into quietude. 

The meetings of different tribes, I found were not 
solely for. the purpose of exchanging food, but for the 
very laudable purpose*# bringing out their very elegant, 
amiable, jnarriageable .daughters, to be seen and known, 
and of course, courfod. By this very natural process, 
much ill-will and wild desperate passions, are unfortu- 

X*FE OF JBUCKSifiY. 

53 

nately excited—*o that wounds, not only of the heart, 
but of the beast, and frightful minders ensue; some of 
them never to be forgiven, until a fearful revenge has 
followed* 

Previous to breaking up from our present ground 
there was another battle, so that when the other tribe 
left, one of ours stole after them in the night and speared 
a man dead, who was sleeping in his hut beside his 
wife; he sent his spear right through him into the 
ground, for no other cause than that the murdered man 
bad promised him his daughter years before, and had. 
then given her to another. Having had his revenge he 
returned, and boasted of what he had done, upon tfhich 
his relations and particular friends left the plaice, ap¬ 
parently apprehending an attack. The next morning, 
those who remained went to the tribe to which the 
murdered man belonged, and found him rolled up in his 
rug, ready to be tied up in a tree—a mode of disposing 
of the dead, who were not enemies, unknown to me 
before. They selected a strong, if not a lofty tree, and 
in the branches, about twelve feet up, they placed some 
logs and branches across, and sheets of bark; on these 
they laid the body with the face upwards, inclining 
toward the setting sun, and over it was placed some 
more baric and boughs, and then logs as heavy as the 
branches would bear; all this being done to protect the 
body from the birds of prey. Whilst this was going 
on, the women sat round the treejoining with the 
widow in riie most hitter lamentations, pitidble to hear. 
A fire was, as usual, made all round this e^traotdinarjr 

$4 LIFE Or BOOKLET. 

tomb, and at that' side in particular which was nearest 
to theiBttttwtite sfeiting, sovthat he might have! m the 
Hotorrly the $uns rays, but the fire to cheer 
and warm imh. Att ihings beingcompleted, one word 
was uttered, <frahiiBad£atb,” which means, he is gone 
fo'be made ft Whiteman, hot not for ever. The mur¬ 
dered max appeared ; to have been an especial favourite, 
and' the lhoaming was dong and very general. The 
hear of 1 aft was^trt 1 bhftrt with sharp shells—both men 
and w^mfenirdanhing^ themselves with clay, and the 
latter erymgrVery lamentably throughout the night. 
'I r Wft9 ^tiHch di 9 tce 8 sed> at all this, for their grief was 
-'gtftuimgf aad ihe ipOorm«at*»»8 had no Christiancom- 
fortof hope toirikhsck upon*; 

I suffered much mentally, so that I determined on 
once more attempting Jmy escape, being sick at heart, 
and of theseweenes altogether, for scarcely* month had 
passed' without their being repeated; My guardians^ or 
I may again say r my relations, according to them super¬ 
stitious fashion, however assxutdvine- nothing shawfld 
happeh to me* imder tbe ciimimataiiccs by which' I had 
MdupMd amongst them. ^ j v . w 

^ After" a long conversation, the following morning We 
patted with tbe other tribes apparently on friendly 
terh*r,*ttd'*t length joined the rest of our people who 
hid -lef^iae,Hianditiiaving crossed'the Barwin, had gone 
ad:«;spet ialled Biarhoo, where wehalted. Very 
aagrytHiscciseieiiB aroseabeut the murdered man, and 
sftacme th^«t Jappeartdfchat rthesavage who had slain 
ifclimiWouldota^^ similar manner;. but after 

EIF& 0F' BttEKLET. 

55 

awhile wfcaU movethm to apladethey catt-Godtout, 
near the "sea teide^ where we pitched? o*r hark huts oa 
a high projecthig’pfece of. land, frttawbefcoe .we, could 
command an extensivievie w, so thaf no atcahgm ooidd 
approach us"unobserved, 'They evidently expected-a 
hostile visit from Boons of Hhb friends 6f the; man Who 
had been killed, and kept' a gotolbok*rat for- mi^eWcff. 
At this- spot, however, nothing ms tobr had? toefetbut 
shell fish;' so we soon left &r tocher about eight male* 
distant, going through a very; think scrub to* reach* it, 
which occasioned me great paiiH—my trowisers ibeiag 
almost useless, and the slanrrug being ; iny onlyevpptr 
covering. Here we settled down* for a fehrrdayQ, near 
two fresh water wells, hunting opossum* apd' digging 
roots. ■' . * 

'Our next journey was ,te iPalafcyPalae,* halting 
place in .some veay ^extensive plain*, with hdreand 
them a < tree dpon: thorny whem matt mmaitied ino^y 
months, there being plenty 'rift animal-food and nr$o$d 
deal offish in?the*Water-holes^ » 

Great anxiety was stilh.fek 1 tabdui;our safety* and 
watch was kept night and day*, to) prevent: surprise. 
One day s numerous tribe w^^seen erosahig ihe^ains 
coming in our dimrion, arid alb otur party So6k to their 
heels for the nearest shelter^ wherB^wet^Temaiited' ali 
the night with nothing toiea4,ifor fthe; natives seldom 
provide for their wants forfoieteinFb: fijThnjBextnmnftnpg 
several of our people wtee weak <mt alanreeooaditre ^ and 
not retuniliLg>fdl^ eoneirfe- 

table apprehension was Mt^tHthsmialmaicbijLfrThm&l- 

56 

Liya qp.jpq&LgY, 

lowing day* however,, *fcey btoufth* wtfefaetory in- 
tejhgqnc^yb# p^jty wj&bad #eeu .were not enemiesr 
but p$rt £f^t^be> with whiqh we wereon .friendly 
terms, ^jt$ i# halt^d ,^hput, ihirftftn n&tiee W- Onr 
messengers brought with them sop# fite-eticke, so that 
we we$e T $gajp afele tp iryd jft fixe^ foceok qiw food— 
having^ in oyr hasty ftigbi, left ours behind. av*fc the 
place to whjeh m 

, After, spipe . ti^e,. a , messenger came to say the 
friendly fiifahpfl fotpd $ great abundance of eek, in 
the lagoon. #epr w^ofr .they had encamped, ami that 
they wished us. to,C0m# and share in their good fortune. 
This is customary ajpengsfc those tribes who are friendly 
with each qtbej? accepted the invitation and 

joined them that day, Being now in considerable 
strength, we did not fear attack, and k afterwards 
proved the*#, M>, occasion forapprehenaion, as the 
friends of the inprd#red, T native neyer sought revenge 
for the deed. lacing ippuch excellent quartos, and in 
perfect safety—excepting pocasional domestic quarrels— 
there was nothing to disturb the general tranquillity; 
and, consequently* J.hepfwne daily, more acquainted with 
their language and habits, By way of relieving the 
monotony of this narrative, J may as well, therefore, 
here relate a few p^rticulars. 

The nafiyto; inhahith)g-that pact of the coast of 
Npw 9<cdlan^ wwi J^hiBip* nofW hnown as the 
cqlQuy of Victoria* generally of a middle stature, 
with, a dark completion ;,but not so dark as those of 
yfprvm latitudes, 7 llw.i^TO and foatees gre not 

57 

lif* mxmrft* 

strikingly hasAmee certainly, butnianytff them would 
be good4ooking, did- they hot make such keririd frights 
of themselves by plastering their hair arid Aafcking their 
face* add bodies ail over with pipe-c&y m& ochre. 
Their heir is not euriy Hke 'the African, tmt straight, 
looking terribly unsentimental In font, every hair of 
the head appears to be deranged, or out of temper with 
its owner; and well it may be, for it geft frightfully cut 
and hacked about, sometimes by shells, and Ants, and 
such like; besides being made the abode of certain 
living tormen to rs, which* it would be uhp&tiameritary 
to mention, or describe more partieulai-ly. 'ftiey are 
not at all nice about their food; alliri&drf of beasts, and 
fish, and fowl, reptile, and creeping thing—although 
when alive poisonous-being acceptable. It is quantity, 
not quality with them. 

They have no notion of a Supreme Being, although 
they have* of an after life, as in my case; arid they do 
not offer up ahy kind of prayer, Wen to the sun or 
moon, as is customary with most other uncivilized 
people. They have a notion, that the world is sup¬ 
ported by props, which are in the charge of‘a man who 
lives at the farthest end of the earth. 'They were 
dreadfully alaftned on one occasion when I Was with 
them, by news passed from tribe to tribe, that unless 
they could send him a supply'of tomahawks for cutting 
some more props with, and some more rope to 1 tie item 
with, the earth would go by the run, arid aD hands 
would be smothered. Fearftd of this, Wey tfifegari to 
think, and enquire, and calculate* whcWthfc highest 

r 58 

LIFE OF BOOKLET. 

toouataifis ahd bow target sit thorn, and on them, 
so ah tohavO somte chance ofescape from the threatened 
danger/ ' Notwithstanding <his forethought, they set to 
wdrktO provide the %Ge£hl{ and succeeded in this way. 
Passing' bri ihfo ? WmKP r t6 : tbe tribes along the coast, 
some sdttlers at n very gteftt distance were robbed bf 
ares, and siWs,?tmd T r^e, f Saod tiers of dray wheelsall 
of which n Wbre forwarded On from tribe to tribe, to the 
old genttetfeah f bn the OffeCtMiifte {, and, as was supposed, 
in rime' 0 # prevent the capstee, for it never happened. 
AiVifeitS bf Ms iesCripiioh U paid Whenever possible'; 
but Whb'ffle iftoWin^* bld jUggling reeeliving thief is, I 
couM hetffek nftfcfe Ouii • Bbweibr,•’ it' is only One of the 
same ttolt^rot are practised in tbe other 

eountridtf bf * Wbai is caUSd ' ©brisfondbm ; and as I 
have ho partSchlhr Wish todW^fi’upofc them in this nar¬ 
rative^ Iei r iis , ph&& Oh. 1 ,T; - ;v -' rr * r 

The& n notion ^f T ‘the r origfo of fine iii this; that as a 
native wdft&h was ’ digging at 1 an ant MU one day, for 
the phrpode of getting r ihbii* r eggs 1 fbr eating, a crow 
flying Over' her dropped‘ something like dry grass, 
whieh immediately TdazOd,' and SOt a tree'on fire. For 
this tea Uni they 4ery mhch reSpeet the Waakee, as 
they* call tfee hfafl; ahddd not ftiB ‘and eat him, unless 
preeeerfbjrheeesfitjr. 1 

I wftf flbw describe their War and' hunting imple- 
inerifo,"khd then continue my every flay narrative of 
•eVetts/ 1 ’ 1 ^ ' ■■ • ' - - * . 

"The ^pear WMcb they dde/^froihben 4e fifteen T feet 
lbhg/tmd ia hftitoOf a ^M piece of wood, very sharp 

59 

LIFE OF, BUCKLEY. 

at the point—some shaving rows of teeth; these art 
called jagged* spears, because they cannot be eaajjy ex¬ 
tracted from either man. or beast* The natives call 
them KarnwelL There is also a smaller kind, th? 
Daar spear, used in hunting; it; is. made of twopieces 
of wood, fastened together with the wnews^of the kan¬ 
garoo. They are very^harp at the >pehg^ and have 
a white flint stone on each side, flpfonodny and on, 
with gem. These they throw an amaaijng. digt*$ee find 
with great force, seldom missing their j ah & Monger 
roo when bounding past at ftdV speedy and at ifr$paqes 
distance; There is also another kipdoof; sf^ar - htd' h 
is chiefly used in warfare; it is,a very ^cy^pipep of 
wood inserted into a pieee of rt^ng .»cp4; 5 . : it f , ajhogethp?, 
being nearly seven feet long, and boapd } together by 
the sinews of the kangaroo. They have another in¬ 
strument called the marriwan, havingoat the smaU$r 
end a sort of hook rTW boomerang, or w&ngpan^ as 
they are called, is made, from a solid piece of wood 
formed in the shape of a halfl-moont; this they* hurl at 
their antagonists with groat force, holding it at one end 
before 4efttiag & go ^inmag agaiarf.tho ^mmy^ ;Th$y 
have akind of shield also,made of wood, a broad solid 
pieoe of abept thxen feat d^r tapegi^g ei* each end, 
with a handle cut in the side, so as to admit the baaf- 
These shields, which, they eal^mlkft VKR Wd I ei 7 
dexterously in warding pf 8©?*rs v and 
waddie, or koor, a piece of wood very much reseppbbPg 
a cricket bat* And 4h$n ihe$ehf lP*{jPMnd}ri jP n °- 
tber piece of wood ci$ into* OPOtf^with 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

^handle ifO i# and a knob at the end. These two war 
weapons aro^ excellent at close quarters. 
r ^Towjt, readers, let us go hack to the plain where I 
8^4 we were living in peace and with great abundance 
<$lpod tor many months;, of course, travelling about 
tj^t,particular locality occasionally as it suited oar pur¬ 
poses, either for hunting, or for mere pleasure. 

Getting tired at length of the sameness of food, we 
all left and travelled about twenty miles, as I suppose, 
into the bush, to a place called Boordek, where opos¬ 
sums wefe plentiful, My brather-in-daw, as he con* 
sidered himself to be; had shown me how to ascertain 
when.these .animals were up the trees, and how the 
natives tpQk thjpq;, this was, in the first place, by 
breathing, bprd on the bark, so as to discover if there 
was any opossum hairs left attached to it when the 
animal ascended. This found, he next cut a notch in 
the bark with his tomahawk, in which to insert his toe, 
and then another notch, holding the tomahawk in his 
mouth after making the incision,* and so on upwards; 
by this means climbing .the highest -twees, and. dragging 
the animals opt of theirWlea, and off the branches by 
their legs and .tails, and then throwing them down to 
me at the foot; my business, being tp* kjjU, and. carry 
them* .At the.former I was tolerably-expert, so that 
he often cried Qnt from aloft, Meflrijig; which maims 
well done. Yft lived indoyer.at this pbw, getting 
plenty of opossums, and a very caroeUont root, .which, 
whan roasJed»4 found m sweet as a chewwtf, and as 
white as flour. 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

ei 

Our next halting place Was Morrieck, where WA 
found a great abundance of squirrels. After being 
there some time, the greater part of the men left oh a 
distant hunting excursion, leaving about half-a-dozen 
other tnen and myself in charge of the women and 
children. On going Away, they marked their arms 
the usual manner with stripes, to denote how many 
days they would be absent; and one man of ours; who 
remained, did the same; rubbing off one mart each day, 
to denote the lapse of time. Soon after our people had 
left, another tribe came and made their imts very near 
to ours. The very next day they began to show hostile 
intentions, taking advantage 6f ’our weakness, and at 
length threw their spears, killing a boy and gift TJpoii 
this a conflict ensued, which lasted about an hour. 
Finding'we could defend oUrselVeS, they very sOoh left; 
and we immediately sent away a* messenger to our 
tribe to tdl them what had happened in their absence. 
They returned as quickly as possible, and A war council 
was held as to the propriety of following the others, 
which ended'in preparations’ being made for a pursuit. 
The smearing With pipeclay began Again, Atid the spears 
and other Implements were made ready for action. ‘ 

It appeared the cfeuse' of their attack upon ns wAs 
some very old grievance about the 1 wofrifen. I am s6rry 
to Say it, but’these dear creatures werA At thfe bottom of 
every mischief. FrdtfT Adam, that old 7 root digger, 
downwards; it has always Iteeri the' same, ih e^ery elf trie, 
and nations—Then why 1 fattlCV ^rtftty Poking, 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

62 

slightly clad Venuses, to ie worse than others ?—On 
their part, I repudiate the imputation. 

Thd next morning our party started, fully armed for 
the cojhhat, apd with passions highly excited at the 
thought of the advantage taken of them by their cowardly 
assailants. After they were gone, we, who were left, 
buried the bodies of the children in the usual manner. 
After two days’ absence, our fighting men returned, 
several of them severely wounded; but their revenge 
was satisfied* for they had killed two of their opponents. 

The next place we went to was called Ballackillock, 
where we found a tribe already settled, if a few days’ 
residence under sheets of bark and branches of trees, 
may be so called* Both parties were very friendly for 
a short time, and tfyen there was a great fight, in which 
a young woman, about twenty years of age, was speared 
through the thigh. As she belonged to our tribe, she 
was brought into our huts, from whence it seemed, she 
had absconded with a man of the other party, without 
her parents’ knowledge. The quarrel being over, and 
all quiet, the men went to the lake fishing, leaving the 
women to their usual occupation, and the poor girl by 
herself in one of the huts. The man she had eloped 
with knowing all this, went to her, and carried her off; 
so that when the tribe returned they discovered the flight 
of the fugitives, on whom they vowed vengeance. AU 
went on as usual for a few days more, and then we shifted 
again, and for some time kept moving about, killing 
squirrels and opossums—the skins of both being very 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

6 ! 

much estimated. There is another kind, of animal the 
natives kill and eat—it is called the kajrtor^ about 
the size of a dog—thick and short in the body^ with 
a tremendous large head, and very short legfy armed 
>vith claws covered over with thick frizzly hair of a 
light brown colour; they inhabit the branches of high 
trees in the day, but at night they descend to eat the 
grass, and roots, these being their principal food. When 
wounded they make the most pitiable criep, like those 
of young children in pain; they make the same noise 
in the night; and many a time have th^y kept me 
awake whilst on my lonely wanderings. , They are 
very harmless, making no resistance when taken, might 
be easily domesticated, are excellent eating, and very 
much resembling pork in flavour. They carry their 
young in a pouch under the belly the samd as the kan¬ 
garoo; and, notwithstanding their singular and some¬ 
what unwieldy appearance, are very active, springing 
from branch to branch, like squirrels. 

We now started to meet* by invitation, another tribe 
who were halted near a small stream running into the 
Barwin. The second day, we reached the appointed 
place, which the natives call Monwak, but they were 
not there; so we sent off a messenger to inform them 
of our approach; at length we found them, in great 
strength, smearing themselves all over with day, and 
apparently preparing for some important occasion. On 
learning this, our tribe did the same, jumping about 
as if mad. In the afternoon the others arrived, with 

64 

MFE OF BUCKLEY. 

the mtti who had ran sway with the girl of our tribe 
at their head; the whole body following him m some¬ 
thing like dose column, so that I saw clearly there 
would be another battle. 

In the first place, they seated themselves on their 
rugs, in groups of half-dozens, or thereabouts, keeping 
their spears, and shields, and waddies all ready at 
hand; our party being prepared also. At length the 
young man already mentioned, advanced towards as. 
He had bunehes of emu’s feathers tied to different parts 
of his body by a kind of yam they make by twisting 
the hair of the opossum ; he was cutting the most ex¬ 
traordinary capers, and challenged our men to fight—an 
offer which was accepted practically—by a boomerang 
being thrown at him, and which grazed his leg. A 
spear was then thrown, but he warded it off cleverly 
with his shield. He made no return to this, but kept 
capering and jumping about, until one of our men ad¬ 
vanced very near to him, with only a shield and a 
waddie, and then the two went to work in good earnest, 
blow following blow, until the first had his shield split, 
so that he had nothing to defend himself with but his 
waddie. His opponent took advantage of this, and 
struck him a tremendous blow on one side of the head, 
and knocked him down; but he was instantly on his 
legs again, the blood however flowing very freely over* 
his back and shoulders. His friends then cried out 
enough, and threatened general hostilities if another 
blow was struck; and thi8 having the desired effect, 

65 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

they all, soon after, separated quietly, tljus ending an 
affair which at one time promised to conclude very 
differently. 

The next day we moved on to another fresh water 
lake of considerable extent, where we encamped, not 
very much at our ease, as we saw another tribe on the 
opposite shore. In the middle of the night we heard a 
dreadful uproar in that direction, and in the morning 
learned that those we had seen before dark liad been 
fallen upon by some others whilst they were sleeping; 
so on hearing this we went to their assistance. On 
our arrival a horrid scene presented itself, many women 
and children laying about in all directions, wounded 
and sadly mutilated. Several of the poor creature* 
had rushed into the lake and were drowned. The few 
who had escaped were hiding themselves in the reeds ; 
but on our proffering assistance and protection, they 
joined us, and went to our huts. The dead were left, 
it not being safe to lose time in burying them, as our 
number was not sufficient to make us safe from a 
similar attack. The day following we therefore left 
the spot, and kept wandering about for some time after, 
until we came again to our old quarters at Moodewari, 
where we remained some months. 

Having come to another halt, the better way perhaps 
will be, for me here to state, that the tribes are divided 
into families; or rather, I should say, composed of 
them—each tribe comprising from twenty to sixty of 
them. They acknowledge no particular Chief as being 
superior to the rest; but, he who is most skilful and 

F 

66 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

useful to the general community, is looked upon with 
the greatest esteem, and is considered to be entitled to 
more wives than any of the others. They contrive to 
keep a tolerable account, by recollection, of their pedi¬ 
gree, and will not, as I observed before, knowingly 
marry a relation—except where two brothers happened 
to be married, and one dies ; in that case the survivor 
claims the widow; in fact, as many wives or widows as 
he has left behind him. Should the women object, 
there is little chance of their lives being spared, as this 
law of custom is absolute. They are in general, very 
kind to their children, excepting the child is from 
any cause, believed to be illegitimate; and again, 
when a woman has been promised to one man, and is 
afterwards given to another; in such case, her first¬ 
born is almost invariably killed at its birth. The 
tribes would be much more numerous were it not for 
these barbarous and inhuman sacrifices. 

As soon as the children are able to toddle about, 
they begin, as if by instinct, to search for food, and at 
four or five years of age, are able to dig roots and live 
without the aid of their parents; to whom, as may be 
supposed, their drapery, and washing and combing, etc., 
is no sort of trouble. They are all stark naked, and 
tumble about in the lagoons and rivers, like so many 
jolly young porpoises playing in the sun. 

They have a brutal aversion to children who happen 
to be deformed at their birth. I saw the brains of one 
dashed out at a blow, and a boy belonging to the same 
woman made to eat the mangled remains. The act of 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY* 

67 

cannibalism was accounted for in this way. The woman 
at particular seasons of the moon, was out of her senses; 
the moon—as they thought—having affected the child 
also ; and, certainly, it had a very singular appearance. 
This caused her husband to deny his being the father, 
and the reason given for mating the boy eat the child 
was, that some evil would befall him if he had not 
done so. 

68 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

CHAPTER Y. 

DREADFUL ASSASSINATION.—NATIVE MUSIC.—ODD HABITS 

AND SUPERSTITIONS.-THE KALKEETH ANT.-DESCRIP\ 

TION OF TOMAHAWK.-MORE FIGHTS AND MISCHIEF.- 

FATAL ACCIDENT.-VENEMOUS SNAKES.-LOSS OF MY 

FRIENDS AND SUPPOSED RELATIONS. 

44 Ev’n the low hut—poor shelter—while he slept, 

Shook in the earthquake, or the storm, or rain: 

Thus, sick at heart, the Exile stood and wept, 

O’er thought and care, and hope and toil, in vain.” 

Having told this horrible tale, let us now return to 
our halting place at Moodiwiri, when, after a long time 
another tribe joined us, and a dispute arose about sur¬ 
rendering a woman who had been carried away. The 
man who had her with him refused to give her up, so she 
was forcibly taken from him and brought to the hut I 
was in, very much to my dissatisfaction. I was greatly 
annoyed at it, because I thought the matter would not 
end there, and so it turned out; for when the native 
from whom she had been taken, found she was gone, 
he resolved on vengeance, and with this view, when we 
were all asleep, he came to our hut and speared the 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

69 

mate of whom he was jealous. He pierced him to the 
ground, right through his body. Hearing the noise 
occasioned by this assault, I gave the alarm, but he was 
gone, taking with him the woman. The poor fellow's 
brother who was wounded, and myself, endeavoured 
to draw the spear, but could not, even by twisting it 
round, it being jagged; at length a woman succeeded, 
but although everything was done to save him, he died 
in a very few hours. The next day he was buried, or 
rather suspended on the branches of a tree as before 
described, his mother making horrible lamentations, 
and burning her body all over with fire-sticks. The 
next day the men set off to find the murderer, but not 
succeeding, they returned a little before dark. 

A short time after this affair we shifted our quarters, 
and, when on a hunting excursion, accidentally fell in 
with the tribe to which he belonged, and a very des¬ 
perate fight ensued. As is the case with them in such 
matters, when the parents cannot be punished for any 
wrong done, they inflict it upon the offspring. So now, 
the savages having got hold of a child of about four 
years of age, which this man had had by the young 
woman before referred to, they immediately knocked it 
on the head, and having destroyed it, they killed the 
murderer's brother, also spearing his. mother through 
the thigh, and wounding at the same time several others; 
so that vengeance was heaped upon him and his tribe 
in, a most dreadful manner. However, the man himself 
having escaped, he, with others, went in the night to 
the hut of the savage who had killed his brother, and 

70 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

tipeared him dead; having done which, they cut the 
most of the flesh off his body, carrying it away on their 
spears to mark their triumph. The next day and night 
there was a continued uproar of dancing and singing, to 
notify their joy at these horrible events; during which, 
the mangled remains of the man were roasted between 
heated stones—and they eat part of them, and no mis¬ 
take; for I saw them join in the horrible repast, and 
was requested to do so likewise, which of course I re¬ 
fused to do, evincing the greatest disgust at their pro¬ 
ceedings. 

Having been rescued from death by starvation, it is 
only natural that I should, from a feeling of gratitude, 
desire to save the natives from so great a reproach; 
but the truth must prevail, and that many of the 
natives inhabiting this part of the continent of New 
Holland are cannibals, under particular circumstances, 
cannot be doubted. 

During their savage and brutal repast, I was told 
it was their intention to serve every one of the mur¬ 
derer’s tribe in the same manner. 

After this affair, we continued wandering about in a 
similar way, from place to place, joining one tribe, then 
leaving it for another, and so on, nothing particular 
occurring. At length we pitched our huts upon the 
borders of a lake or lagoon, with a long name, it being 
called Koodgingmurrah, the name they give to a root 
growing thereabouts. At that place another tribe joined 
us, and in a very few days another skirmish took place, 
and, as usual, it was all about the women. In this 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

71 

fight I was very nearly killed by a boomerang, which 
split my shield in two. It appeared not to have been 
intended for me, but for my supposed brother-in-law. 
The man, in spite of my intercession, was punished very 
severely for having thrown it; for which, however, he 
professed great sorrow. Having been slightly wounded 
in the hand, and the blood flowing, the women came 
crying, and bound it up with a piece of rug, tying it 
round with opossum sinews. The next morning we 
went to the other side of the lake, where we remained 
many months. 

Another halt—let me then make the best of it, by 
relating something more about the habits of my Abori¬ 
ginal friends: the wild uncivilized inhabitants of the 
forest, the uncultivated children of nature ; thousands of 
whom live unknown, and die unpitied. 

All those I met with, excepting in times of war, or 
lamentation, I found to be particularly fond of what 
they consider music, although they have no kind of 
instrument except the skin rug, which, stretched from 
knee to knee, they beat upon, others keeping time 
with sticks. So passionately attached are they even 
to this noise, that they often commence in the night, 
one family setting them on, until at last they one and 
all become a very jolly set, keeping it up in one con¬ 
tinual strain until daylight. I have often wished them 
and their enchanting enlivening strains on the other 
aide of the Continent, with the queer old conjuror who 
manages the props already mentioned, to whom I must 
however nvoidraUuding more particnlady. 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

7r 

They have a great aversion to the use of water, unless 
for the purposes of drinking, and bathing in the summer 
season, so that their washing processes are not very 
labourious or extensive. Nature, as it is, reigns in 
aft her glory with them, without artificial assistance. 
My gentlemen, and lady friends, as may be supposed, 
knew nothing about tailors, and dressmakers, hairdres¬ 
sers, or boot and shoe makers; they were as ignorant 
in all such matters as Eve or Adam. They, however, 
take great pains in greasing and painting themselves 
in the most fantastic manner. Their style of shaving 
is not the most agreeable, for when the beard is nearly 
fall grown they singe it with a fire-stick, or pluck 
it off with a muscle-shell. They have a great aversion 
to grey hairs, whether in the head or beard. The 
women pluck them out whenever they appear on their 
husbands or their own heads, until old father Time 
gets the better of them at that work. They are very 
fond of ornaments—the women especially—and in their 
manufacture, are very ingenious. Their head-bands are 
netted like silk purses, and they do this kind of work 
without any needle or other instrument—using their 
fingers only. They make these bands as even as it 
could be done by* the most experienced person with 
silk or thread, leaving a piece at each end to tie round 
the forehead, colouring them with ochre. Their neck 
ornaments are made like silk velvet guards. Upon these 
are strung a great number of pieces of shells, and of 
the teeth of the kangaroo, adding too, the feathers of the 
swan and emu; the strongest of which they split in 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

73 

the middle, in order to make them more pliable. Many 
of the women have rings made out of the bones of birds 
suspended from the inside of their nostrils, and the men 
have a small straight bone with a sort of knob at one 
end. Those who have the most ornaments are con¬ 
sidered the most fashionable and attractive. 

The baskets I mentioned before are made of rushes 
and grass, dried and split; and so nicely are they 
tinned out of hand, as to have the appearance of those 
manufactured in India; but they are much more dur¬ 
able. No person could suppose they were the handy- 
work of an uncivilized people. To return. 

We remained at the opposite side of the lake, until 
the approach of spring. Here they made their food 
principally of the large ants called the kalkeeth, which 
are found in hives within hollow trees. In order to 
ascertain where they are, the trees are struck with the 
tomahawk, and, at the noise, they show themselves at 
the holes. An entrance for the hand is then made, 
and so they are taken out and put into baskets, being, 
at the proper season, as fat as marrow. These creatures 
are prepared for eating, by placing them on slips of 
bark about three feet long and one foot wide, and so, 
burnt, or roasted. It is only for about one month in 
each year they can be had, for after that time they are 
transformed to large flies, and then fly away to die, or 
again change their shape and nature. 

Having finished this ant hunting and eating ex¬ 
pedition, we shifted our quarters ; but before I go any 
further I must say something about their tomahawks; 

74 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

which, perhaps, as a very important instrument, ought 
to have been mentioned in an earlier part of this nar¬ 
rative. The heads of these instruments are made from 
a hard black stone, split into a convenient thickness, 
without much regard to shape. This they rub with a 
very rough granite stone, until it is brought to a fine 
thin edge, and so hard and sharp as to enable them to 
fell a very large tree with it. There is only one place 
that I ever heard of in that country, where this hard 
and splitting stone is to be had. The natives call it 
karkeen; and say, that it is at a distance of three 
hundred miles from the coast, inland. The journey to 
fetch them is, therefore, one of great danger and diffi¬ 
culty ; the tribes who inhabit the immediate localities 
being very savage, and hostile to all others. I was 
told, that it required an armed party of resolute fight¬ 
ing men, to obtain supplies of this very necessary 
article; so that the tomahawk is considered valuable 
for all purposes. They vary in weight from four to 
fourteen pounds; the handles being thick pieces of 
wood split, and then doubled up, the stone being in 
the bend, and fixed with gum, very carefully prepared 
for the purpose, so as to make it perfectly secure when 
bound round with sinews. 

A messenger now came from another tribe, to tell us 
they would be glad to see our party near a river they 
called Booneawillock—so named from a sort of eels they 
call Boonea—with which that stream abounds. It was 
very much swoollen, in consequence of heavy floods, 
so that we could not cross it, to join our friends; 

LIFE OP EtJCKLEY* 

75 

we therefore pitched our huts on the other side. Many 
parts of that river are rocky, leaving but an incon¬ 
siderable depth of water, into which the eels get in 
great numbers; indeed so numerous were they, that 
we caught them in dozens. These eels appeared to be 
very sagacious, but not so much so as to avoid our 
fishing parties; for although they would shoot away 
into deep water at the falling of a star, or any extra¬ 
ordinary noise, yet they would come to our fishing 
torches and allow themselves to be taken very placidly. 

When the flood in the river—which had been occa¬ 
sioned by very heavy and continuous rains—had sub¬ 
sided, we passed over, and hutted ourselves on the 
other side. Another tribe soon after joined us, amount¬ 
ing to about one hundred men, women, and children. 
I should here say, that the eels mentioned, seemed 
inexhaustible at this place, those of the smallest kind 
being the most numerous. They are light blue on the 
back, with white bellies; these the natives call the 
Mordong; and the larger kind, the Babbanien; the 
latter being brown on the back, with white bellies. 

The tribe which arrived the last, only remained a 
few days, when another fight occurred, again about the 
womens—one of whom was killed, and several severely 
wounded: they then left. We also shifted our quarters 
a short time after, and kept up the old fancy of wander¬ 
ing about; not exactly from “ post to pillar,” hut from 
one hunting ground to another, seeking variety of food, 
from fish to flesh, from roots to anything available; 
for the natives are, in truth, a rambling lot, never 

76 

Life of buckley. 

content—unless sleeping, and then dreaming of Corrob- 
berrees, and fights, and mischief. In one of these excur¬ 
sions, one of our men was bitten by a snake whilst 
stepping over a fallen tree, of which bite the poor 
fellow died immediately. As he was one of the prin¬ 
cipal men of the tribe, his death caused great sorrow, 
and he was buried; or, rather stowed away in the 
branches of a very high tree, with all the honors 
suited to his value, as one of this very estimable 
community, of which I had, involuntarily, become a 
member. 

Time passed on, and a variety of circumstances 
occurred to separate us, so that I was at last left with 
my supposed relations, and only two or three other 
families—each living in our separate huts. 

One day we saw a large party of natives coming to¬ 
wards us, but they passed on to the back, at a distance; 
and, when there, began to polish themselves up with 
clay, and ochre, as if for a fight; it occasioned us great 
alarm; but we hoped our defenceless position would 
induce them to treat us mercifully. There were about 
sixty of them, and they soon undeceived us as to their 
intentions ; for they came first to the other bank of the 
river, shaking their spears; and then crossing over, 
attacked us so furiously, as to give the women and 
children only time to attempt escape. My old friend, 
and supposed brother-in-law, had a spear sent right 
through his body, and then they hunted out his wife 
and killed her dead upon the spot. The savages then 
came back to where I was supporting my wounded 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

77 

friend; who, seeing them approaching, sprang up, even 
in the last agonies of death, and speared the nearest 
assailant in the arm. My friend was, of course, dis¬ 
patched immediately, with spears and boomerangs; as 
was a son of his, who was with us at the time. Strange 
to say, not one raised his hand against me ; had I done 
so against them, I must have been sacrificed instantly; 
for what could I do, being only one against so many ? 

The cause of this sudden unprovoked cruelty was not, 
as usual, about the women, but because the man who 
had been killed by the bite of the snake belonged to 
the hostile tribe, and they believed my supposed brother- 
in-law carried about with him something that had oc¬ 
casioned his death. They have all sorts of fancies of 
this kind, and it is frequently the case, that they take 
a man's kidneys out after death, tie them up in some¬ 
thing, and carry them round the neck, as a sort of 
protection and valuable charm, for either good or evil. 
They took the son’s life because he had a daughter, 
who he had promised to the man who killed him, and 
had afterwards given her to another. 

I should have been most brutally unfeeling, had I not 
suffered the deepest mental anguish from the loss of 
these poor people, who had all along been so kind and 
good to me. I am not ashamed to say, that for several 
hours my tears flowed in torrents, and, that for a long 
time I wept unceasingly. To them, as I have said 
before, I was as a living dead brother, whose presence 
and safety was their sole anxiety. Nothing could exceed 
the kindness these poor natives had shown me, and 

78 

LITE OP BUCKLEY. 

now they were dead, murdered by the band of savage* 
I saw around me, apparently thirsting for more blood. 
Of all my sufferings in the wilderness, there was nothing 
equal to the agony I now endured. My feelings made 
me desperate, so that when a tall powerful fellow came 
to the hut some time after, to demand my friend 1 * 
spears, I refused, in fierce language, to surrender them, 
so that he desisted; ordering me however away, with a 
quantity of fish, and his rug, to where his wife and 
family were, telling me to wait there until his arrival; 
at the same time, assuring me of his good-will and 
future friendship. These I did not choose to rely upon, 
and so, after having arrived at a convenient distance 
from the scene of these savage murders, I resolved on 
making my escape. With this view, I tied my spears 
together, and put myself in light marching order, rolled 
up my rug as tightly as possible, crossed the river, and 
made for the bush; going in another direction to that 
which I thought it likely the savages would follow in 
pursuit. 

After what I have stated as to their cold-blooded 
murders, I may surely call them savages, although, as 
we have seen, there are many kind-hearted creatures 
amongst them. 

When I got about four miles, I unexpectedly fell in 
with a tribe I knew, to whom, my hurry and fright was 
a source of great anxiety. I told them all that had 
happened, on hearing which, they immediately prepared 
for vengeance on the murderers, for the young man was 
amongst them to whom my old friend’s son had given 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

79 

the girl, instead of the man who had so barbarously 
murdered their father. Before they set off, they directed 
me where I should find them after the expedition they 
were going upon was over; so I started for the place 
appointed, near the Barwin River. The next day I 
swam across that river; taking with me my spears, 
and rugs, and fire-stick, and before night, set up my 
hut in a place from whence I could view the country 
all round. Before I lighted the fire, I made a turf and 
bark fence all about where it was to be, so that the 
flame should not be seen, for I was naturally in great 
dread of being overtaken. In this way I lived a few 
days, waiting for my friends. At length, one evening, 
I saw a light coming across the plain in my direction. 
This occasioned me great alarm, as I did not suppose 
the friendly tribe would travel in the night; so I put 
my fire out, hid my spears and fish, and concealed 
myself amongst the high reeds growing in the neigh¬ 
bourhood. After a time I heard female voices, and 
then one of them say, u where can he be gone?” some 
surmising one cause, and some another, for my absence. 
This satisfied me that all was right, so I approached, 
agreeably surprising them by my appearance. They 
were five young women belonging to the last party we 
had met with, who had made their escape, in conse¬ 
quence of another great fight which had ensued be¬ 
tween my old friends, and the tribe who had killed my 
protectors. They told me, three men of the hostile 
party had been killed, and that they had burned the 
bodies of my said-to-be brother-in-law, his wife, and 

80 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

his son, to prevent their enemies from mangling them; 
and, that if the women had not left, they would have 
heen taken away by force by the opposite party. They, 
poor creatures, were dreadfully hungry and fatigued; 
so I gave them all the food I had and kept them in my 
hut until the morning, when two of them left, the other 
three remaining for several days longer, waiting for 
their friends. Finding they did not come, according to 
their appointment, they then went away also. 

Having reason to think something had occurred to 
prevent their arrival, I returned to the scene of the 
brutal massacre; and finding the ashes and bones of my 
late friends, I scraped them up together, and covered 
them over with turf, burying them in the best manner I 
could, that being the only return I could make for their 
many kindnesses. I did so in great grief at the re* 
collection of what they had done for me through so 
many years, and in all my dangers and troubles. 

My next move was back again to the hut I had left 
on the plains where the women had found me, and the 
following day the others came according to their promise. 
They endeavoured to persuade me to join them per¬ 
manently, saying they would protect me; that, as I was 
alone I should certainly be killed; but I refused, having 
no faith in their professions, and being sick at heart, 
so shortly after witnessing all these atrocities. After 
staying a short time at this spot, they left me, crossing 
over the river, and when they were out of sight, I 
packed up my traps, and started in an opposite direc¬ 
tion, going towards the sea. When at a place called 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

81 

Mangawhawz, where there was a well of fresh water 
and plenty of all kinds of fish, I put up a hut, and 
remained there several months alone. I had now passed 
so many years in this sort of way—more I should think 
than five-and-twenty—and had got so much accustomed 
to the kind of life, as to have forgotten the use of my 
own language, and began to be careless about every 
thing civilized, fancying I could never return to a better 
kind of existence, or to the intercourse of any other 
society than that of the tribes, if I was again forced 
into communication with them. I had ascertained from 
the natives long before, that the Calcutta had left the 
bay, and that the first settlement had been abandoned. I 
often looked towards the sea, thinking I might observe 
some vessel passing; but no, not one; for at that time 
there was little voyaging round the coast,—South 
Australia, and the other settlements, not having been 
formed, and ships from Sydney keeping well off the 
land, few of them passing through the Straits at any 
time. Although so desolately placed, I, for a long time, 
fancied myself comparatively happy, and that I could 
gladly have ended my days there. If I had had books 
they would have been totally useless, having forgotten 
all the little knowledge I had learned in my early days ; 
therefore I could only seek my food,—eat, drink, and 
sleep; bnt how I could have passed so long a time in 
such a way, is to me now a matter of bewildering as¬ 
tonishment. It is related in the fabulous history of 
Robinson Crusoe, that he was fortunate enough to save 
a Bible from the wreck of his ship, and by that means 

82 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

consoled and benefited himself; but I, the real Crusoe, 
for so many years amongst savages, in the then un¬ 
known forests and wilds of the vast Australian Conti¬ 
nent, had no such help to my mind, and I beg the 
humane reader to reflect on this circumstance with 
feelings of kindly sympathy—for mine was, in truth, a 
sad existence. I was indeed a lone man, without any 
other resource than an entire reliance upon the great 
God, who had so wonderfully preserved me; and to 
whom, I say again, I did not forget to pray earnestly 
and fervently, for health, sustenance, and protection. 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

88 

CHAPTER VI. 

FISHING HUT ON THE KARAAF RIVER.-GREAT SUCCESS.-— 

THE WOMBAT.-DOMESTIC CEREMONIES OF THE NATIVES 

-GREY HAIR.-ANOTHER MURDER.-CANNIBALISM..— 

MY MARRIAGE.-MY WIFE ELOPES, AND LEAVES ME 

VERY DISCONSOLATE !—HER FATE.-MONSTER SNAKE. 

-BLIND BOY.-RETURN TO MY HOME ON THE KARAAF 

RIVER. 

“ The breeze came gently o’er me from the West, 

Where the last sunbeams linger e’er they part; 

Along the beach I lay, to sleep, and rest 
My wearied limbs, and still more wearied heart.” 

At lengtii I was compelled to leave my quarters and 
mo^e'to the Karaaf River again, where I built a more 
substantial hut, the locality being full of roots. Unfor¬ 
tunately I had no dog to hunt the kangaroo, so my de¬ 
pendence was chiefly upon the fish, which sometimes 
however, were very scarce. Before I made this change 
of quarters the winter had set in very tempestuously^ 
and I suffered very much from the cold weather and 
continued rains. One day, whilst watching the fish, I 
saw a great shoal of bream come into the mouth of the 
river, making their way up a long distance, to a bend 
where it branches off, and where it is of considerable 

a 2 

84 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

depth. When the tide turned, they came down with it 
again, and it occurred to me that if I could by any 
means stop them in their retreat by a sort of wear, I 
should have a great supply of food, thus placed at my 
command, as it would seem, by Providence; so I turned 
my thoughts to this all that day, and all night long. 
After examining the river, I found a spot suited to the 
purpose, where the tide did not rise above two feet, 
and here I resolved on making the attempt. With 
this view, I set to work making faggots with rushes 
and boughs of trees,—carrying them down to the bank 
of the river; and, at the same time, preparing long 
stakes, sharpened at one end, to make them fast in the 
sand. At length I had a sufficient number together to 
commence operations, and taking advantage of the tide 
when it receded, I set about my undertaking, and com¬ 
pleted a wear, working incessantly; so that when the 
fish came down with the stream in thousands, they 
found themselves intercepted, and being apparently 
confounded at this, they turned tail up again, and then 
down, and so on; but by that time the top of my wear 
was above the surface, and they were obliged to sur¬ 
render at discretion. 1 caught in this way, consider¬ 
able numbers, and consequently was in great delight; 
for with them, and the roots growing thereabout, 1 had 
food in abundance. 1 gathered—-or rather caught, I 
should say—heaps of them, and employed myself in 
drying and preserving them—many of these fish weigh¬ 
ing three pounds each and more,—being also of very 
delicious flavour. With feelings of comparative content, 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

85 

I set about improving my habitation, making it mote 
substantial and comfortable, by getting some logs, and 
making the roof better able to resist the cold and rains. 
The branches of trees and their supporters I covered 
with tur^ making the sides of that material, forming a 
chimney of the same; so that after a few days' labour, 
I found myself more at home in my solitary abode, 
having from the door-way a long view over the plain, 
and out to sea. 

It was necessary, I found, to consult the moon, so as 
to judge of the ebbing and flowing of the tides; for the 
fish, I ascertained came and went accordingly; and 
therefore, in order to prevent a scarcity, it was proper 
I should dry them in the sun, by spreading them about 
on the trees, and on the roof of my hut, taking them 
inside on every appearance of rain, or other unfavour¬ 
able weather. There was another sort of food very 
useful to me; this was a particular kind of root the 
natives call Murning—in shape, and size, and flavour, 
very much resembling the radish. 

Whilst employed with my fish one day, I heard 
voices near me. One said u Amadeat,” meaning, white 
man. The first thing to be done was to conceal myself; 
but presently I saw two men, and two women, with 
several children. One of them called out, in their lan¬ 
guage, u It is me,' 1 meaning by that, they were firiends, 
and that I need not be alarmed. I soon found they 
belonged to the tribe of my old friend: my tribe, I may 
say. On seeing me, the women began to cry with joy 
at finding me safe. It was more than a year, perhaps 

86 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

nearly two, since I had met them, or any human being; 
and they supposed me to have been killed long since. 
One of the men took a leg of kangaroo out of his 
basket, and some of the roots and gum they had, and 
gave them to me; and in return, I took them to my 
hut and’ offered them fish, of which food I showed them 
my great abundance, and told them my adventures 
since we parted; at which they expressed much delight, 
singing and capering about in a most wild and extra¬ 
vagant manner. 

When I explained my plan of entrapping the fish, 
they could not contain themselves for joy, patting me 
on the back, and saying I deserved three or four wives 
for my invention. For some cause or other they then 
told their women to go away; they, however, would 
not, but began stamping and beating the ground, ex¬ 
pressive of their dissatisfaction. After a time the men 
went off to spear fish, and on their return they set up 
their huts near mine, and so made themselves comfort¬ 
able for many days. After a time they persuaded me 
to accompany them to a salt lake, called Nellemengo- 
beet, about five miles off, which lake is only separated 
from the sea by a narrow belt, or sand-bank. Near it 
was a well of very good water, and there we en¬ 
camped, our object being to gather gum and roots. 

When the moon was again at the full w'e returned 
to the Karaaf—my old fishing quarters; where our 
success was so great, that one of the party went away 
to fetch the remainder of the tribe, to share with us in 
kindness' our abundant supplies. They soon joined us, 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

87 

bringing with them a quantity of kangaroo; and see¬ 
ing we were so comfortable, they pitched their huts 
beside our party. 

Having heard of the massacre of my friends, they 
vowed vengeance against the murderers ; but the re¬ 
sources of food I had provided by means of the wears, 
being so ample, they remained content for a long time, 
heaping upon me all the civilitiel possible, for having 
put them in the way of procuring fish for themselves 
and families so easily. 

After some time, we all went away together in search 
of the kangaroo, of which we killed a great many, as 
also of the nomgnor—an animal about the size of a 
small pig. It is the creature the English call the 
wombat. They live in holes in the earth, of about 
twenty feet long and from ten to twenty deep, in an 
oblique direction, burrowing in them like the mole. 
When well cooked, they are good eating. The mouth 
of this creature is furnished with large teeth, their ears 
scarcely discemable, their legs being very short and 
armed with long claws; the skin is very tough, 
with short hair upon it, but they are without tails. 
The wombats feed on grass chiefly, only venturing out 
after dark, or on moonlight nights, returning to their 
burrows at day-break. The natives take these crea¬ 
tures by sending a boy or girl into their burrows, which 
they enter feet first, creeping in backwards until they 
touch the animal. Having discovered the lair, they 
call out as loud as they can, beating the ground over 
head, whilst those above are carefully listening,-rtheir 

88 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

ears being pressed close to the earth. By this plan of 
operations, they are enabled to tell with great precision 
the spot where they are. A perpendicular hole is then 
made, so as to strike the extremity of the burrow: and 
having done this, they dig away with sharp sticks, 
lifting the mould out in baskets. The poor things are 
easily killed, for they offer no resistance to these intru¬ 
sions on their haunts! There is, however, a good deal 
of difficulty in making these holes, and in getting down 
so deep to them—so that it is a sort of hunting for 
food, of which the natives are not very fond. Except 
when the wombat has young, it is seldom that more 
than one is found in a hole. The animal is generally 
roasted whole, after having had the entrails taken out, 
which is all the preparation—the fire doing all the rest. 
And whilst alluding to this method of cookery, I may as 
well state, that in summer fire is very easily obtained 
by rubbing together two sticks of the wood they call 
Dealwark. They sometimes carry these unlighted 
fire-sticks about with them, wrapped up in a sort of 
covering made of opossum hair. In the winter months 
they are often very much distressed for fire, and suffer 
greatly from hunger and cold; their only covering 
being skin rugs, sown together with sinews—using as 
needles fine bones of the kangaroo. These rugs serve 
them also to lay upon. Considering how they are ex¬ 
posed to the weather, it is wonderful how little they 
suffer from idleness; for, excepting a sort of erysipelas, 
or scurvy, with which they are sometimes afflicted, they 
are m general very healthy. I never observed any 

LIFE OF BUCEXEY. 

89 

European contagious disease prevalent) in the least 
degree; and this I thought strange. There was at 
one time however, I now recollect, a complaint which 
spread through the country, occasioning the loss of 
many lives, attacking generally the healthiest and 
strongest, whom it appeared to fix upon in preference 
to the more weakly. It was a dreadful swelling of the 
feet, so that they were unable to move about, being 
also afflicted with ulcers of a very painful kind. 

I may as well here also mention a curious custom 
they have relative to their domestic affairs—if such a 
term can be applied to such a people. In many in¬ 
stances, a girl, almost as soon as she is bom, is given 
to a man. After this promise, the mother of the 
child never again voluntarily speaks to the intended 
husband before he takes her to himself nor to any of 
his^brothers, if he has any; on the contrary she shuns 
them in-the most careful manner. If the future son-in- 
law, or either of his brothers, should visit the tribe, 
she is always previously informed of his coming, so that 
she may have time to get out of the way; and if by 
chance she meets them, she covers her head over with 
her skin cloak. If any present is sent to her, such as 
opossum or kangaroo, and such like food, the receivers 
rub their faces and hands over with charcoal before it 
is taken and tasted. When again, a present of a skin 
cloak is made by the intended son-in-law, the mother 
gives it to her husband to wear for some time before it 
is favoured with her acceptance. This, practice is ad¬ 
hered to on both sides, for the son-in-law may see his 

90 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

proposed father, but will not on any account see the 
mother; their notions on these matters being, that 
when their children are married the parents become 
much older, and if the girl’s mother happens to see the 
proposed husband it will cause her hair to turn grey im¬ 
mediately. 

To return to my narrative. We remained for a very 
long time at this place, and were ultimately joined by 
two tribes, one being called the Putnaroo, the other 
the Warwaroo, who usually inhabited the opposite side 
of the bay, a long way off, and on this occasion had 
left their women and children behind them. Having 
erected their bark huts near ours, they remained peace¬ 
able enough for several days, hunting and enjoying 
themselves; at length, the Putnaroos suddenly sur¬ 
rounded our people, and without any previous alterca¬ 
tion speared a young man about twenty years of age. 
The cause stated to be was, that the murdered man 
had been promised a girl who his assailant wanted for 
himself. Poor fellow, when he was speared, he ran 
only a very few paces, and then dropped down dead. 
Our tribe expostulated with the others against this 
assault, but were answered by the threat, that if they 
said much about it they would serve us in a similar 
manner; so we, being by far the weaker party, were 
obliged to appear to be satisfied. 

This affair broke up our encampment, and I was sent 
to inform the friends of the deceased of what had hap¬ 
pened, and also to watch the movements of the Putna¬ 
roos. Having found all this out, namely, where the 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

91 

enemy were, and the young man's parents, I made 
the latter acquainted with the circumstances connected 
with his death ; telling them at the same time, that his 
remains had been deposited in the branch of a tree; 
which news gladdened them much, for in the first place 
they imagined the savages had taken his body away. 
When they had consoled themselves a little, the father 
summoned all the tribe and other friends he could 
muster; they came in considerable force, and having 
pipe-clayed and ochered themselves all over, they set 
off, prepared for battle. This however was evaded, as 
the Putnaroo invaders had taken to their heels, on 
seeing the great numbers to which they were opposed. 

We now took up our quarters at a place they called 
Nullemungobeed, situated in the centre of a very exten¬ 
sive plain, with wells of good water handy. When we 
had settled ourselves down there, some of the men went 
to the spot where we had left the young man’s remains 
hanging in the tree, and brought away the lower part 
of the body, leaving the upper quarters and head where 
they found it suspended. The usual uproar commenced 
amongst the women on the arrival of the part of the 
corpse, lamentation succeeding lamentation, burning 
with fire-sticks, and all the rest of it, until at length 
the mangled % remains were roasted between heated 
stones, shared out, and greedily devoured by these 
savages. Again I was pressed to join in this horrid 
repast; but I hope T need not say, that I refused, 
with indignation and disgust. 

Strange as all these cannibal ceremonies may appear, 

92 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

it is proper to explain, that many am performed out of 
what they consider respect for the deceased; the cap 
bones of whose knees, in this instance, after being 
carefully cleaned, were tied up in a sort of net of hair 
and twisted bark. Under such circumstances, these 
relics are carried by the mothers, tied round their necks 
by day, and placed under their heads by night, as 
affectionate remembrancers of the dead. 

Being again thoroughly disgusted with these inhu¬ 
man scenes, I went away alone, back to my old hut at 
the Karaaf River, where I fished as before by means of 
my wear, and lived for many months, daily expecting a 
visit from some of the tribes; but, by their absence, 
they all appeared to have deserted me. One day, how¬ 
ever, a friendly party visited my solitary abode, and 
settled themselves down. In this way we all lived on 
for several months more, having plenty of fish and roots. 

And now, reader, I come to a very important period 
of my life, which was a decision arrived at by my friends 
that I should take unto myself a wife. I Was not in any 
way consulted, being considered a sort of instrument in 
their hands to do with as they might think proper.— 
My wife was a young widow, about twenty years of 
age, tolerably good-looking, after a fashion, and ap¬ 
parently very mild tempered. The marriage feast, the 
ring, the fees for the ceremony, the bride's dress, my 
own, and all the rest of it, did not cost much. I was 
not obliged to run in debt, or fork out every shilling, 
or pay fifty per cent, for discounting a bill to pay the 
piper—nothing of the kind; so I took her to myself to 

LIFE OP BUCKLEY. 

93 

my turf and bark hunting and fishing hut, on the 
banks of the Karaaf River.—I should here mention, that 
although previously married, my wife did not present 
me, on the day of our union, with any tender little re¬ 
membrances of her first husband, my predecessor in 
her atfections. Affections!—we shall see more about 
that presently; but, perhaps I may as well say at 
once, that tny dearly beloved played me most abomi¬ 
nably false, for at the end of our honeymoon, (perhaps 
it might have been a few months after that moon had 
gone down,) one evening when we were alone in our 
hut, enjoying our domestic felicity, several men came 
in, and took her away from me by force; she, however, 
going very willingly. The next day—.as I hsld no Su¬ 
preme Court to go to for damages—I went over to the 
tribe'the intruders belonged to, and told them how I 
bad been treated. I confess I did not make a very 
great fuss about my loss—if it was one—but endea¬ 
voured to whistle it down the wind gaily. Several of 
the friendly natives were anxious I should take the 
usual revenge upon her and the man she had left me 
to live with, but I refused, and in the end, she was 
speared by another man, with whom she had been co- 
queting, and to whom she bad also played falsely. Mixed 
up by relationship, as all these parties were, after a great 
number of altercations about her having run away from 
me, and the circumstances of her death, there was 
another fight, in which many heads were broken. I, 
however, took no part in these, excepting assuming the 
defensive, and threatening them with punishment if 

94 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

they interfered with * me, being now, and having been 
for a long time past, quite as expert as any of them 
with the spear, and boomerang. After a great deal of 
talk and noise, all became reconciled, and there was 
another Corrobberree on a large scale. A little before 
this affair, I had taken charge of a little blind boy, and 
a girl, children of my supposed brother-in-law, who 
were very much attached to me, and went with me in 
my hunting and fishing excursions. 

I should here observe, that the natives sometimes, 
and when the wind is favourable, hunt round a kind of 
circle, into which they force every kind of animal and 
reptile to be found; they then fire the boundary, and 
so kill them for food; it matters not what they are, 
whether kangaroo, wombats, opossum, or black snakes; 
they are to them, with the exception of the last named, 
all alike; as are also lizards, toads, rats, mice, and wild 
dogs; they cook and eat them all. On one of these 
burning excursions, I remember a monster snake was 
killed, having two distinct heads, separating about two 
inches from the body, black on the back, with a brownish 
yellow belly, and red spots all over. It had been about 
nine feet long, but the fire had burnt the body in two, 
and being such an unnatural looking monster, the 
natives were terribly frightened at its appearance. Of 
the poisonous snakes generally, they are not the least 
afraid, for they eat them, after cutting off the heads, 
and roasting them in the usual manner. 

With my adopted children, and two families only, I 
now went to a place they called Bearrock, where there 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

95 

was a chain of water holes, full of excellent eels, and 
roots, on which we subsisted for a long time. One 
night one of the women—-just as we were laying down 
to sleep—heard a rustling in the bushes, as if people 
were approaching. Her, and her husband, came imme¬ 
diately, saying we must all run for our lives, and thus 
dreadfully alarming the little girl, and her blind brother 
for they had all been present at the murder of their 
father. After a minute's thought, we all resolved to be 
off, in order to conceal ourselves. Being quite at a loss 
what to do, we remained silent, if possible to ascertain 
from whence the noise proceeded, and who the strangers 
were. After a time, our two men, who had gone out to 
reconnoitre, came back, saying they had seen a fire, 
with several men standing round about it, which very 
much increased the alarm, and particularly of my poor 
little boy and girl. For their protection and support, I 
put some fire into one of our native buckets, covering 
' it over with turf, and then moved off to a more concealed 
place, the natives called Banor, on the top of a small hill 
in the shape of a sugar-loaf, and close to the sea side, 
from whence, at day-light, I knew I should be able to 
see all around me to a great distance. 

In the morning, on looking anxiously around, I ob¬ 
served, about a mile off, some people coming in my 
direction, and in consequence of their approach, I con¬ 
cealed myself, with my charge. However, I soon saw 
they were our friends, who we had left the night 
before. We then held a consultation as to the direction 
we should take for their safety, and differing in opinion, 

96 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

we separated, they going one way inland, and I, with 
my charge, another; mine being toward a place they 
called Kirkedullim, near the sea side. So we kept 
wandering along for Beveral days, until we made a 
lengthy halt at Mangowak where we lived on shell 
fish, and a sort of wild grape which grows in great 
abundance thereabout. It being the height of summer, 
we did not suffer much privation; for, as far as I was 
concerned, I had now been many years accustomed to 
all the habits of my extraordinary Hfe. 

Moving on again, we at length arrived at the Karaaf 
River, my favourite spot, where I found the hut just as 
I had left it months before. I know not the cause, but 
the natives had not visited it, or if they had, they had 
not in any way interfered with the arrangements I had 
made for my comfort. Here I again made fast my 
wear; and although for several days and nights we 
were very unsuccessful, in consequence of the tide and 
weather being unfavourable, ultimately & great lot of 
fish was taken, and we lived in abundance on bream, 
and roots* I had now become very anxious for the 
safety of my charge, particularly on account of the poor 
blind boy, who could in no way assist himself by get* 
ting out of danger, should any savage tribe attack us in 
the night, as I have already described is often their 
custom* I was at length relieved in part from this 
responsibility by the arrival of a man, with his wife 
and family, who I knew to be friendly to us, and who 
settled himself down close to our locality. 

LIFE OP BUCKLEY. 

97 

CHAPTER VII. 

MURDER OF THE BLIND BOY.—ABANDON THE NATIVES,—* 
A NATIVE WOMAN MY ONLY COMPANION FOR MANY 

MONTHS.-THE NATIVE LANGUAGE.-CANNIBAL TRIBE, 

-VESSEL SEEN.—CONSEQUENCES.-THE WHITE MAN’S 

GRAVE.—DREADFUL MASSACRE.—WRECK OF A SHIP.—« 
THE BUNYIP AGAIN, 

-“ I awoke 

To hear the Oceans never varied sound, 

And the wild sea-mew, wheeling round and round. 
Where hope, the sun light of the soul, ne’er beams; 

A broken-hearted Exile, e’en in dreams.” 

Our small community remained in perfect harmopy 
for many months, until, unfortunately, a youjig man 
about twenty years of age, belonging to another tribe, 
arrived. This yopth was taken seriously ill a few days 
after joining us, and although we did all we could for 
him he died. This event created great distress, and 
by way of changing the scene, our small party broke 
up, and left the Karaaf on a short hunting excursion. 
After a time we fell in with the deceased young man's 
family, who, on being informed of his death, expressed 

98 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

great astonishment and rage, fancying it had been 
brought about by some unfair means on our part. This 
excitement arose to such a height, as to approach— 
what it would be mercy to describe—insanity. After a 
time, they forced the poor blind boy away from me, and 
killed him on the spot, because he had happened to be 
in the same hut in which the young man died, be¬ 
lieving he had been in some way the means of his 
death. After this, they roasted the body in the usual 
manner; but whilst this was going on I left, with the 
little girl, moving on, and on, until meeting the tribe 
to which the man belonged to whom in her infancy 
she had been promised; I explained all the parti¬ 
culars of the sacrifice of her poor blind brother. They 
immediately vowed vengeance, and two or three of 
them set out for the purpose of murder, returning in a 
few days with the intelligence that they had killed two 
of the children of their enemies. 

By one accession and the other our numbers had now 
increased to more than two hundred men, women, and 
children; and it may be easily supposed, that such a 
mob of savages could not move on long without fights 
and bloodshed. Seeing these things certain, I left, with 
the proposed husband of the little girl, and one or two 
families, to go back again to the Karaaf River. Having 
remained there some time, I resolved on surrendering 
my charge to her intended husband, and the wife he 
had had with him for many months; and positively 
insisted on doing so, although they were anxious that 
she should remain with me for some time longer. 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

99 

Having transferred her to the care of these people, I 
set off alone, determined to live by myself, in order to 
avoid a repetition of the scenes I had witnessed, and all 
farther intercourse with the natives. The direction I 
took was along the sea coast, but although subsisting 
upon shell fish principally, I now knew perfectly well 
how to provide myself with a change of food, and with 
fire to cook it, so as to make whatever it was more 
palatable. Although I had parted with the girl from 
prudential motives, I lamented very bitterly the savage 
death of her brother, my poor blind boy, for whom I 
had acquired a great affection; and who, on his part, 
had so many hundred times clung to me for shelter and 
protection. 

I was now again very lonely and miserable, and 
whilst indulging in melancholy thoughts one day—such 
as cannot be described—I was most unexpectedly joined 
by a young native woman, who had ran away from her 
tribe at some distance, where it was fighting with 
another. She remained with me for a long time, during 
which I was successful in procuring abundance of food; 
amongst other kinds was a large sea animal, one of that 
sort which the natives call the Koorman, mentioned 
before as having visited my retreat near where I first 
met the natives'. We found the flesh very good eating, 
and my female friend enjoyed the repast with great 
gusto: greasing herself all over with the fat, after we 
had made the most of the carcass, which might well 
be compared to bacon. 

My amiable young lady friend continued with me 

H 2 

100 LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

for a long time, in fact she made all sorts of excuses 
for not going back to her tribe, who not coming in 
search of her, and we not knowing of their where¬ 
abouts, were induced at length to remove for a change of 
hunting and fishing grounds; arriving ultimately at 
Danawa, where there is a considerable river, having its 
source in several high mountains, some way off in the 
interior. The scrub through which we should have had 
to pass, had we left the beach, being almost impassable, 
we were obliged to keep along the sea shore; and the 
weather by this time being cold and inclement, we oc¬ 
casionally took shelter, and slept in the caves and cre¬ 
vices of the rocks. This was a very suffering time, and 
as soon as we could, we returned again to my old fishing 
castle, on the Karaaf. 

The reader may wonder, how it was possible for any 
one like myself, who had, in my earlier life, been asso¬ 
ciated with civilized beings, so to live; but I beg him 
to remember how many years I had led a different sort 
of existence, and how easy it is for the human being, as 
well as every other, to change his habits, taste, and I 
may add, feelings, when made the mere creature of 
circumstances. I look back now to that period of my 
life with inexpressible astonishment; considering it, as it 
were, altogether a dreaming delusion, and not reality. 
Perhaps there is no one living who can cast his mind 
back to so many years of his past life with such a mul¬ 
tiplicity of extraordinary sensations, as have fallen to 
my lot to experience. 

After many months we were visited by my com- 

Life of buckley. 

101 

panion’s relatives, to whom she returned, and I was left 
once more alone, occasionally however visiting such of 
the friendly tribes as came to my locality. All the 
years I had been upon the coast, and near it, I had 
never seen or heard of any ship, or of shipwrecked 
mariners, so that I had no hope afforded now of ever 
again regaining an association with civilized beings. 
I had seen a race of children grow up into women and 
men, and many of the old people die away, and by my 
harmless and peaceable manner amongst them, had 
acquired great influence in settling their disputes. Num¬ 
bers of murderous fights I had prevented by my inter¬ 
ference, which was received by them as well meant; 
so much so, that they would often allow me to go 
amongst them previous to a battle, and take away their 
spears, and waddies, and boomerangs. My visits were 
always welcomed, and they kindly and often supplied 
me with a portion of the provisions they had—assuring 
me, in their language, of the interest they took in my 
welfare. 

Here I may as well say, that the native language 
varies according to the tribe individuals belong to, each 
tribe having a peculiar expression of their own. The 
one I was with so many years, I, of course, under¬ 
stood perfectly, but there were others I could scarcely 
make out. I saw a native from the Murray River 
whose language was perfectly unintelligible to all of 
us; indeed this is reasonable, when we reflect on the 
difference of the dialect, or pronunciation of words, of 
many of the counties of England, Ireland, and Scotland. 

102 

LITE OF BUCKLEY. 

How carefal then ought those persons to be, who are 
now known as what are called Protectors of Aborigines, 
when they attempt to interpret on trials in Courts of 
Justice. Their translations and explanations should 
be received with great care, in order to prevent the 
infliction of unjust punishments—especially in cases of 
life and death. Again, there is another point to be 
borne in mind, that is, the vindictive character of the 
natives, which leads them, in many instances, to give 
evidence founded upon revenge and falsehood. This is 
all very bad, but that it is true cannot be doubted. 

I had almost forgotten to say, that in my wanderings 
about, I met with the Pallidurgbarrans, a tribe notori¬ 
ous for their cannibal practices; not only eating human 
flesh greedily after a fight, but on all occasions when it 
was possible. They appeared to be the nearest approach 
to the brute creation of any I had ever seen or heard 
of; and, in consequence, they were very much dreaded. 
Their colour was light copper, their bodies having tre¬ 
mendously large and protrubing bellies. Huts, or arti¬ 
ficial places for shelter, were unknown to them, it being 
their custom to lay about in the scrub, anyhow and any¬ 
where. The women appeared to be most unnaturally 
ferocious—children being their most valued sacrifice. 
Their brutality at length became so harrassing, and 
their assaults so frequent, that it was resolved to set 
fire to the bush where they had sheltered themselves, 
and so annihilate them, one and all, by suffocation. 
This, in part, succeeded, for I saw no more of them in 
my time. The belief is, that the last of the race was 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

103 

turned into a stone, or rock, at a place where a figure 
was found resembling a man, and exceedingly well exe¬ 
cuted; probably the figure-head of some unfortunate 
ship. 

One day when I was at Bangibarra, some distance in 
the interior, I saw some natives coming along, one of 
them carrying a flag over his shoulders. On anxious 
enquiry, I was told by them that they had seen a vessel 
laying at anchor in Port Phillip Bay, and near Indented 
Heads; watching her for several days, they observed 
her remove to another anchorage, soon after which, a 
boat was hoisted out and all hands left her, proceeding 
up the river. After watching several hours to see the 
coast clear, three of them swam alongside, and hoisted 
themselves on board, one, one way, and another, another. 
The first object that attracted their attention was the 
colours; these they soon hauled down: then they pur¬ 
loined rope, sails, and other things they thought would 
prove serviceable—such as glass bottles to bark and 
sharpen their spears with. There were many other arti¬ 
cles they took, but fortunately they were afraid to go 
down into the cabin, and so considerable property was 
saved from plunder. Having completed their marauding 
excursion, they carried what they had to land, and far 
back into the bush. When the crew returned and saw 
the mischief done during their absence, they fired off 
their pieces, but they were at too great a distance to do 
any injury to the natives. Thinking it advisable, they 
soon got the anchor up again, moving farther out into 
the bay. 

104 

Life of buckley* 

This was the story they related, and great anxiety 
was expressed that I should lend a hand to decoy the 
people on shore, so as to get them into our power, with 
the vessel, boats, and cargo also. I did all possible to 
divert their attention, telling them that if they went 
to where the ship was, they would again be fired upon, 
and all killed. A few days after I saw the vessel still 
laying at anchor, and became almost nervously wild 
with desire to make myself known to those on board, so 
as at length to be released from captivity, and with that 
hope I went alone, taking with me merely my spears 
and other instruments for hunting and fishing. When 
.1 got to the beach abreast of the vessel, I made a large 
fire, thinking I should attract their attention, as several 
persons oould be seen walking up and down the deck, 
occasionally looking attentively toward me, as I thought. 
All my efforts however were useless—the crew no doubt 
supposing, after the robbery on board by the natives, 
that the object was to entice them on shore for some 
murderous or mischievous purpose. I could not hail 
them, having lost all my English language. All that 
day and night I continued making signals—my heart 
ready to break with grief and anxiety, seeing all my 
efforts futile. About the middle of the next day, a boat 
put off from the side, coming in my direction; and, 
when distant only half a mile, my signals were repeated; 
but alas, when only three hundred ygxds off, the people 
in her, hoisted sail, steering away two or three miles 
. farther up the beach, toward a small island, where they 
landed* Seeing this to be a chance opening up for me, 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

105 

I followed as fast as I could rtm, and crossed over to 
where I supposed they were cutting wood. However, 
the breeze being in their favour, before I could reach the 
spot, they had cut as much as they wanted, put it into 
the boat, and shoved only laughing at my violent 
gesticulations and unintelligible cries; little thinking 
who I was, or that I was any other than I appeared to 
be in my native dress. Forgetting all this, I re¬ 
proached them to myself very bitterly, thinking them 
worse than savages, thus to leave me in my misery. 
Instead of their having been guilty of inhumanity, I 
should have remembered the possibility and probability 
of their firing upon me—and particularly after the act 
of robbery before mentioned* 

After consoling myself somewhat, I examined the 
spot where they had been, thinking to find—perhaps a 
hatchet, or some such like tool, which would prove 
useful. In looking about, I saw a mound of earth about 
the size of a grave; but I foolishly thought it might be 
a place of concealment for some kind of treasure; and, 
although money, or plate, or jewels, could not have 
been of the least use to me in my disconsolate condition, 
yet I determined to examine the mound; and began to 
do so, by taking off the turfs with which it was covered. 
Having worked some time, I was shocked at coining to 
the body of a white man, wrapped up in a blanket. 
It occurred to me to remove this covering, as the 
weather was very cold; and it seemed a pity to leave 
bo good an article where it was, but I could not find it 
in my heart to rob the dead—even to supply my own 

106 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

pressing necessities; I therefore made the grave up 
again; covering it carefully over with boughs, and 
he*vf stones, so to protect the body from the wild dogs. 

Finding all my efforts to communicate with the ship 
useless, and after passing another night in great distress, 
I made my way back to the tribe. The vessel remained 
Where she was for several days longer—a period to me 
of indescribable misery. What the ship was, or where 
she-was bound to, or where from, I was never able to 
make out, in consequence of my ignorance of dates. 
During the period we were watching her, the natives 
told me another vessel had anchored nearly in the same 
place, a long time previous; from which vessel, two 
white men were brought ashore by four or five others, 
who tied them to trees, and shot them,—leaving their 
bodieB bound. 

A few months after these efforts of mine to communi¬ 
cate with the ship, I found a large boat stranded on the 
beach. It appeared to have belonged to a whaler, as 
there were eight large oars laying about her, partly 
buried in the sand; there were also three blankets 
rigged as a sail, with Topes, mast, and other articles, 
used by some unfortunate mariners who had been cast 
away. The blankets, after being washed, I spread 
over the boat to dry, and when that was done, a fire 
was visible at some distance, to which I went, and there 
found a party of natives cooking and eating fish, and 
other food. On seeing the blankets, they began caper¬ 
ing about in their usual fantastic manner, expressing 
the most extravagant joy. Acting on prudential mo* 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

107 

•l 

tires, and in order to preserve harmony, I cut the 
blankets up into several pieces, dividing them as I best 
could. This done, we returned to the wrecked boat, 
which they had evidently seen or known about before; 
indeed they soon told me, that a few days previous, two 
white men had wandered from the beach into the bush 
where these natives were, who received them kindlyv 
The poor fellows were dreadfully bruised and cold—4b 
fact, perishing from exposure, thirst, and hunger. They* 
pointed in the direction where I had found the boat, sd 
if trying to make the tribe understand that some adoi~i 
dent had happened, looking at the same time very sad] 
and disconsolate. Being well fed on fish and kangaroo, , 
after some days they recovered their strength; the* 
natives then tried to make them understand there was e- 
white man—meaning myself—amongst them, and that 
they would go in search of me; but the poor fellows 
could not be made to comprehend their meaning, , aadd 
went away by themselves toward the Yawang Plains; d * 
There is no doubt but they were part of the peopled 
cast ashore in the boat. Some months after I heard- 
that the same two men, who had been so kindly treated,. 
were savagely murdered, whilst crossing the Yarra * 
River, by a tribe called the Wairwaioo. I grieved very 
much at this melancholy event, for had I arrived h ^ 
time no doubt their lives would have been preserved; * 
and on the circumstance I reflected very seriously,* cub*’ 
pressing my heartfelt thanks to the great Creatorofmy* 
being, for having brought me unharmed through: «od * 
many dangers. 

108 

LIFE OF BUCELEY. 

Several months after, when journeying alone along' 
the beach, I found a large cask, a barrel or hogshead, 
partly buried in the sand, which, no doubt, had been 
thrown on shore from a wrecked ship. It was much 
too heavy for me to lift, or move in any way; so I set 
to work digging round about it, until I could get at the 
iron hoops, which I knew were valuable to the natives. 
At length I knocked the head in, but could not fancy 
what the liquid contents were, having lived so long in 
the bush without tasting any other drink than water. 
The flavour appeared to be horribly offensive, and the 
smell equally so. It must have been either beer or 
wine, not being strong enough for spirits. However, I 
determined on letting the whole contents go by the run, 
to prevent mischief—should the natives take a fancy to 
it—although so utterly nauseous to my palate. Having 
broken up the iron hoops into pieces, I some days after 
divided them amongst those who were most kind to me, 
and by these presents added greatly to the influence I 
had already acquired over them. Whether being so 
long with them was the occasion or not, but I began to 
fancy / they were gradually becoming more docile and 
civilized. 

The various families returned to their several camping 
places—except one old man, his wife, and children, who 
remained; and we proceeded together to a lake called 
Jerringot—one of a chain of that name—which supplies 
the Barwin River. Here the Bunyip—the extraordi¬ 
nary animal I have already mentioned—were often seen 
by the natives, who had a great dread of them, believ- 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

109 

ing them to have some supernatural power over human 
beings, so as to occasion death, sickness, disease, and 
such like misfortunes. They have also -a superstitious 
notion, that the great abundance of eels in some of the 
lagoons where these animals resort, are ordered for the 
Bunyip's provision; and they therefore seldom remain 
long in such neighbourhoods, after having seen the 
creature. 

They told me a story of a woman having been killed 
by one of them, stating that it happened in this way. 
A particular family one day was surprised at the great 
quantity of eels they caught; for as fast as the husband 
could carry them back to their hut, the woman pulled 
them out of the lagoon. This, they said, was a cunning 
manoeuvre of a Bunyip, to lull her into security—so 
that in her husband’s absence he might seize her for 
food. However this was, after the husband had stayed 
away some time, he returned, but his wife was gone, 
and she was never seen after. So great is the dread 
the natives have of these creatures, that on discovering 
one, they throw themselves flat on their faces, mutter¬ 
ing some gibberish, or flee away from the borders of 
the lake or river, as if pursued by a wild beast. 

When alone, I several times attempted to spear a 
Bunyip; but, had the natives seen me do so, it would 
have caused great displeasure. And again, if I had 
succeeded in killing, or even wounding one, my own 
life would probably have paid the forfeit—they con¬ 
sidering the animal, as I have already said, something 
supernatural. 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY* 

CHAPTER VIII. 

NEWS OF ANOTHER SHIP.—LANDING OF SETTLERS.—MY 
REFLECTIONS.—LIBERTY OR CAPTIVITY? THAT’S THE 
QUESTION.—VISIT THE NEW COMERS.—RECEIVED KIND¬ 
LY BY THEM.—MESSRS. WEDGE AND BATMAN.—HOPES 
FOR THE FUTURE.—EXPLORING EXPEDITION.—BUCK- 
LEY’S FALLS.—RECEIVE A FREE PARDON. 

“ Sleep, to the homeless, thou art home. 

The friendless find in thee a Mend; 

And well is he, where’er he room, 

Who meets thee at his journey’s end.” 

One day when the old man just mentioned as having- 
remained with us, was out with me gathering roots, 
we discovered two young natives coming through the 
marshes, and in our direction: each having a coloured 
eotton handkerchief fastened to the end of his spear. 
These they held up as high as they could, waving them 
about to and fro, for me to see—knowing me to be in 
that neighbourhood. It was evident they had met with 
civilized people; and, on coming up, it was explained 
that they had met with three white, and six black men, 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

Ill 

they had never seen before. I enquired if the strangers 
had any boat? and was told they had a Koorong, 
meaning a ship, but that she was gone, leaving the 
men behind;—that they had erected two white houses, 
which I supposed to be tents;—that they had plenty of 
provisions, blankets, tomahawks, and such articles;— 
that they had asked for some of the KaUallingurks 
(tomahawks), but were refused; although presents were 
made to the tribe near Indented Heads, of knives, and 
scissors, and other things. 

The next piece of intelligence was very alarming,— 
the men saying they were in search of another tribe, to 
enable those they had left behind to murder the white 
people the more easily, and by doing so to get posses¬ 
sion of their property. 

That night was one of great anxiety to me, for I 
knew not how, without danger, to apprise the strangers 
of their perilous situation—as the least appearance of 
such an intention would, to the natives, have seemed 
like treachery. My reflections were very paanftd, for I 
was, of course, aware of having long since forgotten the 
language of my youth. I was at a loss what to do for 
the best, but at length determined on hazarding my 
life by going to them at the earliest opportunity, for 
their protection. So when the two men who brought 
the intelligence had left us to go in search of the other 
tribe, I hastened off on my journey to where the 
strangers were—which, as the natives had described, 
was about fifteen miles distant; but it must have been 
much more, for I did not reach it until the next day; 

taraTOF BUCKLEY. 

in 

the befeg cold and very tempestuous. At 

length’ T amved ineight of a long pole, or staff, with 
the British-odours hoisted upon it; and there I also 
saw *> sort <rf <cauip. I now was overwhelmed with 
feelings - Cogiiected wHh the past, the present, and the 
future. ' My being an absconder from the operations of 
the-sentence imposed upon me by the authorities, and 
‘the consequences of having so done; the present, with 
^reference to my then unmistakable liberty, and perfect 
freedom from all such consequences; and, as to the 
future, thctre was what before me?—captivity, and 
probable punishment $ who could tell? 

Whilst sitting in deep thought musing over all these 
matters, I saw one .of the white men take a bucket and 
go with it to a well some way off, and when he had 
left it with his load, I went there also, in order to gra¬ 
dually recover my senses, and act upon my ultimate 
determination, whatever it might be. 

From the well I had a good view of all about me, 
v and observed that the natives had pitched their tents 
near those of the white men—the former being seated 
round their fires, evidently in great excitement. Pre¬ 
sently some of the natives saw me, and turning round, 
pointed me out to one of the white people; and seeing 
they had done so, I walked away from the well, up to 
their place, and seated myself there, having my spears 
and other war and hunting implements between my 
legs. The white men could * not make me out—my 
half-cast colour, and extraordinary height and figure-* 
ffresied, or rather undressed? as I was—-completely con-. 

LITE OF BUCXfcEJT, 

,IU 

founding them as to my retd character. At length one 
of them came up and asked me mam questions* which I 
could npt understand; but when he offered me. bread— 
calling it by. its name—a clpud appeared to.pass from 
over my brain, and I soon, repeated that,, and. other 
English words after him. Somehow or other I soon 
made myself understood to them as Apt being, a native- 
born, and so the white men took me. to.theirtents, and 
clothed me, giving mp hiscuit, tea, and. meat; and they 
were t indeed, all very kind in. every, way. My sensa¬ 
tions that night I cannot describe, and before I closed 
my eyes I offered up to God feryent prayers of thank¬ 
fulness for my deliverance; for although I saw great 
danger to the new comers, in consequence of their weak¬ 
ness in numbers, compared, with the strength which 
could be brought against them, yet I thought it certain 
they had resources in reserve, which might be made 
available, even if the first party wag doomed to be sat 
crificpd. 

As I- have already said, I was very anxious, but at 
the same time grateful, believing the period had arrived 
for my deliverance. My sensations I cannot describe ; 
and, as I could not explain, them in my mother.tongue, 

I showed the initials W B on one .of my arms,.by, which 
they began readily to sympathize and look upon me as 
a long lost east-away seaman—treating me accordingly, 
by giving me well cooked food,, shelter,. and raiment. " 
Word by word I began Jo comprehend, what they said, 
and soon understood—as if by instinct—that they, in¬ 
tended to remain in the.country;—that they had;seen 

i 

114 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

several of the native chiefs, with whom—as they said— 
they had exchanged all sorts of things for land; but 
that I knew could not have been, because, unlike other 
savage communities, or people, they have no chiefs 
claiming or possessing any superior right over the soil: 
theirs only being as the heads of families. I also knew 
that if any transactions had taken place, it must have 
been because the natives knew nothing of the value of 
the country, except as hunting grounds, supplying them 
with the means of present existence. I therefore looked 
upon the land dealing spoken of, as another hoax of the 
white man, to possess the inheritance of the uncivilized 
natives of the forest, whose tread on the vast Australian 
Continent will very soon be no more heard, and whose 
crimes and sorrows are fast fading away amongst other 
recollections of the past. 

In a day or two I was quite at home with the strangers,, 
to whom I made myself useful in any way I could, by 
giving them useful information about the country. They 
said the vessel which had landed them would be back 
again from Launceston in a few days; bringing—they 
thought—a great many people, and a further supply of 
provisions and working tools. By their desire, I re¬ 
mained at the camp with them constantly, night and 
day; and I did so with considerable anxiety, knowing 
that the tribe the two men had gone to fetch, would 
soon arrive, and might be disposed to follow up their 
murderous intentions. At length these people came in 
great numbers, and seeing the very few English, and 
small party of Sydney natives, their determination to 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

11& 

destroy them was communicated to me, with a positive 
desire that I should aid them, and with a threat that I 
should be sacrificed with the weaker party on my re¬ 
fusing to do so. 

I knew not how to act for the best; if I acquainted 
the new settlers of their great danger, they might, in 
the excitement, have had recourse to violence, which 
would have made matters in all probability worse, they 
being so few in number. The policy I adopted there¬ 
fore, was, to seem to fall in with the views of the sa¬ 
vages, but to induce them to delay carrying them out 
until the ship arrived, when I said, in support of my 
argument, the amount of plunder would be much in¬ 
creased. 

This manoeuvre succeeded for a few days, but at the- 
end of that time they became very impatient, so that I 
told the white men to be on their guard; and arming 
myself with a gun, I threatened, in strong language, 
the life of the first native who raised a hostile hand 
against the strangers; telling them afterwards, that on 
the arrival of the vessel they should have presents in. 
abundance. This pacified them, and they turned their 
thoughts from mischief to fishing and hunting: our 
party, for so I must now speak, keeping a good look 
out every night, relieving each other at intervals, to 
prevent surprise. At length the vessel waa made out 
by me whilst anxiously gazing across the bay, and I 
lost no time in giving the pleasing intelligence to both 
parties;—as for the natives, they made great rejoicings, 
jumping round and round me in the wildest manner,.. 

n« 

XlBE: OF BUCKET. 

tapping me on the shoulders to show their delight at 
my not: having deceived them ; and, of course, at the 
arrival of the expected presents. No doubt, their guilty 
Consciences toUehed them up a little; for, remembering 
and referring to their murderous designs, they asked me 
if I thought it would be sale for them to remain, or 
more advisable to run away into the bush ? I told them 
to stay where they were, as they had done no wrong, 
but had th^ydoaoe so, it would have been a very different 
matter; for in that case, they would, to a certainty, all 
have been shot or banged. 

The vessel—her name I do not recollect—kept stand¬ 
ing^ up the bay until she touched upon a sand-bank, 
about three miles off, when Mr. Batman and Mr. 
WCdgS, who were <m board,’ left her in a boat; and, in 
order to prepare for their landing in safety, I went up 
to the.native, camp, and addressed the tribes as to the 
conduct r they should pursue; The gentlemen I have 
named, <m coming up to whore we were—whites and 
blacks—appeared to be very muob astonished at seeing 
me, and at my height, as I rose at their approach. 
There waaa person named Gunn, who had been left in 
charge of the party during their absence, and he soon 
explained who I was, and other matters. Mr. Batman 
asked me many questions, and I told him I arrived in 
a ship, the name of which I had forgotten; and, as I 
thought, .about twenty years befbm^-biit that I could 
only gUfesftj -having lest: aB recollection of time? He 
then askedime. if I .would remain altogether with his 
partyy afcd ^vhat preee*fts*it would be .most advisable to 

UFE OF BOOKLET. 

117 

give r the natives? Thefirstartide 1 recommended was 
bread; so the boat was immediately sent off for two bags 
of biscuits, and these were distributed at a great Corrob- 
berree we had that i%ht; which entertainment—if it 
may be so called—very much delighted the visitors. 

My task now was to keep alive the. good understand¬ 
ing which existed; in that I succeeded: and in the: 
mean time, the vessel had floated off the 'sand-bank, 
and ,we landed from her, provisions, blacksmiths’, ear-' 
penters’, and other tools. 

As Mrs. Batman with her family had arrived in tber 
vessel, they were landed also, as soon as the best ac¬ 
commodations that could be prepared had been made 
ready for their reception. 

The brig sailed the following day, leaving Messrs* 
Batman, Wedge, and the whole party behind making 
permanent arrangements for a settlement. 

To Mr. Wedge I had fully explained all the circum¬ 
stances of my case, and my anxiety about my position, 
as a runaway from the Calcutta. That gentleman 
said he would represent them in the most favourable 
light to Lieutenant-Governor Arthur, so that I might 
feel safe in returning to Van Dimen’s Land; for I was 
resolved on not doing so as a prisoner, after so many 
years’ suffering. Mr. Wedge kindly promised to use 
all theinterest he had to proeureme a free pardon; and' 
so I waited the next arrival of the vessel, employing 
myself in the meantime as an Interpreter, and as the . 
friend of both parties, seldom leaving the camp* in ease 
any unfortunate dispute might arise during my absence. 

118 

LIFE OF BUCKLlflT. 

At length Mr. Wedge expressed a wish that I should 
■accompany him on an exploring excursion inland; so 
we started with two others, and three of the Sydney 
"blacks, reaching Keingeang (as the natives called an 
extehsive lake) the first night; and the next day 
Booneewang, a rising ground of considerable height, 
drora whence may be seen a great extent of country. 
Mr. Wedge here took some sketches, and I pointed out 
to him the falls, near a place called Woorongo, where I 
had caught a vast quantity of eels. Of these falls he 
•also took a view, calling them Buckley’s Falls, out of 
compliment to me. We passed, the next day and the 
following, over a great extent of fine country; now 
jotted with the homesteads of many an industrious and 
Wealthy settler. 

It would be useless for me to describe a country gft 
this time so generally known; suffice it to say, Mr, 
Wedge was surprised and delighted with the magnifi¬ 
cence of its pastural and agricultural resources, making, 
I suppose, his reports accordingly. 

I must state, however, that on this excursion we 
visited my old fishing hut, at the Karaaf River, and, on 
more than one occasion, we shot wild fowl on the rivers 
and lakes, in the presence of the natives; bo as to occa¬ 
sion them to entertain great dread of the use of fire 
arms. I was authorised to tell those I met with, that 
if they would go to the settlement, presents would be 
made to them of blankets, knives, &c., and many pro¬ 
mised to visit us. 

For some time I found it as much as I cOuld do to 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

119 

keep down their inclination for thievery, and their con¬ 
tinual grumbling at some plan not being acted upon for 
seizing all they saw before them—they thinking it&lto- 
gether my fault that an attack had not been made; for, 
although they dreaded the fire arms, they desired to 
surprise the party, and beat them by their numbers. 

At length the vessel arrived from Hobart Town, 
anchoring about two miles off the land, and the.boat we 
had left with us being launched and manned, Mr. 
Batman went on board. 

On leaving us he told me he would make a signal by 
firing off his gun, if there was any good news in which 
I was interested. He was not long on board before 
he did so, and that 1 was delighted may be easily 
imagined; and I had great reason to be more so, when, 
on landing, he handed me a letter to Mr. Wedge, who 
told me all was right. The next matter of importance 
was, to remind him of my promise to the natives, which, 
as the ship had arrived, ought to be performed promptly, 
in order to avoid dissatisfaction. The boat was accord¬ 
ingly sent off again to the vessel for two more bags of 
biscuit, but it did not return until late, so that I was 
obliged to defer sharing them out that night. The 
newt morning I did so, and Mr. Wedge showed me at 
the same time a free pardon from Governor Arthur, 
and a very flattering testimonial of thanks for my ser¬ 
vices to the settlers. These documents were dated the. 
twenty-fifth of August, One thousand eight hundred 
and thirty-five; which, strange to say, was exactly 
thirty-two years from the date of my landing from the 

120 

iXPBr xx ‘wtKfeu*. 

ship Gafcutta. I take tins opportunity of publicly ac- 
krowledging the great kindness shewn me by Mr. 
Wedge, in thus procuring me my freedom, so imme¬ 
diately after ifry 'becoming known to him in smfe an 
extraordinary' manner; and also my gratitude to Sir 
George, then Colonel Arthur, for his having so readily 
responded to the appeal made on my behalf. It was 
more than I had reason to expeet from any Governor, 
without a previous reference to the Home Authorities; 
and the confidence thus placed in my future exertions 
to benefit the first settlers, gratified me exceedingly. 

Allow me, generous reader, to throw my mind hack 
upon the hour when 1 thus, received deliverance from 
the past imdv present, and iriy long hoped for freedom 
for the future. Ihus, in effect, I expressed myself:— 
“ I can now, brice itiore, raise my thoughts—my un¬ 
shackled mind and hands—to Heaven, as a free man. 
I can now offer Up my prayers of praise and thankfulness 
to G<ft), for my extraordinary deliverance, and for His 
wonderful pre^rvAtidh of me dtmhg so lbng a period.— 
My heart beats high with joy, almost to its bursting, 
—and, I ask, Whose heart, bounding from Sb many long 
years of solitude and captivity into freesdoin, could, or 
can, beat like mine?” 

Who, after Heading this brief history bf my ‘eirly 
life, and of my thirty-two years’ perils and wander¬ 
ings in the Wilderness, whatever may be his pbSitioh, 
Will not-— 

Liflfc err * 

HOPE ON. 

12T 

J 

"• * 1 

Hope on!—Live on!—Hope to the la«t., , 
Though cowards shrink before the blast, 

The man whose heart is firmly cast 

Hopes on. v 

Hope onI—’Tis, often in the darkest night, 
When all is lost to human sight, , . , 

There comes the brightest flash of light. 

Hope on 

Hope on!—In deepest pain or misery,— . v 
However great thine agony,— 

Whate’eT may be thy destiny,— 

Hope eh. 

Live on!—Though unequal be the fight, 
See,—Hope hoists high her signal light, 
For ever cheering—ever bright. 

Hope on. 

Hope on!—Live on!—Hope to the last. 
Though cowards shrink before the blast, 
The man whose heart is firmly cast, 

Hopes on—Lives on. 

122 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

CHAPTER IX. 

CHANGE OF SETTLEMENT.—VISIT FROM THE PUTNAROOS 
AND WAINWORRAS.—MR. GELLIBRAND.—ENGAGE AS 

INTERPRETER. — ANOTHER ARRIVAL.-FIRST HOUSE 

BUILT.-COLONISING EXCITEMENT.-DISPUTES BE¬ 
TWEEN THE SETTLERS AND NATIVES.-TWO SETTLERS 

KILLED. 

“ For ’tis a goodly sight to see 
What Heaven has done for this delicious land; 
What fruits of fragrance blush on every tree, 
What goodly prospects o’er the hills expand.” 

By the same vessel which brought my pardon, there 
arrived also instructions from the Directors of the Com ¬ 
pany forming the settlement, for us to break up our 
present encampment, and take up our station on the 
right bank of the Yarra from its source, at a spot they 
had fixed upon as the site of a town; little thinking, 
however, it was, in so brief a space of time, to become 
.the capital of a mighty colony, replete in itself with 
all' that is required to found a nation of pre-eminent 
importance. 

LIFE Of BUCKLEY. 

1S3 

Ih consequence of these orders, every one was busily 
•employed for two days packing up and preparing for 
the remove to Melbourne; then only known as a town 
by its marked trees, and other simple signs of such like 
early progress. Having put all our baggage on board, 
I explained to the natives where we were going to, and 
having so done I once more trod the deck of a ship, 
with feelings impossible to be explained. My sable 
friends were not at all pleased at our leaving, thinking 
we might be going away altogether; and their thoughts 
fttill being upon plunder, they did not by any means 
like the idea of its probable escape. 

In the trip up we were unfortunate, for the wind was 
contrary; so we had to beat about the bay two days, 
but in the end reached our destination, and immediately 
commenced unlading the cargo—the mechanics com¬ 
mencing temporary workshops and dwelling-houses for 
the people. 

Whilst thus occupied, we were visited by two of the 
tribes I have already mentioned, the Putnaroo and the 
Wainworras—the savages who murdered the two ship¬ 
wrecked mariners when crossing the Yarra River. 
They mustered about two hundred strong, men, women, 
and children. I had great difficulty in keeping these 
people from exercising their thievish inclinations, thereby 
bringing on difficulties between the settlers and the 
blacks; and I had enough to do, so as to keep myself 
from the suspicion of intending wrong either to one or 
the other party. During all the time we were landing 
the cargo and storing it, sentries were mounted day and 

LIFE OF BUCKLET. 

124 

night, to prevent pilfering and disputes; but other 
tribes continuing to arrive, increasing their strength, it 
occasioned me great anxiety; because I knew, as the 
last arrivals had left; their families behind, they name 
with warlike intentions, and with hopes of plunder, in 
case %n opportunity offered. This devilry was, however, 
neutralised by the gentlemen in charge of the settle¬ 
ment making them more presents of blankets, bread, 
knives, scissors, and .such like useful articles; with 
which the tribes separated, apparently satisfied with 
the generosity shown them, and with the promises made 
of further supplies on the arrival of the next ship from 
Van Diemen’s Land. 

That vessel brought several gentlemen, amongst 
whom was Mr. Gellibrand, and they engaged me as 
their Interpreter, at a salary pf fifty pounds a year, 
with rations. Soon after this, we started on pa ex¬ 
ploring expedition, looking for land; and were out 
about six days, traversing in the meantime, all the 
country round, visiting Buckley’s Falls, the Yawang 
Hills, and other localities already mentioned; during 
which journey we fell in with a man, his wife, and 
children, with whom I had been many months, who all 
lamented bitterly my haying left them; but the present 
of a blanket happily soothed their affliction. 

On our return to Melbourne we found another vessel 
had arrived, bringing a cargo of potatoes and other food, 
and articles suited to the general wants and require* 
meats of the settlement, A great portion of the former 
I daily distributed Ip the natives by order of the persons 

LlPfe OP BUCKLEY. 

125 

in charge; the bricks and building materials being ap¬ 
propriated to the erection of a residence for Mr. Bat¬ 
man,' on what is now called Batman’s Hill, which was' 
the first habitation regularly formed at Port Phillip. 
Having been bred a bricklayer, I superintended the 
putting up of the chimneys, although it was so many 
years since I had learned the trade under my gqo4 old 
master, Mr. Wyatt. .. . 

Other families continued to arrive, a great excitement 
having been created in the adjacent colonies, by. the. 
reports made Of the discovery of excellent sheep,and, 
cattle pasturage; and, particularly amongst the settlers; 
in Van Diemen’s Land, who were already induced to 
embark large amounts in the speculation; many othcrsr 
also coming amongst us for the purpose of ascertaining 
the value of the country thus opened up, and the pro¬ 
priety of changing their abodes. 

All things went on very quietly, until several of the 
Sydney blacks, and others, began to be too familiar with } 
the native women; and at length, one of the latter came 
to me, saying, she had been seized by one of the shep¬ 
herds, who had tied her up, but, that when he was, 
asleep she had broken loose, and had run away to me 
for protection. I considered it my duty to mention the , 
circumstance to Mr. Gellibrand, pointing out the con¬ 
sequences that would ensue if this conduct was persisted ; 
in; knowing well the vindictive vengeance <?f the na- . 
tives, who, as I have already shown, are exceedingly , 
jealous in all such matters. That gentleman,imme- r 
diately sent for the Inan accused, hut he denied all 

126 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

knowledge of the woman, or of the circumstances ta> 
which she had referred. Mr, Gellibrand had, however, 
good proof of his guilt; and therefore, after severely 
reprimanding him for his brutality, he dismissed him 
from the Company’s service, and ordered his immediate 
return to Van Diemen’s Land. 

Soon after this, there arrived a Missionary, who- 
wished to travel up the country, and being applied to,. 
I. named six natives I could trust to accompany him; 
and they returned with him in safety after an absence 
of six days. This Missionary was the late Rev. Joseph 
Orton. 

Emigrants from Sydney and Van Diemen’s Land 
now continued to arrive almost daily, and from the 
former place came several gentlemen, holding official 
appointments, to report on the capabilities of the country 
generally: Mr. Gellibrand also came again from Hobart 
Town. During his absence an affray had taken place 
between the natives and some of the settlers, in which 
two of the latter were killed. I know nothing of tha 
circumstances, as the affair occurred more than twenty 
miles away from the settlement; excepting that the 
deceased were buried at Melbourne. 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

127 

CHAPTER X. 

ARRIVAL OF CAPTAIN LONSDALE.—STOCKMAN MURDERED. 

—GENERAL BOURKE ARRIVES.-EARTHQUAKE.-LOSS 

OF MESSRS. GELLIBRAND AND HESSE.-EXPLORING 

PARTIES GO IN SEARCH OF THEM.-MY HORSE BRUTAL¬ 
LY MAIMED.-VISIT LAUNCESTON.—RETURN TO MEL¬ 

BOURNE.—LEAVE THE SERVICE OF THE GOVERNMENT.. 

“ Heaven, from all creatures, hides the book of fete, 
All hut the page prescribed,—their present state .’ 1 

I should here state, that a Mr. Faulkner, from Launces¬ 
ton, had been some time settled in the colony, but he had 
no connection with the Company. From some cause or 
other, and although not knowing much of me, he repre¬ 
sented me to be a dangerous character : as one having 
too great an influence over the natives. I was much 
hurt at his representations to my prejudice with the 
Company; and so, not knowing what the ultimate con¬ 
sequences might he, I resigned my situation; continuing 
however with Mr. Batman, who treated me with the. 

128 LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

greatest kindness on all occasions, I do not attribute 
any intentional wrong to Mr. Faulkner, believing him 
to have been misinformed by interested persons, and 
that I was sacrificed by their malignity. 

With Mr. Batman I remained until the arrival of a 
King’s ship from Sydney, having on board Captain 
Lonsdale, of the King’s Own Regiment of Foot, my old 
corps, with which 1 had served in Holland. He came 
to assume the command, not only as a military officer, 
but as the resident magistrate of the new colony. A 
detachment of the Fourth accompanied him for the 
protection of the settlers; who were, by this time, 
numerous, many of them being also very wealthy, and 
influential. The new Commandant enquired very par¬ 
ticularly into my history and sufferings, and ultimately 
offered me employ, with the same pay and advantages I 
had had before I was discharged from the Company’s 
service; but considering all I had done, I said I thought 
myself entitled to at least an advance of pay, which was 
at length agreed upon; so that I was in future to receive 
sixty pounds ; per annum, and rations, instead of fifty, as 
'heretofore, This being arranged, I began the duties of 
my office as Interpreter and attendant;on the new Com¬ 
mandant, pointing out to him localities for his consider¬ 
ation, for the building of barracks, a store-house, and 
such like; Captain Lonsdale however retaining his 
quarters on board, until a suitable temporary building 
was erected for hip accommodation. 

After a little, time, I succeeded in getting the natives 
to work in carrying loads of goods, building materials,, 

UFB OF BWKLEY. 

129 

and water, from place to place, where they were required; 
rewarding them each with boiled meat and biscuit; and 
this sort of employ they followed with great cheerful¬ 
ness* 

At the sight of the soldiers’ red jackets, however, they 
were at first very much alarmed, associating the colour 
with something very dreadful. 

My duty now wap to visit about amongst the various 
settlers 1 families, to ascertain if the natives had been in 
any way troublesome, to promote a mutual confidence 
between the parties, and for some time I was pleased to 
find all things going on well] but one day, a white boy 
brought me word that two stock-keepers had-been mur¬ 
dered, in consequence of their attempting to ill-use some 
native women when they were out gathering roots. 
Their screams brought some of the tribe to their assist¬ 
ance, and the next day, as the shepherds were proceed¬ 
ing to another station, having their guns and provision^ 
fastened on a pack-horse, the natives waylaid and sur¬ 
prised them^-seizing their guns the first thing, and 
then murdering them. This unfortunate affair hap¬ 
pened about seventy miles from the settlement; and 
this was not the only one to be regretted, for several 
robberies having taken place near Geelong, a native 
was seized, and although merely suspected, he was tied 
to a tree and shot; the body beiAg thrown into thfe 
Barwin River. 

I waa sent, in company with two other constables, 16 
apprehend the white man—a servant of a Mir Fisher; 
and having brought him with us to Mblbourtie, he Was 

K 

130 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

fully oommitted and Bent to Sydney for trial, there 
being no competent tribunal at Port Phillip.—He was 
acquitted, as no person could clearly prove the identity 
of the deceased, and other necessary particulars in cases 
of life and death. 

Soon after this, Governor Bourke visited us, with 
several of the Civil and Military Officers of the New 
South Wales Government. As good a parade as pos¬ 
sible was made to receive him, myself having the charge 
of about one hundred natives ranked up. in line, soldier 
fashion, and saluting him by putting their hands to 
their foreheads as I directed. 

His Excellency told me to say to them, if they 
were quiet and orderly they should have presents of 
bread, blankets, and tomahawks; all which promises 
were faithfully kept within a very few hours after he 
had landed. 

The Governor having expressed a desire to see some¬ 
thing of the interior, I was ordered to attend him, with 
an escort; and crossing the Yawang Plains, we reached 
the Marrabul, now called the Esk River, the first night, 
there pitching our tents. The night following we halted 
near the Yallock, where we again bivouacked, remain¬ 
ing there several days; his Excellency, the Surveyor- 
General and others, taking me with them, and moving 
in various directions, expressing great delight at all 
they saw of the country in that quarter. The natives 
we met with in these excursions, were, through me, 
assured by the Governor, that if they came to the set¬ 
tlement, and avoided committing any offences against 

LIFE OP BUCKLEY. 

131 

the white people, they should receive presents of all 
kinds of useful articles. These invitations and promises 
many of them availed themselves of, behaving very 
peaceably. One night whilst away from Melbourne, 
the party was awoke by shocks of an earthquake; and 
so heavy were they, that the sentry gave an alarm, 
thinking at first the natives were in upon our powder 
and provisions. 

About this time we received intelligence that Mr. 
Gellibrand had again arrived from Hobart Town, in 
company with a Mr. Hesse, a Solicitor of that city 
It appeared that shortly after landing at Geelong, they 
had left that place on horseback for Melbourne; but, at 
the end of a fortnight, great alarm was excited by the 
news, that they had not arrived at the latter—nor 
found their way back to the former. Although greatly 
fatigued after a very long journey, I was immediately 
sent on horseback in search of them; and reaching the 
hut of a gentleman, nearly fifty miles distant, I re¬ 
mained there for Mr. Gellibrand^ son, who was to meet 
me by appointment. No news of the lost gentlemen 
could be obtained by me on my journey;—and here, 
I should say, that they had taken with them as a guide 
a white man, who, according to his statement, they had 
discharged, in consequence of some misunderstanding 
about the direction of the route. On his return to hm 
master, Captain Pollack, he stated “ That they had 
refused to be guided by him, and that therefore he had 
left.” I engaged some trustworthy natives and accom¬ 
panied them, hoping to trace the steps cf the horses. 

132 LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

When Mr. Gellibrand, junior, joined me at the place 
appointed, we all proceeded to Captain Pollack's station, 
from whence, after necessary refreshment, the latter 
gentleman accompanied us on our search, following the 
course tha guide said the lost travellers had taken, to 
the spot where they had left him. We traced the spoor 
of the horses, as the Cape men say, much farther on, 
into an extensive plain recently burnt, and here we lost 
it altogether. We now struck across the country, still 
hoping to gather some intelligence; and falling in with 
a native encampment, and having reason to think it 
was not a tribe likely to receive the white men in a 
friendly manner* I requested them to remain where 
they were, whilst I endeavoured to obtain some infor¬ 
mation. This bejng acceded, I approached, but being 
on horseback, and in an unknown dress they, at first, 
did not know me, but ran away in great alarm, having 
never seen a horse before. After a time, however, I 
made them understand who I was, and dismounting, 
they all came round me in a friendly manner. Just 
when I was explaining the object of my visit, our 
white party rode up, and one of them began asking 
questions in a jargon of language no one could under¬ 
stand; and by this interference prevented my doing 
any service, for I had scarecly had time to express 
even a hope that they would go in search and do their 
best to bring the lost gentlemen to the settlement. 
The abrupt appearance of our people on horseback, so 
much alarmed the natives, that I could do nothing, 
except accompany them alone to their camp as they 

LtFE 0* BUCKLEY. IS& 

wished, but this my companions Would not allow me, as 
their guide, to do, not feeling safe in thy absence. 

Our efforts to trace the lost travellers were all m 
vain, and at length I returned to Melbourne to report 
our ineffectual efforts for their retctie. Whilst We were 
absent on the expedition, Governor BoUrke had returned 
to Sydney, and the news of the loss of Messrs. Gelli- 
brand and Hesse having been forwarded to Hobart 
Town, three of their Mends arrived with the deter* 
ruination, if possible, to trace their fate. I was applied 
to for information, and to accompany (hem; the former 
I gave them, but I refused the latter proposal, because 
I was certain I could do mUcit better if I went by tny- 
self on such a mission. They appeared very much dis¬ 
pleased at my objections, and I was summoned before 
the Commandant to give my reasons; to whom I said, 
those who were with me before had most improperly 
interfered, endangering my life and their own, by not 
having placed confidence in me and allowed me to do 
with, and say to the natives, what I thought best on 
the matter. The Commandant agreed with me, but the 
persons Who had taken the affair in hand decided on 
having their own way; and they accordingly engaged 
several blacks to go with them, who, strange to say, 
they furnished with fire arms. 

Three days after they had left; the place, I had per¬ 
mission from Captain Lonsdale to proceed alone on my 
search; but my horse having a sore back, I was obliged 
to remain a short time until it could bear the saddle. 
In the meantime he was tethered in the rear of my 

134 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

quarters, where the animal was very happy during his 
temporary rest; until one day a native came running 
to me in great sorrow, saying he was bleeding very 
much and nearly dead. Mr. Batman happening to be 
near, we went away together to where the horse was, 
and found he had been, what is called, ham-strung; all 
the hind sinews of his legs having been cut through by 
some white, or other savage. 

My poor horse died, and I took passage by a vessel 
to Geelong, in order there to provide myself with 
another, and thence pursue my search, although I had 
long since concluded upon its being useless, after the 
absurd efforts which had been made by those who, no 
doubt, most anxiously desired to recover the lost gen¬ 
tlemen, but knew nothing about how successfully to 
accomplish so difficult an undertaking in such a country 
and under such circumstances. Mr. Gellibrand, junior, 
did all he could; and as a son, was naturally excited 
and influenced by all proper feelings of regret, anxiety, 
and perseverance; but what could he do, overruled as 
he was by others, who had done more harm than good 
in the search, as I have already shown, by their im¬ 
proper interference with me, who might have led to the 
discovery of the lost travellers, either dead or alive. 

Having obtained permission, I at length set off alone, 
and at Mr. Reibey’s station received intelligence that a 
native and his daughter had been shot by the natives 
who had accompanied the three gentlemen that pre¬ 
ceded me from Melbourne by land, and who, being 
much alarmed at the circumstance just recorded, had 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

185 

returned to that place. Knowing it would be useless 
for me to attempt any discovery after this event, I went 
on board again, and returned to Melbourne also. It 
was* an inexcusable murder, for there was not the least 
reason to believe that the poor people who had been so 
mercilessly sacrificed, had had anything to do with the 
death of either Mr. Gellibrand or Mr. Hesse, neither 
was it known at that time whether they were dead or 
alive. This affair gave me great pain, because, from 
my long association with the natives, 1 thought such 
destruction of life anything but creditable to my coun¬ 
trymen; but on the contrary, that they were atrocious 
acts of oppression. 

From that time all search after the unfortunate gen¬ 
tlemen ceased, but enquiries were still continued, un¬ 
fortunately without effect. In Mr. Gellibrand, I lost a 
very good and kind friend; his humane considerations 
for me will never be forgotten; and amongst other 
evidences of this feeling, he had given me the horse 
which, as I have just said, was so brutally mutilated. 

About this time, an absconder from Van Diemen's 
Land was apprehended, and ordered by the Magistrates 
to be returned to Launceston; and I asked permission 
to take charge of him to that colony, which request was 
acceded to, as I was a Constable. Having delivered 
the prisoner to the Gaoler at Launceston, I went into 
the country for a few days to visit an old shipmate, 
whose name it is not necessary to mention, and then 
returned for a passage back again, according to the 
orders I had received. 

136 

OP BUGKLBT. 

At this time a steam vessel arrived at Launceston 
'with seme prisoners bound to Port Phillip, and in her 
wise Captain Fyfcns, who had been appointed Resident 
Magistrate at Geelong. I returned to the new colony 
in that teasel, having received great kindness at Laun¬ 
ceston from Mr. Bamms, toe Under Sheriff, and others, 
who gave me flour, and other things, as presents for 
myself, and to be given to the natives. 

On my arrival at Melbourne, I was directed to ac¬ 
company Captain Fyans to Geelong, he having a 
number of other persons with him. On eroesihg the 
Yawahg Plains it came on to min very heavily, and 
having been much occupied and exhausted before I kit 
Melbourne* by toy explanations to toe friendly tribes 
of natives, and by my long march, I was compelled to 
Vest by toe way,—the party proceeded ott without me. 

I hesitated for Some time whether I would follow the 
Captain in the morning, but at length determined to 
do so, and proceeded / to Mr. Fisher’s station, who on 
all occasions treated me* m had Messrs, ftimpson and 
Wedge, with the greatest kindness and consideration; 
so much jso, that I shall, through life, always be pleased 
to acknowledge the obligations I am under to them and 
others. 

Haring gone on to Geelong and remained there se¬ 
veral days, I obtained permission to return to Mel¬ 
bourne by water; hnd* soon after my arrival, was sent 
in search of sheep, said to have been driven away 
by natives. In this way I was employed for several 
weeks, butfitodiag that soma persons were always 

Li tl Of BUCKLEY. 

137 

throwing difficulties in the way of my interests, and 
not knowing what might be the result, 1 determined 
on resigning office, and on leaving a colony where my 
services were so little known, and so badly appreciate*} 
by the principal authorities. 

It was not without great regret, that I resolved on 
leaving the colony, because I had believed my know¬ 
ledge of the language and habits of the natives, ac¬ 
quired during my sojourning amongst them, might have 
led to my being employed by the local authorities 
during the rest of my life; but, when I reflected on the 
suspicion with which I was viewed by the most influen¬ 
tial white men, and on the probable doubt the natives 
would entertain in my sincerity after having left then}, 
I thought it best to retire to Van Diemen’s Land. In¬ 
deed, I could ntot calculate on one hour’s personal safety 
from either one party or the other, under sueh circum¬ 
stances, for if lives had been lost, or cattle stolen, in any 
locality where I happened to be stationed, prejudice or 
vindictive feelings might have been brought into play, 
and I should have been sacrificed. 

In proof of this, and of the reckless way in which 
conclusions were sometimes arrived at in serious matters, 
I will here relate, in as few words as possible, what hap¬ 
pened to one of the natives, who, poor fellow, had a 
very narrow escape from death, in consequence of false 
information; such as I might have been subjected to at 
any time, had I remained in a colony where no confi¬ 
dence was placed in me, merely because I possessed 
more influence with the natives * 

138 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

CHAPTER XI. 

CHARGE AGAINST A NATIVE.—HOW SUSTAINED.—THE 

CLIMATE.-SAIL FOR HOBART TOWN. — HOSPITABLE 

RECEPTION.—NARROW ESCAPE FROM BECOMING A PUB¬ 
LIC PERFORMER.—GOVERNMENT HOUSE.—AGAIN ENTER 
THE PUBLIC SERVICE.—MY MARRIAGE.—DISCHARGE 
AND PENSION.—NARRATIVE DRAWS TO A CLOSE. 

My march of life is nearly ended; 

Bugler,—sound the “ Halt!” 

I have already related some of the circumstances con¬ 
nected with the loss of Messrs. Gellibrand and Hesse. 
Soon after the search for them had been given up, a 
vessel arrived at Geelong from Van Diemen’s Land 
with goods and passengers; amongst them was a car¬ 
penter, who had with him a tool-chest and other bag¬ 
gage to carry up from the beach. By that time the 
natives had acquired the industrious habit of working 
in this way, many of them being very useful and 
civil, after their fashion; in fact, all those who know 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY, 

m 

anything of their habits, are aware how docile those of 
the poor creatures are, who are well inclined, and how 
anxious they are to please those who employ and treat 
them kindly. One of this description was engaged by 
the carpenter to carry his traps up from the ship, and 
as a reward, and for the sake of decency, he was clothed 
in a much worn coat and trowsers; in which, having 
done all that was required of him, he set off to astonish 
his tribe by his very smart and altered appearance. 
He left in great glee, little thinking of what was to 
follow. 

Some days after, another vessel arrived from Van 
Diemen’s Land, and he, with others, went to her, look¬ 
ing for a job. The master of this craft seeing a native 
in such a dress, began to examine him after the fashion 
peculiar to self-constituted and many other kinds of 
Justices, who found their views and decisions only 
upon one order of thinking; namely, the infallibility 
of their own opinions—-not in the least valuing those 
of others. 

This wise sailor judge swore he knew the coat the 
man had on to have been the property of Mr. Hesse; 
that, in fact, it was the one he wore when he left 
Hobart Town;—that he could trace spots of blood upon 
it; and, on this evidence the native was seized, hand¬ 
cuffed, and forwarded to Melbourne on a charge of 
murder. 

When the accused arrived there, he was brought 
before the Commandant, and I was required to act as 
Interpreter; this, however, I at first declined, having 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY, 

( H0 

given up ray connection with the Government; faff 
considering that the life of a fellow-creature Was is 
jeopardy, I at length consented, 

A boy, in the employ of Mr. Faulkner, Who wan 
supposed to know something of the language* was in¬ 
terrogated as to what had passed between him and the 
prisoner? Bat I soon found the hoy was altogether ig¬ 
norant, and Was shocked at the idea of his evidence 
being taken. I then questioned the accused as to hoW 
fa became possessed of the clothes? Be explained, by 
stating, that they were given him in the manner before- 
mentioned. I asked the poor follow if he would know 
the carpenter again; or Where he lived, so as to enable 
us to obtain his evidence? He said tike man had left 
Geelong, and that he knew nothing about his present, 
residence. 

I explained all this to the Justices, but the Captain 
of the vessel persisted in the statement that the coat 
belonged to Mr. Hesse; so the prisoner was remanded 
to the guard-house. The coat was then given into my 
charge, with instructions that I should make every 
enquiry concerning its former ownership; and with that 
view, I gave it into the care of the Chief Constable, 
readily enlisting his Sympathies for the native, who I 
believed to be innocent. 

One day whilst walking along the banks of the river 
we were talking over the matter, particularly of the 
hard swearing of the Captain, and of the probable con¬ 
sequences to the accused: When a man, who, with his 
wife, was Within hearing, suddenly stopped, and said 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. Ml 

he should like to see the coat; for he remembered 
having given a coat of the kind with other things to a 
native, for carrying his chests up from the Geelong 
beach in the manner already mentioned. We listened 
with great interest to his statements, and he afterwards 
fully proved the identity of the coat; and that the stains 
of supposed blood upon it were red paint marks, occa¬ 
sioned by himself when wearing it in his trade St 
Launceston. He afterwards clearly identified the pri¬ 
soner as the native to whom he had given the coat and 
' trousers; so that after an unavoidable short delay, he 
was discharged, greatly delighted at being liberated; 
although, on finding himself once more at liberty, he 
cried loudly and Utterly, like a child. 

I make no remark upon the conduct of his accuser, 
who had so nearly sacrificed the life of another; but 1 
must do the Commandant, Captain Lonsdale, the jus¬ 
tice to say, he did all he could in the matter to ad¬ 
minister justice free from prejudice; and that, after the 
case was dismissed, he ordered me to take the native to 
his own house, where he was received and treated with 
great kindness. After eating as much as he pleased, 
at my recommendation he was given blankets, toma¬ 
hawks, and other things as presents, added to which, 
he received a quantity of bread and meat, to help him 
on his way homewards to his tribe, about fifty miles 
distant, over a portion of which I accompanied him, 
leaving the poor fellow at last in high spirits. gnd 
good humour. It was a very lucky escape for him, 
and the circumstances additional proofs of the danger 

. . /V 

142 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

at that tune arising out of false information in any 
matter where the natives were concerned. 

As it may be expected, that I should say something 
more about the localities I visited, of the climate I ex¬ 
perienced, during so many years, and of other things 
and circumstances which more properly belong to the 
history of a country, than to that of an individual, I 
will add a few brief remarks. 

The climate I found very genial, in temperature I 
suppose between that of New South Wales and Van 
Diemen’s Land; but during the winter months, the cold 
winds and rains, in the country near the coast, are very 
trying, even to the Aborigines, who often shrink before 
the heavy gales into hollow trees, caves, and holes in 
the rocks, in a pitiable manner. In the summer months, 
it is not bo hot as many imagine, but as the heat gene¬ 
rates myriads of musquittoes, and of a very large sort of 
horse fly, the traveller suffers much inconvenience and 
torment. These, however, are not peculiar to Port 
Phillip, for in all uncleared and uncultivated coun¬ 
tries it is the same. To avoid these insects the natives 
carry their lighted fire-sticks, holding them to wind¬ 
ward. 

The thunder and lightning storms are occasionally 
very heavy, and I have already noticed the shock of an 
earthquake, but I never heard of any other. There 
was also one heavy flood, in consequence of continuous 
rains, but they are not often known to exceed the sup¬ 
ply required by vegetation. 

The trees and flowers.—I have not the ability to give 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

143 

an account of these; neither is it necessary, scientific 
explorers having done so in various works, which the 
growing importance and natural resources of the pro¬ 
vince have rendered it desirable to bring before the 
public. The same with the birds and other creatures. 
It is more especially my business, in this narrative, to 
allude to the Aborigines. 

The natives live to about the same age, generally, as 
civilized people—some of them, to be very grey-headed. 
They have an odd idea of death, for they do not sup¬ 
pose that any one dies from natural causes, but from 
human agencies: such as those to which I have alluded 
in previous pages of this narrative. The women seldom 
have more than six children, and not often so many. 
So soon as they have as many as they can conveniently 
carry about and provide for, they kill the rest imme¬ 
diately after birth : not to eat them—as may be sup¬ 
posed—but with the idea that, for the sake of both 
parties, and under such circumstances, death is prac¬ 
tical mercy. 

To resume the thread of my narrative. I sailed from 
Melbourne in the Yarra Yarra, on the twenty-eighth of 
December, 1837, and landed at Hobart Town the tenth 
of January following. On arriving, the master of the 
vessel, Captain Lancey, went with me to the Bank, to 
procure the value of a cheque I had, and he afterwards 
took me to the Duchess of Kent Inn, where he enter¬ 
tained me very hospitably. In fact, on all occasions 
he behaved towards me in the most generous manner. 

At the Inn, I was visited by a Mr, Cutts, then the 

144 

XJ7£ OW BUCU-ET. 

landlord of the Black Swan, Hobart Town, a country¬ 
man of mine, who insisted on my making bis house my 
home, free of all charge; which invitation, for a few 
weeks, I thankfully accepted- 

In my rambles about the town, I was frequently 
accosted by persona anxious for information about Port 
Pbillip, with the extraordinary accounts of which all 
Van Diemen's Land bad become, I may say, inflamed. 
To the new colony, vessels fall of emigrants, with 
sheep, &e., wore almost daily proceeding; so that any 
information from me was considered valuable. In one 
of my perambulations, I met with a gentleman who 
gave me a ticket to the Theatre; asking me, at the 
same time, to accompany him, which I did, and was 
very much gratified at what I saw. At length one of 
the performers came to ask me if I would like to visit 
the place again, and come upon the stage? Thinking 
his offer kind, and that I should see the performance 
better there, I said yes; little supposing I was to be 
then exhibited as the huge Anglo*Australian giant. 
However, the next day I found what was intended, and 
soon gave a denial to any such display, very much to 
the mortification, as I afterwards understood, of the 
stage manager, who had publicly notified my appear* 
ance. 

About this time I was visited at Mr. Cutts’, by one 
of my old shipmates in the Calcutta, who had become a 
wealthy and respectable settler, near the Green Ponds, 
about thirty miles from Hobart Town. After a few 
days, and he had settled his business, I accepted an 

LIFE OP BUCKXBY. 

145 

invitation to accompany him to his home, where I was 
hospitably entertained more than three weeks; when, 
being tired of an indolent life, I begged my friend to 
make interest with his Excellency Sir John Franklin, 
so that I might have employ. My friend lost no time 
in acceding to my wishes; and, in a few days I was 
directed to call at Government House at an early 
hour, and had the honour to be introduced to Sir John 
and Lady Franklin, and to several gentlemen who were 
breakfasting there. Numerous were the questions they 
put to me, and amongst the rest was, what I wished on 
my own account ? I replied, a small allotment of land! 
His Excellency said he could not grant land, but that 
he would see what could be done in the way of finding 
me employment.. 

According to this promise, I was soon afterwards 
appointed Assistant to the Storekeeper at the Immi¬ 
grants’ Home, Hobart Town; which situation I held 
about three months; when the immigrants having been 
all settled, the establishment was broken up, and I was 
transferred to the Female Nursery, as Gate-keeper. 

At the Immigrants’ Home I had become acquainted 
with a family—consisting of a respectable mechanic, 
his wife, and daughter; the former of whom, thinking 
to better himself, went on to Sydney; but, whilst on a 
journey he afterwards undertook overland to Port Phil¬ 
lip, he was killed by natives near the Murray River; 
thus leaving his family unprovided for. 

The fact of his death having been ascertained, I ten¬ 
dered myself to the mother; she accepted me as her 

L 

146 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

future husband, and we were married by the Rev. Mr, 
Ewing, the Episcopalian Clergyman at New Town, in 
the month of March, 1840. 

Soon after this, I was attacked by typhus fever, and 
lay many days suffering very much; it being the only 
severe illness I had undergone in all my life. The kind 
attentions I received from my wife and her daughter 
however, under the merciful providence of God, at 
length restored me to health, but not to such health as 
I had previously enjoyed; my privations and exposure 
in the bush, with increased years, having, no doubt, 
materially damaged my naturally strong constitution. 

In the year 1850, there was an alteration in the 
establishment at the Nursery, and I was paid off by the 
Convict Department, my services being no longer re¬ 
quired, with a pension of twelve pounds per annum. 
With this small sum, for which I feel grateful, under 
all the circumstances of my case, and the industry of 
my wife and daughter, we contrive to live humbly and 
honestly; but I do entertain a hope, that something 
will be done for me by the local authorities of Port 
Phillip—now the great and wealthy colony of Victoria 
—when, by the means of this narrative of my life, my 
sufferings, services, and wants, are better, and more 
generally known. 

My narrative is now at its close; let its details of 
dangers and privations serve as a moral to the young 
and reckless,—to all who, passing unheeded the admo¬ 
nitions of parents, guardians, and friends, rush heed¬ 
lessly on the future, with all its trials and consequences, 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

I4T 

occasioning many bitter pangs to those who would 
instil into their minds motives of action, founded on 
religion and propriety. The want of these, or rather 
the abandonment of them, by me in early life, led to 
the sufferings I endured in after years, some of which 
I have here endeavoured faithfully to portray. 

Finally.—To the Almighty God of my existence, I 
thus publicly offer up in all humility , my heartfelt prayers 
of thankfulness , for the great and merciful preservation 
and undeserved blessings he has vouchsafed unto me in 
all my wanderings: hoping , that when it may please Him 
fo call me hence—I may surrender myself into his hands v 
with the true spirit and feelings of a Christian man . 

As this page closes “ The Adventures of William 
Buckley/ 7 in justice to him something ought here to be 
said in furtherance of his claim upon the Home and 
Local Governments. It is generally admitted, that had 
he not been at Port Phillip when the first Settlers ar¬ 
rived, they would, most probably, have encountered* 
dangers and difficulties, which were averted only by hi® 
presence and influence. 

It is understood, that two hundred acres of land were 

148 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

ordered him by Sir Richard Bourke, which grant he 
never received. He however yet lives, and the oppor¬ 
tunity therefore remains to do him justice. It is not 
to be supposed that those who have the control of these 
affairs in Victoria, will rest content with his receiving 
the pittance of twelve pounds annually from the British 
Government, for services performed in Van Diemen's 
Land;—to think this, would be a reproach to all con¬ 
cerned. Let us then hope that some additional provi¬ 
sion will be made for him, so that he may never have 
cause to regret (on account of poverty) his return to 
civilization, or the services rendered to those of his 
countrymen who found him in his solitude, and restored 
him to what he hoped would prove happiness for the few 
remaining years of his extraordinary existence. 

In all the surrounding prosperity, arising out of the 
increase of flocks, and herds, and gold, surely Buckley 
may be permitted, in a very small degree, to partici¬ 
pate ? His career in this island has been most respecta¬ 
ble and praiseworthy. Under all circumstances, then, 
Victorians, give him a reward suited to your means, 
your liberal feelings, and your sense of justice.— Ed. 

149 

APPENDIX. 

/ 

HISTORICAL RECORDS OF THE FOURTH REGIMENT 
OF FOOT. 

In the early part of this narrative it is said, that re¬ 
ferences to the campaigns in Holland in which Buckley 
with his regiment took part, must be very brief. It 
would, however, be an injustice to the service, and to 
the gallant corps to which he belonged, did we omit the 
following extract from the historical records of the 
Fourth, or King’s Own:— u Leaving Botley in April, 
1799, the Regiment proceeded to Worcester, from thence 
to Horsham Barracks in July; and in the following 
month it marched to the camp on Barham Downs. 

44 The Militia being permitted this year to transfer 
their services to the regular Regiments, two thousand 
seven hundred men volunteered to the King’s Own, in 

150 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

consequence of which the Regiment was formed into 
three battalions. Major-General the Earl of Chatham 
was appointed Colonel-Commandant of the second bat¬ 
talion, and Major-General Lord Charles Somerset Co¬ 
lonel-Commandant of the third. 

44 On the 3rd September the Prince of Wales was 
pleased to present a pair of new colours to the first 
battalion on Barham Downs. The Regiment was 
formed in square, and his Royal Highness addressed 
the officers and men as follows:— 

u 4 It affords me the highest satisfaction to have the 
honor of presenting this gallant and distinguished corps 
with their colours. Nothing but a blameless accident 
could have deprived you of those you possessed before, 
and I now replace them, under the firmest conviction 
that there is not a Regiment in his Majesty’s service, 
that will ever support and defend its colours with more 
valour and gallantry than the Fourth, or King’s Own. 
It considerably enhances the pleasure I feel on this 
occasion, that the ceremony has happened on a day 
when every British heart must be filled with gladness 
at the tidings which have just been received of the 
heroic actions our brave countrymen have achieved, in 
endeavouring to rescue Holland from the detestable 
tyranny of France; and I perceive with true pride, 
that every countenance I behold partakes of the noble 
ardour, and that every heart is panting to share in 
their laurels and glory.’ 

Lt In a few days after the presentation of the new 
colours, the Regiment was ordered to proceed on foreign 

APPENDIX. 

151 

service. It embarked at Deal, and after landing in 
Holland, joined the Anglo-Russian army, commanded 
by bis Royal Highness the Duke of York, when the 
three battalions of the King's Own, and the Thirty-first 
Regiment were formed in brigade, under the orders of 
Major-General the Earl of Chatham. This brigade 
formed part of the column under Lieutenant-General 
Dundas, in the attack of the enemy's position near 
Bergen and Egmont-op-zee on the 2nd October. The 
King's Own were engaged amongst the Sand-hills, and 
evinced the same intrepidity and firmness, for which 
the Regiment had been distinguished on former occa¬ 
sions. The enemy was driven from his position, and 
the troops received the thanks and approbation of the 
Commander-in-Chief. The Regiment had three men 
killed; Ensign Carruthers, one Sergeant, and eight 
private men wounded; one Sergeant, and six men 
missing. 

11 In the attack of the enemy's position between Be- 
verwyck and Wyck-op-zee, on the 6th October, the three 
battalions of the King's Own were sharply engaged. 
The action was most severe, and was continued with 
sanguinary obstinacy until night, when the enemy 
retreated, leaving the allies masters of the field. 

“ The King's Own had Lieutenant-Colonel Dickson, 
Lieutenant Forster, and twenty-five men killed; Major- 
General the Earl of Chatham, Lieutenant-Colonel Hodg¬ 
son, Captain Palmer, Ensigns Johnson, Carruthers, 
Nichols, Highmore and Archibald, with four Sergeants, 
and one hundred and eight rank and file wounded; 

152 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

Majors Wynch and Homdon, Captain Gillmour, Lieu¬ 
tenants Dear© and Wilson wounded and taken priso¬ 
ners ; Lieutenant-Colonel Cholmondelay, Major Pringle, 
Captains Archdall, Broadie and • Chaplain, Lieutenants 
Gazely and Wilbrahams, Ensigns Brown, Ellis, Hill, 
Anderson, McPherson and Tyron, with twelve Ser¬ 
geants, one drummer, and five hundred and two rank 
and file, prisoners of war and missing. 

11 Several circumstances having occurred to render 
farther operations in Holland unadvisable, the army 
re-embarked and returned to England. The three bat¬ 
talions of the King’s Own landed at Yarmouth, and 
marched to Ipswich, where they passed the winter.” 

APPENDIX. 

153 

THE FIRST SETTLEMENT OF PORT PHILLIP, 
AND SUBSEQUENT ABANDONMENT. 

■ 

r ; I ' * * hr* 

As many persons, in all parts of the world, are looking 
with great interest to the Australian Colonies, now so 
rapidly rising into importance, the following extract 
from Bent's Tasmanian Almanack for 1829, will not 
be out of place in a work of this kind :— 

“ Lieutenant-Governor Collins arrived at Port Phillip, 
to form a British settlement at that place, with his Ma¬ 
jesty's ships Calcutta and Ocean,,having on board de¬ 
tachments of Royal Marines, a number of free settlers, 
and several hundred prisoners, stores, &c., October 9th, 
Governor Collins having left England on the 27th of 
April 1803, in the former vessel, for the express pur¬ 
pose of forming another settlement on the south coast 
of New Holland, for the further reception of convicts 
transported from Great Britain. Governor Collins, 
soon after his arrival at Port Phillip, saw the imprac¬ 
ticability of colonizing that place , in consequence of the 
great want of water , and immediately dispatched an 
open boat from thence to Sydney, with an application 

154 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

to Governor King, for instructions how to proceed, and 
stating the incapabilities of Port Phillip for the forma¬ 
tion of a second colony. In consequence, Lieutenant- 
Governor Collins received instructions from head¬ 
quarters, to make a settlement, either at Port Dal- 
rymple, or on the banks of the River Derwent, Van 
Diemen’s Land, which he found the best adapted for 
the purpose. After due and deliberate consideration, 
Lieutenant-Governor Collins determined on settling at 
the latter place; and the whole of the establishment 
was removed from Port Phillip thither, in two separate 
drafts, by the Ocean, assisted by a government brig, 
called the Lady Nelson. The latter vessel was em¬ 
ployed upon this service, in consequence of instructions 
having been received from Governor King, requiring 
the immediate service of the Calcutta at Port Jackson, 
in order to assist the Civil and Military Authoritiesin 
quelling an insurrection which had broken out there. 
The first draft, in which was Lieutenant-Governor 
Collins, left Port Phillip on the 30th January. 

“ 1804.—Port Phillip having thus been abandoned 
and evacuated, Lieutenant-Governor Collins, in the 
transport ship Ocean, Captain Matthew, arrived in the 
River Derwent, Van Diemen’s Land, on the 16th of 
February, when this part of the coast of the island was 
first formed a British settlement: the colony having 
been taken possession of and the British colours dis¬ 
played, by Governor Collins—notwithstanding a small 
party of soldiers and prisoners had previously left Port 
Jackson to take a temporary possession, for fear that 

APPENDIX. 

155 

'the French should first form a settlement in the island. 
This little establishment disembarked at a place called 
4 Rest down/ The party, under the command of Lieu¬ 
tenant Moore, accompanied by Dr. Mountgarret, were 
found by Governor CollinB in a most wretched state— 
almost approaching that of starvation; Lieutenant 
Bowen, in the Lady Nelson, having sailed on his 
return for Sydney, for provisions. Lieutenant-Governor 
Collins, after making many surveys, formed the head¬ 
quarters at its present site, which he named 4 Hobart 
Town/ after Lord Hobart, the then Secretary of State 
for the Colonies. The Calcutta, 50 guns, Captain 
Woodriff, which was left at Port Phillip by Governor 
Collins, arrived at the Derwent, June 23. The Ocean 
and Calcutta had on board the following officers and 
persons, who were to compose the Civil and Military 
establishments of the new and second colony in the 
Southern Ocean 

44 Civil .—Lieutenant-Governor, David Collins, Esq., 
Colonel, R.M.; Chaplain, Rev. Robert Knopwood, M. A.; 
Surgeon Superintendent of Convicts, Dr. Edward Foord 
Bromley, R.N.; Colonial Surgeon, William J. Anson, 
Esq.; Assistant Surgeons, Matthew Bowden, Esq., and 
William Hopley, Esq.; Deputy-Commissary-General, 
Leonard Fosbrook, Esq.; Deputy-Surveyor, George 
Predaux Harris, Esq,; Mineralogist, A, W. H. Hum¬ 
phrey, Esq.; Superintendents of ConvictB, Messrs, 
Thomas Clark and William Paterson; Wesleyan Mis¬ 
sionary, Rev. Mr. Crook and family. 

44 Military .—Lieutenant-Colonel Collins, R.M.; Lieu- 

156 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

tenant William Sladen, E.M.; Lieutenant J. M. 
Johnson, E.M.; Lieutenant Edward Lord, E.M.; 
thirty-nine Marines, three Serjeants, one Drummer 
and one Fifer; besides which, there were also, three 
hundred and sixty-seven Male Prisoners, with twelve 
free women, wives of Prisoners. 

“ The Officers on board H. M. Ship , Calcutta v—Daniel 
Woodriff, Esq., Post Captain, Eoyal Navy; First 
Lieutenant, James Tuckey, Esq.; Second Lieutenant, 
Eichard Donevan, Esq.; Third Lieuteuant, Nicholas 
Pateshall, Esq.; Fourth Lieutenant, William Dowers, 
Esq.; Fifth Lieutenant, John Houston, Esq.; Master, 
Eichard Wright, Esq.; Surgeon, Edward FoordBrom¬ 
ley, Esq,; Purser, Edward White, Esq.” 

It is curious to observe the reasons for abandoning 
Port Phillip; namely, u The impracticability of colo¬ 
nizing that place, in consequence of the great want of 
water.” In those days, exploring parties could not 
have been formed of the most energetic adventurers, 
and that hardy race now known as overlanders, were 
not even thought of, as an especial class of pioneers, 
although occasionally an individual astonished the world 
by a publication of his travels. Had any such men 
accompanied Governor Collins's expedition, how very 
different would have been the result. However, let 
us not censure, but take the next extract, as one of 
praise 

u On the 24th of March, Lieutenant-Governor Collins 
died suddenlv. fiftv-four vears of acre, haviner adminis- 

APPENDIX. 

157 

tered the affairs of the colony for six years and thirty- 
one days. As a Governor, he was beloved by all the 
colonists, to whom he was truly a father and a frieticL 
His humanity to the unfortunate prisoners under his 
care, was most conspicuous—being ever more ready to 
pardon than to punish the offender. He was always 
ready in attending to, and complying with, the wants 
and wishes of all classes of the people. He had been for 
upwards of thirty-six years in the Royal Marine Forces. 
In his youth he had served several campaigns in Ame¬ 
rica, under his father, General Collins; and was at the 
battle of Bunker's Hill. In New South Wales, he had 
been in actual employment nearly a quarter of a century; 
having, when a Captain in his corps, been appointed 
Judge Advocate, on the first Establishment of that 
colony, under Governor Phillip. In this situation he 
continued until the year 1796, when he returned to 
England, and there published his history of the colony, 
in two quarto volumes; and was afterwards reinstated 
by his late Majesty to all the rank he had lost in the 
Army by accepting a civil appointment, as Judge 
Advocate. His known abilities, long services, and 
great local knowledge, then gained him the high office 
of Governor." 

In justice to the memory of this excellent man, we 
give the following extract from Barrington's History 
of New South Wales :— 

44 Colonel David Collins was the eldest son of General 
Arthur Tooker Collins and Harriet Frazer, of Pack, in 
the King's County, Ireland, and grandson of Arthur 

158 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

Collins, Esq., Author of the 4 Peerage of England/ &c;. 
He was bora on the 3rd March, 1756, and received 
a liberal education under the Rev. Mr. Marshall, Master 
©f the Grammar School, at Exeter, where his father re¬ 
sided. In 1770, he was appointed a Lieutenant of 
Marines, and in 1772, was- with the late Admiral 
M 4 Bride in the Southampton Frigate, when the un¬ 
fortunate Matilda, Queen of Denmark, was rescued from 
the dangers that awaited her, by the British govern¬ 
ment, and conveyed to a place of safety in the Ring's, 
her brother, Hanoverian dominions. On that occasion 
he commanded the guard that received her Majesty, 
and had the honour of kissing her hand. In 1775 he 
was at the Battle of Bunker's Hill, in which the first 
battalion of Marines, to which he belonged, so signally 
distinguished itself; having its Commanding Officer, 
the gallant Major Pitcairn, and a great many officers 
and men killed in storming the redoubt, besides a very 
large proportion wounded. In 1777 he was Adjutant 
of the Chatham Division, and in 1782, Captain of 
Marines on board the Courageux, 74 guns,, commanded 
by the late Lord Mulgrave, and participated in the 
partial action that took place with the enemies fleet 
when Lord Howe relieved Gibraltar. Reduced to half¬ 
pay at the peace of 1782 he resided at Rochester, in 
Kent, having previously married an American lady* 
and on its being determined to found a colony, by 
sending Convicts to Botany Bay, he was then ap¬ 
pointed Judge Advocate to the intended settlement;, 
and in that capacity sailed with Governor Phillip in May 

APPENDIX. 

15fr 

1787, (who moreover appointed him his Secretary,) 
which situation he filled with the greatest credit to 
himself, and advantage to the colony, until his return 
to England in 1797. The History of the settlement, 
which he soon after published, followed by a second 
volume—a Work abounding with information highly 
interesting—and written with the utmost simplicity, 
will be read and referred to as a book of authority, as 
long as the colony exists whose name it bears. The 
appointment of Judge-Advocate however proved even¬ 
tually injurious to his interests. When absent, he had 
been passed over when it came to his turn to be put on 
full pay, nor was he permitted to return to England to 
reclaim his rank in the corps, neither could he ever 
obtain any effectual redress, but was afterwards com¬ 
pelled to come in as a junior Captain of the corps, 
though with his proper rank in the army. The differ¬ 
ence this made in regard to his promotion was, that he 
died a Captain instead of a Colonel Commandant—his 
rank in the army being merely Brevet. He had than 
the mortification of finding, that after ten years of dis¬ 
tinguished service in the infancy of a colony, and to the 
sacrifice of every real comfort, his only reward had 
been, the loss of many years' rank—a vital injury to 
any officer. A remark, which his wounded feelings 
wrung from him at the close of the second volume of 
his History of the settlement, appears to have awakened 
the sympathies of those in power, and he was almost 
immediately after its publication offered the govern¬ 
ment of the projected settlement of Van Diemen's Land 

160 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

—which he accepted—and sailed once more for that 
quarter of the globe, where he founded his new colony, 
struggled with great difficulties—which he overcame— 
and after governing there six years, was enjoying the 
flourishing state his exertions had produced, when he 
died suddenly—after a few days’ confinement, from a 
slight cold—on the 24th March, 1810. His person was 
remarkably handsome, and his manners extremely pre¬ 
possessing, which, to a cultivated understanding, and 
an early fondness for the ‘ Belle Letbres,’ he joined the 
most cheerful and social disposition. How he was es¬ 
teemed by the colony over which he presided, will 
appear from the following extract of a letter announcing 
his decease:—‘By the death of Colonel Collins, this 
colony has sustained a loss it will take a number of 
years to get over. I have known and served with him 
from the first establishment of the colony, and when I 
speak the feelings of my heart on this melancholy occa¬ 
sion, I am sure that it is not my single voice, but that 
of every Department whatsoever in the settlement, who, 
with the heartfelt regret, universally acknowledged him 
to have been the Father and Friend of all! ’ ” 

APPENDIX. 

161 

ABORIGINES’ SUPERSTITIONS AND JEALOUSIES. 

With reference to the Superstitions of the Aboriginal 
Inhabitants of uncivilized countries, there is one noticed 
by Russell, in his History, especially deserving record 
in a Narrative of this kind. Alluding to those of the 
Mosquittoe shore, he says— 

u The Mosquittoes are distinguished into two sorts, 
the Reds, and Blacks, or Samboes. The first are the 
original inhabitants of the country; the second are the 
descendants of about fifty negroes, whom a Portuguese 
Captain had brought from Guinea, and was carrying to 
Brazil, but who rendered themselves masters of the 
vessel, throwing all overboard, but one man. The as¬ 
sistance of this man, however, was insufficient to navi¬ 
gate the vessel, which, left at the mercy of the winds, 
was driven upon Cape Gracias a Dios, where the crew 
fell into the hands of the Mosquittoes, among whom the 
Negroes lived for some time in a state of servitude, and 
afterwards became the partners of their dangers and 
toils. 

a The Portuguese was so much like a Spaniard, against 
whom the animosity of the Mosquittoes is implacable, 
that his life was, with difficulty, spared; and after he had 
been a slave for two years, it was determined to sacrifice 

162 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

him at the funeral of the master to whose lot he had' 
fallen, that he might serve him in the other world. 

44 Luckily, the Portuguese had but one eye. He re¬ 
presented to the General Assembly of the nation, which 
was convened on that occasion, 4 that a one-eyed man; 
could be of service to nobody in the other world, as it 
was difficult to see clear there, even with two/ His 
argument succeeded, the Mosquittoes not only granted 
him his life, but also his liberty, a wife, and the sur¬ 
name of The man who knows a great deal ” 

Next, with reference to their jealousy, as shown in 
ibis narrative; it is a feeling known amongst all men, 
of all nations, and all classes. The following is an ex¬ 
tract from the Work mentioned in the title page-— 44 The 
Emigrant 1 8 Guide : 11 — 

u The men have been represented as most outrageously 
iealous, bat I do not believe they are more so than any 
other people. It is, however, a melancholy fact, one 
that will scarcely bear reflecting upon, and one that 
perhaps, 4 will melt even Lawyers to pity/ that the 
American Indian has no more idea of a Lord Chan¬ 
cellor, than he has of the Chief Officer of the Inqui¬ 
sition, and knows no more about a suit in Chancery, 
than he does of the North-west Passage. Poor fellow, 
he does not even know the meaning of an action for 
damages;—totally senseless to all the charms of briefs 
and refreshers, he actually lives, moves, and has his 
being, without the assistance of 4 Letters and Messages,’ 
or of even one solitary six-and-eight-penny, to inform 
him that black is not white, and vice ver&d . Now, where 

APPENDIX. 

E6£ 

people thus destitute are left to follow their own idea* 
of right and wrong, it is not to be wondered at, that 
they should act promptly, and upon the impulses of 
the moment. I would therefore strongly, and most 
seriously, advise the emigrant to Upper Canada, to 
constantly bear in mind the Tenth Commandment; if 
he does not, his blood be upon his own head, for he will 
be scalp'd to a certainty. He may rest assured that the 
only progressive operatives introduced to his notice 
should he fail to do so, will be a scalping-knife and a 
ride; and that the only brief, or instructions, will be 
given on a round piece of lead, which will find its way 
through his Chancery Court much quicker than would 
a suit in charge of those who are, of course, all—all— 
disinterested and honorable men!!! ” 

So you see reader, there are other people in the 
world, besides the Port Phillip natives, who are occa¬ 
sionally very jealous. 

It would be the labour of a life to write a History of 
Superstitions,—for what people or nation is without 
them ? We should turn our thoughts inwards therefore, 
before we laugh at the superstitions of others, and re¬ 
member that it is not so very long since our own country 
was full of than,—even to the general belief that a child 
born with a caul on his head, can never be drowned; 
and again, that old Van Derdecken, the Flying Dutch¬ 
man, is still knocking about in a gale of wind off the 
Cape;—or again, that the man who writes a book (one 
tike this of course) must be clever—-sad superstition! I 

164 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

EDITORIAL NOTES. 

Since the preceding pages were placed in the hands of the 
Printer, I have read with considerable care and great interest, 
the Exploring Expedition of Sir Thomas Mitchell, a work which 
probably is not excelled by any, in its minute descriptions of a 
line of country previously unexplored. By that reading, I find 
Buckley’s descriptions of many of the customs of the Aborigines 
fully confirmed, whilst others again are peculiar to those of New 
South Wales. Sir Thomas Mitchell, however, does not state, 
that the natives of the localities he yisited, are cannibals; but 
Buckley clearly shews, that those round about Port Phillip are 
so, under particular and exciting circumstances. They both say 
something about their extraordinary imitative powers, and I 
may add my testimony on that matter from my own experi¬ 
ence of the Western coast. 

I preface my remarks by stating, that a long intercourse with 
the North American Indians, in peace and war, has given me a 
tolerable knowledge of what is called savage life, and of the 
great difference which exists between the warriors of > new 
world, and the savages of the Australian wilds; the former 
being faithful, courageous, and intellectual; the latter on the 
contrary, being generally treacherous, cowardly, and mere 
creatures holding the link in the chain of animal life between 
the man and the monkey. 

I write as of my own knowledge, having been initiated into 
all the customs of one of the Six Nations, the Hurons, by 

ATPENDIX. 

165 

whom I was adopted as a son, and brother, eight and thirty 
years ago, during the war with the United States. 

The North American Indian is proverbial for his calm, quiet, 
contemplative habits—his philosophical endurance of pain and 
suffering; the Australian Aborigine on the contrary, except 
when meditating mischief, being all monkeyism—all effer¬ 
vescence—nothing escapes his momentary notice—his imita¬ 
tive efforts—whether it be sound, or action; occasionally 
also—but only occasionally—he is courageous. 

These remarks lead me to relate an anecdote or two relative 
to the natives of Western Australia, which may not be out of 
place in this Narrative. 

About three years after the establishment of the Swan River 
colony, her Majesty’s ship Sulphur, Captain Dance, which was 
attached to it, was ordered to the Southward, to examine the 
line of coast between Freemantle and King George’s Sound, 
Her first Lieutenant was the present Commander, William 
Preston, a man, whose heart and soul were not only in the 
service to which he belonged, but, in that of the new colony, 
into the interior of which he had led several exploring parties 
with great tact, talent, and untiring zeal. Captain Preston 
was, and doubtless still is, a man precisely adapted to perform 
such work, he being possessed of good temper, great kind- 
heartedness, and undaunted courage. He was somewhat re¬ 
markable amongst us for odd expressions,—made applicable by 
him, to all things, all times, and all circumstances. The one 
most general with him was, “ Go it ye cripples.” If the wine 
bottle was to be pushed about, the pass-word was, “ Go it ye 
cripples; ”—if at a rubber of whist, and the next player was a 
slow coach, it was “ Go it ye cripples; ”—if anything was to be 
said or done, the cry was the same, “ Go it ye cripples.” 

When the Sulphur arrived off the Vasse, to the northward of 
Cape Lewen, it was determined to send a boat on shore to open 
up a friendly communication with the natives, many of whom 
were seen upon the beach, and with this view my friend Preston 

166 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

landed alone, and unarmed. Out of the way of the inflowing 
wave, he seated himself on the sand, sailor fashion, regardless 
of all personal consequences. As the natives commenced jump¬ 
ing and dancing before and around him, shaking their spears 
and knocking their clubs about, he began to shout “ Go it ye 
crippleB; ” which cry, they repeated readily, and apparently 
with great delight. Presently he took off his neckerchief, and 
flung it amongst them, with a “ Go it ye cripples; ” then some¬ 
thing else went flying, with the same shout, until it became a 
kind of peaoefal, although most uproarious, Corrobberree. At 
Jongth he came on board again, but “ Go it ye cripples,” as a 
friendly salutation, did not leave, and probably never will leave 
the natives of the Western coast. 

To shew this, and how useful that sound was to me some 
months after, I will relate the following rather perilous ad¬ 
venture:— 4 

In eighteen hundred and thirty-three, several of the tribes 
round about the Swan and Canning Rivers had become very 
‘dangerous, several of the settlers having been massacred, and 
the flocks and herds having suffered severely. On one eo- 
•oaston intelligence was brought to me, as Resident Magistrate 
of the Perth district, that a flock of sheep, belonging to Mr. 
Brown, the Colonial Secretary, whoee form was about eight 
miles above the capital, had been driven away by black fellows. 
As was my duty, I dispatched several armed parties in search, 
aoootnpanymg one of them myself. After a wearying march of 
several hours under a hot sun, I found, about four o’clock in ike 
•afternoon, that by having taken what I thought would prove a 
? short cut to tile Helena rivulet, I had lost my way, and all my 
party, excepting a Mr. Clellaad, a strong-nerved intelligent 
Scotchman, on whoee courage I could rely in any case of 
emergency. After oooeying for some time to no purpose, we 
consulted together as to what had better he done in the event 
•of foiling in with the natives, and especially those of whem we 
m&m in search. Each of us was well armed with a double- 

APPENDIX. 

167 

^barrelled gun, and plenty of ball cartridge; and being so pro¬ 
vided, ©i tie proposed order of battle was soon determined upon. 
It Was very simple, namely, to reserve one barrel, and to stand 
by each other to the last. 

I may here remark, that unlike tire natives of the Australian 
Continent generally, many of tire blacks of the Western coast 
ale queer fellows to deal with, and that a steady hand and 
ready eye, are necessary on every occasion when mischief is 
contemplated. 

After a time we became entangled in some scrub and swampy 
ground, and just as we had cleared them, and ascended a rise 
in the forest, we came suddenly upon a strong body of blacks, 
Who, probably, had heard our oooeying. The leading man was 
directly in front of me. He immediately poised las spear in his 
throwing-stick, threw one leg forward, and made ready for the 
hurl at about twenty paces distance. At the*ame instant, I 
came to the present, with both barrels cocked, taking a sore and 
certain mm at the dehateable ground between his ferocious- 
looking eyes;—it was a good aim, for he seemed to me to lie 
looking down both muzzles—my Mend Clelland re m a in i n g 
calmly at the recover. 

I had passed twice down the rapids of the Long Sault, (once 
by moonlight,) the most dangerous part of the magnificent 
Saint Lawrence—I had heard the night war shrieks of hostile 
Indians, and been in more skirmishes and fights than I think 
proper to enumerate, but I confess, neither of these had queered 
me so much, as did the savage then in front of me; however, I 
am proud to recollect, that I was able, and without shrinking, 
to watch his eye as carefully in this game for life or death, as a 
Somersetshire wrestler would for the first throw. At length, in 
about a minute I suppose, up rose the shout, “ Go it ye cripples," 
41 Go it ye cripples," from a native who was rising the ridge, 
and who, fortunately, had recognised me as a Mend of Preston’s. 
In another second, up went the double-barrel, down went the 
spear, and “ Go it ye cripples ” was the cider of the day. 

168 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

The excitement over, and when my friend CleUand and my¬ 
self had lighted our cigars, and perhaps taken a refresher out of 
our buffalo horns, I gave the natives to understand all about the 
missing sheep, which I found they knew nothing of, but that 
they were willing to accompany me in search of them. 

The day ended in the restoration of the flock, and a kind 
reception by their owner, whose hospitality will be remembered 
by the early settlers of that colony, so long as memoiy lasts. 
That evening the natives gave us a great Corrobberree, and all 
ended in peace, when I gave the pass-word,—“ Go it ye crip¬ 
ples. Home.” 

That night, I believe, I dream’t of my friend with the spear 
and throwing-stick, for all hands told me in the morning, that 
I awoke shouting, u Go it ye cripples. Home.” 

1 am sorry to have to record, that although all things passed 
off so well on this occasion, in a few weeks after, the same body 
of blacks committed several unprovoked acts of great atrocity, 
so that our mutual friendly salutation of “ Go it Cripples,” and 
its influences, were exchanged for something like 
“ Ride out, ride out, 

The Foe to scout; 

Mount, mount for Bransome every man 
followed by prompt, and well deserved punishment. 

I take this opportunity of giving an opinion, founded on many 
years’ experience, that the true and most effective principle of 
successfully controlling savages, is founded on consistency. 
Kindness one day, and harshness another, will never do. They 
should be treated, as nearly as possible, on one uniform system, 
and when they return cruelty and ingratitude for kindness, they 
must be punished,—not in a half-and-half manner, as some per¬ 
sons coerce children, but in reality, so that they may “ never 
forget to remember” the when,—the whereabouts,—and all that 
happened. 

THE CONTRAST. 

m 

THE CONTRAST! 

STATISTICS OF THE PROVINCE OF VICTORIA, 
1851. 

Reader, cast your mental vision back to page 111 of 
this narrative; there you will see the first white canvass 
homes of the hardy Pioneers, who arrived sixteen years 
ago, to dear the way for another strong, arm of British 
power—-a future nation of the descendants, or offshoots of 
the old stock. Do them the justice to think, for a few 
moments, on their courage, their perseverance, their 
anxieties,—and honour them as they deserve. 

Look again, at that solitary little vessel riding quietly 
like a swan on the bosom of that magnificent basin; 
dle brings them the only means of communication with 
other shores. 

Look at the people now, and the forests of masts. 
Survey the splendid harbours and the magnificent cities 

APPENDIX.—THE CONTRAST. 

171 

<of Melbourne and Geelong now. Is not the change, and 
in so brief a space of time, wonderful? 

Bead the details of the progress onward, in the fol¬ 
lowing Statistics, taken from the “ Illustrated Austra¬ 
lian Magazine,” which we give in order that the 
astonishing resources of the Province of Victoria (over 
which Buckley trod for -thirty-two years, the only white 
man,) may be known, whenever, and wherever, this 
History of his Life and Adventures are favoured with 
a perusal.— 

The Census, which came off this year as usual eu the second 
‘of March, has not in its results disappointed even sanguine 
expectations. In round numbers Victoria contains 80,000, co¬ 
lonists, New South Wales 192,000, South Australia 68,000, aqd 
Van Diemen’s Land the same number. The respective capitals 
of these colonies are rising by rapid hut sure gradations into 
•cities of even European magnitude. Sydney contains 44,000 
inhabitants, Melbourne 23,000, Hobart Town 20,000, and Ade¬ 
laide 15,000. Geelong, the second town of Victoria, is the largest 
•of any of the second towns of the Sister Colonies, and contains 
upwards of 8,000 souls, and claims the additional pre-en&nonce 
■among these towns of Municipal Institutions. 

The condition’ of the Puhtic Revenues correspond with the 
-general prosperity and extension of the colony. There is a 
satisfactory increase in the various departments of the “ Genera^ 
Revenue,” as distinguished from the fluctuating items of the 
•“ Crown Revenue.” The total receipts under both heads have 
been for 1850 £261,821, against £206,799 for the previous ye££ 
For New South Wales, exclusive of Port Phillip, the amounts 
have been £317,291 for 1850, and £290,847 for 1849. 

The Commercial results for the past year are still nMU 
striking than the Fnancial. The export of Tallow from Vigg 
toria had risen to the unprecedented quantity of 4,490 tons," of 
the value of £133,000. The export of Wool has now advanced 
to the immense quantity of upwards of 18,000,000 of podads 
weight, being four millions of pounds more than the quantity^ of 
4Ms staple produce exported from the older and burger colony of 

172 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

New South Wales for the same period. The export of produce, 
for 1850, amounted in value to £1,022,064, against £737,067 
for the previous year. 

The extraordinary discoveries of gold made about the middle 
of May last to the westward of Bathurst, are still the absorbing 
subject of public attention. The comparative abundance of the 
metal is now undoubtedly ascertained, as far as regards the 
present scene of operation. The actual extent of so lucrative 
a field is still to be explored; but it appears to be probable 
that it extends into Victoria in the direction of Gipps’ Land 
to the East, and the Pyrenees to the West. The precious metal 
has also been recently found, or at least confidently asserted to 
exist, in other parts of Victoria. 

Much inconvenience must for a time result from this disco¬ 
very. Many branches of business must be affected, many 
labourers will leave and are leaving their hired service. The 
wages of those who remain must rise considerably, and many 
contracts must be unexpectedly disarranged from these altered 
relations. Provisions, beer, spirits, and other articles, have 
taken a sudden and considerable rise. 

On the other hand this extraordinary discovery will attract 
towards Australia the attention of the world. An immense 
tide of emigration may be expected to roll towards her shores, 
and a few years may now accomplish what even her san¬ 
guine colonists had removed to the distance of an age or a 
century. 

The operations at the Australian M DigginB” appear as yet 
to have been conducted without that confusion or lawless 
violence, which has too frequently characterised similar scenes 
in California. It is fortunate in this respect that the discovery 
has taken place in the midst of a society already formed, and 
a well-established government. 

Victoria Benevolent Asylum. —At a meeting of Committee 
held at Melbourne, on the 13th June instant, it appeared that 
the edifice of the Asylum was now complete. The total cost 
had been £3,272 19s. 6d. Some exterior additions were re¬ 
commended, which would add between one or two hundred 
pounds to this amount. 

APPENDIX.—THE CONTRAST. 

173 

IMPORTS AND EXPORTS. 

SHIPS INWARDS. . 

From. 

No. 

Tons. 

Men. 

Great Britain. 

117 

62,142 

New Zealand. . 

4 

852 

Y. D. Land, &c. 

420 

40,644 

Foreign States. 

14 

4,892 

Total for 1850. 

555 

108,030 

6198 

Ditto 1849. 

484 

97,003 

5886 

Increase, 1850. 

71 

11,027 

812 

Comparative Return of the value of Imports into, and Exports 
from, the District of Port Phillip, for the Years 1849 and 
1850. 

IMPORTS. 

i 

Articles the Produce or Manufacture of 

£ 

The U. Kingdom. 

Other British 
Dominions. 

Foreign States. 

1 

1850 

1849 

517,035 

307,078 

102,138 

61,214 

125,752 

111,539 

744,925 

479,831 

EXPORTS. 

i 

Articles the Produce or Manufacture of 

s> 

New South 
Wales. 

The United 
Kingdom. 

Other Br. 
Doms. 

Foreign 

States. 

% 

1850 

1849 

1022,064 

737,067 

m 

195 

721 

6,592 

4,466 

1041,796 

755,326 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

174 

IMPORTS.—Table exhibiting the quantity and value of the prin¬ 
cipal Articles of Import into Port Phillip for the year 1850. 

AU Imports of less than £1000 indue are excluded. 

- 1 - ■ « — N i ■ ■ i 

DfcSCfclPTIOir. ' 

QUAOTITT. 

TALUS. 

Agricultural Implements ... 

Alkali (Soda) . 

Apparel and Slops . 

Packages 

414 

697 

£ 

1,036 

2,987 

n 

1,964 

42,080 

Bags and Sacks.. ... 

883 

15,485 

Beer and Ale "* . 

GaHons 

381,150 

38,110 

fflonlring . 

Packages 

425 

1,370 

Blankets and Counterpanes... 

n 

145 

8,252- 

Bricks, Bath and Fire 

Number 

114,438 

1,487 

Brushware. 

Packages 

225 

1,172 

Candles . 

No. 

35,000 

1,611 

Canvass . 

Bales 

112 

2,723 

Carpeting .. 

ii 

40 

1,590 

Carriages and Car. materials 

Packages 

91 

1,713 

Coals.. 

Tons 

1,138 

1,284 

Coffee and Chocolate. 

46 

1,850 

Colours, Painters’ 

Packages 

1,424 

2,322 

Cordage and Rope 

ii 

1,810 

4,522 

Corks and Bungs .. 

ii 

388 

1,060 

Cottons . . 

ii 

1,596 

50,924 

Cutlery ... . 

ii 

48 

1,550 

Drugs and Medicines. 

Earthenware and China ... 

« 

1,567 

10,307 

Crates 

991 

9,572 

Fish, Salted . 

Packages 

2,002 

1,810 

Flour and Bread . 

Curts. 

14,360 

5,150 

Fruits, Dried ... . 

Tons 

279 

6,155 

„ Green .. 

Bushels 

. 7,603 

1,362 

Furniture. 

Packages 

765 

7,534 

Glass and Glassware. 

ii 

1,903 

7,162 

Grain, Wheat. 

Bushels 

30,492 

3,873 

» Oats . 

ii 

24,261 

2,570 

^ Bice • f*- ••• «*-• 

lbs. 

277,760 

1,436 

Haberdashery ... . 

Packages 

2,044 

63,350 

Hardware and Ironmongery 

ii 

11,506 

43,908 

Hats, Caps and Bonnets ... 

ii 

353 

7,02* 

Hosiery and Gloves. 

t» 

153 

4,494 

Instruments, Musical. 

ii 

98 

3,865* 

Ironand Steel ... ... ... 

Tons 

2,310 

23,653 

Lead. 

190 

3,547 

Leather, Boots and Shoes ... 

Packages 

804 

14,600 

Linens . 

453 

12,848 

Machinery . 

tt ■ 

480 

1,420 

DBSGRIPTIpX. 

MfiMnery. 

Packages 

Nails, Iron . 

„ 

Oatmeal and Pearl Barley 

lbs. 

Oilmen’s Stores... 

Packages 

Oil, Black. 

Tons 

Oil, Linseed 

Gallons 

Perfumery ... '... 

Pipes, Tobacco... 

Paokages 

,, 

Pitch, Tar and Rosin... 

Casks 

Plate and Plated Ware 

Casep 

Pototoes and Yams ... 

Tons 

Provisions, Salted 

„ 

Saddlery and Harness 

Packages 

Salt. 

Tons 

Shooks and Staves ... 

Bundles 

Silks . 

Packages 

Slates .... . 

Number 

Spirits, Brandy. 

Gallons 

„ Rum . 

,, 

„ Gin . 

„ 

„ Whiskey 

M 

Starch and Blue 

Boxes 

Stationery and Books... 

Sugar, Refined ... 

Tons 

„ Raw . 

„ 

Tea. 

lbs. 

Tin and Tinware 

Packages 

Tobacco, Cigars and Snuff 

lbs. 

Timber, Deals and Battens 

Feet 

„ Sawn, &c. ... 

,, 

„ Palings 

Number 

„ Laths. 

,, 

„ Shingles 

„ 

„ All other 

Feet 

Vinegar. 

Gallons 

Wine . 

», 

Wooden ware . 

Packages 

Woollens. 

,, 

Woolpacks and Bagging 

»» 

Uncnupierated. 

. 

6,479 

142,660 

9,298 

48 

3,657 

92 

1,004 

1,692 

13 

867 

19 

419 

1 , 87 $ 

3,780 

43 

396,000 

56,147 

160,662 

56,100 

23,478 

653 

1,339 

124 

2,977 

722,824 

1,186 

288,100 

56,185 

6,268,693 

2,996,284 

3,893,200 

6,566,023 

241,349 

15,220 

78,720 

1,724 

458 

1,130 

Totyil Imports for 1850 ... 
Ditto „ „ 1849 

Increase for 1850 

265,0?4 

176 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

ABSTRACT OF IMPORTS 

EXPORTS. 

Table exhibiting the quantity and value of the principal 
Articles of Export from the District of Port Phillip for 
the year 1850. 

DESCBIPTION. 

Butter and Cheese . 

Candles, Tallow . 

flour and Bread . 

Grain, Wheat. 

,, Oats ... ... ... 

Hoofs, Homs and Bones ... 

Lard. 

Leather, Unmanufactured ... 

Live Stock, Horses . 

„ Homed Cattle... 

Tons 

Bushels 

Potatoes. Tons 

Provisions (Salt) Beef ... „ 

» Pork ... ,, 

„ Tongues... „ 

„ Bacon, &c. „ 

Skins, Neat Cattle .. No. 

»* .. »♦ 

„ Sheep ... ... ... „ 

„ Kangaroo & Opossum „ 

Soap Tons 

Specimens of Natural History Packages 

Tallow . Tons 

Wool . lbs. 

Unenumerated Goods. 

3,115 

5 

12,893 

16,091 

106 

15,074 

354 

440 

229 

4,106 

15 

1,012 

58 

3,124 

89 

132,863 

826,190 

21,073 

1,041,796 

APPENDIX.—THE CONTRAST. 

177 

ABSTRACT OF EXPORTS. 

Colonial 

Imports 

Total. 

WHERE SENT. 

Produce. 

re-exported. 

I860. | 

1849. 

£ 

£ 

£ 

£ 

United Kingdom 

951,891 

647 

952,538 

British Colonies 

69,456 

88,259 

78,697 

U. States of America 

237 

227 

264 

2,776 

Other Foreign States 

480 

55 

535 

Total. 

19,732 

1,041,796 

755,326 

We have no very late official returns to fonh opinions 
upon, but the following may be considered sufficiently 
correct up to the close of the year 1851:— 

Acres in cultivation.. 51,536 

Sheep. 6,647,557 

Homed Cattle. 483,202 

Horses. 2,916 

Pigs . 11,544 

The above returns are sufficient to shew the truly 
glorious results of civilization;—what can be done by 
the Anglo-Saxon race;—by English, Irish, Scotch and 
Welsh men when, with a right good-will, they set 
about colonizing a country blessed with a genial climate, 
and rich in its natural resources. The Port Phillippians 
have understood, that 

“ The wise and active conquer difficulties 
By daring to attempt them; whilst sloth and folly, 

Shiver and shrink, at sight of toil, and hazard, 

And make the impossibilities they fear.” 

They have hitherto acted, as did the early settlers in 
Massachusetts Bay, who represented to the Virginia 
Company in 1617, that they “ were well weanqd from 
the delicate milk of their mother country, and inured 
to the difficulties of a strange land. That they were 

N 

178 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

knit together in a strict and sacred bond, by virtue of 
which, they held themselves bound to take care of the 
good of each other, and of the whole. That it was not 
with them as with other men, whom small things could 
discourage, or small discontents cause to wish, them- 
selves home again/’ 

But again, Victoria is commencing a new era, of her 
moral, social, and political existence. The unexplored 
land, over which Buckley, the hero of this Narrative 
wandered, is now an acknowledged Province, a distinct 
portion of the mighty British Empire. No longer a 
child in the hand of its elder sister, she has been declared 
able to walk independently of aid,—to think,—to act,— 
to decide on what is most consistent with her own 
interests and happiness. Arrived at years of maturity, 
her fortune, her resources, at length are her’s, and it 
will be her fault only, should she not secure, and apply 
them, as best becomes her power, and her station. 

But we must not wander farther into the field of her 
present and future prosperity, in a Narrative of this 
description,—neither is it necessary, for 

“ The land has peace, freedom, liberty of conscience, 
and what would ye more ? 

THE GOLDEN HARVEST. 

180 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

THE GOLDEN CITY. 

I’ll tell thee now a story, like a fairy tale of old,* 

Of a fair and fragile City, that was built for storing gold, 

For like the work of fairy hands, it started into life, 

And rapidly it flourished, until the very streets were rife 
With luxuries of other climes, the sunny and the cold, 

For well we know, earth’s farthest spots can feel the power 

[of gold. 

Methinks I see the busy crowds press hurriedly along,— 
There’s but one ruling passion in all that eager throng,— 
They come from many distant lands, to this enchanting shore, 
To seek amongst its mountains a rich and glittering store. 
They have heard of golden treasures on many a lofty height, 
That oft the rushing waters of the torrents bring to light. 
********** 

Mara. 

181 

VICTORIA FELIX. 

The Province of Victoria is bounded on the North and North - 
East by a line drawn from Cape Howe to the nearest sources of 
the Murray, and thence by that river;—on the West by the 
eastern boundary of South Australia, or the 141 degree of East 
Longitude, from the Murray to the Sea;—and on the South by 
the coast to Cape Howe, including the islands. Its area is 
98,000 square miles, or 62,720,000 acres. Its Ports are Mel¬ 
bourne (the capital), Geelong, Portland, Port Fairy, and Port 
Albert. 

Since the “ Adventures of William Buckley ” were 
prepared for the press, another wonderful change has 
passed over the land of his wanderings,—one so vast in 
its provincial and national importance, as to claim an 
especial notice in this Appendix. 

Little did Buckley think when, as he was supposed to 
•be, a living-dead-man, amongst the Aborigines of the 
Australian Wilds, that he was treading over fields of 
-gold,—that his earthy bed and stoney pillow contained 
millions of the precious metal, so fondly loved, so as¬ 
siduously courted, and So eagerly sought after, by aU 

182 

LIFE OP BUCKLEY. 

that portion of the human race whom fate has made 
acquainted with its value. The Poet says— 

“ If ignorance is Mias, »tis folly to be wise,” 
but I doubt very much if poor Buckley does not now 
wish he had had knowledge enough to have found the 
golden treasure, and thus have saved the British Govern¬ 
ment his most liberal [?—!] and very magnificent pen¬ 
sion of- TWELVE POUNDS A-YEAr ! ! ! 

It is evident, however, that he knew nothing at all 
about these 

“-Golden Treasures, on many a lofty height, 

That oft the rushing waters of the torrents bring to light.’ r 
Nevertheless both him and his Historian contemplate 
an early visit to the field of his adventures, there to 
trace in theii* reality the vast changes which have come 

oyer the land.- Perhaps we may jpin in more than 

one Gorrobhetree ;—perhaps we may be received by the 
tribes especially greased, painted* and assembled to do 
us all possible honor,—who knows ? Perhaps also, we 
may have to square the yards, as the sailors , say, from 
a few of our very amiable hosts, on account of some old 
grievance or love affair of Buckley's, with which we 
(editorially or otherwise) could not have had anything 
to do,—and 

“ If we have to pluck from out the nettle danger, 

The flower safety,” 

Well, u whkt must be must,” as some very sensible per¬ 
son has said, and so for the present there's an end of 
that matter. Whether ata future period we shall pub¬ 
lish our adventures in a second volume, will depend very 
much upon the,success ofthe first; so we will now pass 

APPENDIX.—-THE GOLDEN HARVEST. 18& 

on to the additional Statistics, which I take verbatim 
from the Victoria Commercial Review , published at 
Melbourne by Messrs. Westgarth, Boss, & Co. That 

under date September 1, 1851, says— 

The District of Port Phillip, forming previously the southern 
division of the Colony of New South Wales, became on 1st July 
last, by Imperial enactment, a distinct and independent province, 
under the designation of the Colony of Victoria. The Govern¬ 
ment is administered by a Lieutenant- Governor. The Governcr 
General for the Australian Settlements resides at Sydney, the 
capital of the adjacent and senior Colony of New South Wales. 

The Colony of Victoria, first settled sixteen years ago, commen¬ 
ces her independent career with a population of 80,000 colonists, 
and annual exports exceeding at present one million sterling. * 
. Melbourne, her Capital City, contains 25,000, and Geelong the 
second of her towns about 9,000 inhabitants. 

The recent discovery of gold in New South Wales opens for 
Australia a new and extraordinary prospect. The similarity in 
the appearance of the country near Bathurst to some parts of 
California, led to this momentous discovery. Gold hid been tra' 
ced in the interior of the Colony for several years previously, hut 
the existence of a 14 gold field ” was not ascertained until May 
last. 1061b of pure gold were discovered in one spot—a circum¬ 
stance unprecedented in the annals of the precious metals This 
extraordinary treasure was found imbedded in a mass of quartz 
rock weighing between two and three cwt. 

These wonderful discoveries have aroused a general attention 
to the subject of our mineral resources, and numbers of persons 
are daily “ prospecting ” throughout this Colony and New South 
Wales, in search of gold and other metals and ores. The result 
has not been unsuccessful, and in Victoria as well as New South 
Wales, regular 44 diggings ” are now established, from which small 
quantities of gold are constantly brought to market. As yet, 
these new resources for Victoria are but poorly and irregularly 
productive; hut the application of science and skill may be ex¬ 
pected to produce hereafter a very different result. The first 
shipment of Victoria gold left Part Phillip yesterday by the /Zbtf- . 
duras. The amount was 18 os. valued at £50. Gold, now forma - 
a considerable item of the,Sydney exports. The first news of the 
gold discovery produced a very genetsd excitement. 

184 

LIFE OP BUCKLEY. 

The following report, dated January 1, 1852, shew& 
the rapid onward course of the Colony, consequent on 
this vast discovery;— 

The discoveries of Gold in Victoria have greatly increased during 
the last two months. The sensation occasioned in September and 
October, by the productiveness of the Ballarat Gold Fields, has 
been far exceeded during the two succeeding months by that of 
Mount Alexander. The greater part of the diggers have now 
transferred their operations to this latter locality, where with 
varying success, and scattered over many miles of surface, they 
are busily engaged in washing the auriferous soil. 

The number of persons employing themselves in gold digging 
throughout this colony has been recently estimated at 30,000- 
Considerable numbers have just been visiting the towns during 
Christmas; and it is considered that many more must ere long 
abandon for a time their new vocation owing to the want of water, 
as the creeks or watercourses that intersect the grounds now 
begin to cease running or are entirely dried up, as usual at this 
advanced period of summer. In the mean time however new 
diggings are being industriously sought out along the neighbour¬ 
ing banks of the Loddon, where the soil appears similarly aurifer¬ 
ous, and an immense and increasing influx of persons continues 
from the adjacent settlements, who for the most part make imme¬ 
diately for 14 the diggings.” 

The estimate of the yield of the gold fields continues to be a 
subject of great uncertainty. But some data are being gradually 
obtained on the question, in connection with the Government Es¬ 
cort that arrives in town weekly from the Gold Fields, and from 
the Customs’ Returns of the quantity exported^ 

Nearly four months have elapsed since the Victoria Gold fields 
assumed the position of contributing in any important degree to 
the exports and resources of the colony. The quantity exported, 
up to die present date, amounts to 117,825 ounces. In addition 
to this return there appear to be very large quantities still in town 
in the hands of numerous parties, and much must also have left 
this colony for adjacent settlements, independently of the records 
kept by the Customs’ authorities. 

The Government Escort flas conveyed to Geelong and Mel¬ 
bourne, up to this date, 116,996 ounces of Gold. But tiiis con- 
. veyanee, for the use of which there is a charge made of one per 

APPENDIX.—THE GOLDEN HARVEST. 

185 

cent., is supposed to have brought down from the mines only a 
moderate proportion of what is actually realized. Valuing the 
gold at £3 per ounce, it is not perhaps an exaggerated view, that 
up to this date £750,000 worth hasten raised within this colony; 
and that with respect to the future this must be considered a very 
low estimate indeed. The auriferous characteristics are said to 
be traceable over extensive areas of country. 

The general desertion of the able bodied and labouring popula¬ 
tion for the gold fields has seriously inconvenienced the course 
of ordinary business and of social life. All building and improv¬ 
ing operations have, with scarcely any exception, ceased. The 
wages of labour have risen, in many instances, threefold, and oc¬ 
casionally hands are not to be procured for any consideration. 
Many families have been left entirely destitute of servants. The 
crews of the shipping have, more or less in all instances, deserted, 
some vessels being left quite destitute. The most serious fears 
are entertained for the safety of the harvest. An ample crop is 
at this moment ripening throughout the colony ; and it is appre¬ 
hended that with the same force of labour at command, and the 
rapidly maturing effect of the climate^ at this season, a large pro¬ 
portion of the grain must he lost. 

Although as regards a great variety of articles of merchandise, 
business may he said to have almost ceased, there has been a very 
spirited demand for others that happen to be suited to the new 
order of things in the colony. The unlimited demand for “dig¬ 
ger’s outfit” has caused extensive transactions in slop clothing, 
canvas and tarpaulings, tea, sugar, and flour, draft and saddle 
horses, drays and other vehicles. The consumption of Spirits 
and Tobacco has greatly increased; and with the large increase 
of means in the hands of successful diggers, a variety of luxuries 
in dress, jewellery, and other articles, has been indulged in. 

To what extent the gathering of the grain crops have 
suffered, it as yet impossible to ascertain; but that the 
rate of wages in all the Australian Colonies has been 
seriously affected, is certain. 

Little did Elliott, the Com Law Rhymer, think, 
when he wrote the song — u There's a good time comirig 
boys, — there's a good time the labourer, 

136 

UFE OF BUCKLEY. 

by paying Ijhirty.shiUings monthly for aUoense, would 
thereby punchase p right to dig for gold;—that within 
a frWyearsof his thus writing, one Province of the 
British Empire should show evidence of wealth enough 
withiuirreacbbthe of the present generation, to pay off 
the feo-cilteff M National Debt.” 

But Jet us see what say the Statistics, dated the 1st 
February, 1852;— 

The pfcst month has been characterised cMeflyby the large 
aceeSsiorS tothe population of this colony from the adjacent set 
tlements South Australia and Van Diemen’s Land in particular 
are being rapidly depopulated by the efflux ofthefr able bodied 
and industrious male colonists. In the former Ideality a serious 
commercial reaction has arisefr, in consequence Of the almost 
total cessation of trade, the unmarketable character of property, 
and the steppage of operations (and necessarily Of dividends too/ 
at the great Burra mines, which the Workmen are said to have 
abandoned for the Victoria gold fields. 

The gold, diggings in New South Wales, although less prolific 
than those of this colony, have as yet prevented a proportionate 
emigration from that quater; and some accessions to the popula¬ 
tion ate now being received at Sydney from California, consisting 
chiefly of colonists who had previously gone thither, but whom 
the news, of May and June last have induced to return. 

Theimmigration from all quarters during the last month into 
the Fort af Melbourne, independently of some arrivals at Geelong 
and the smaller Ports, has been 6,640 persons. Deducting 481 
who, hpre left the colony during the same period, there .remain 
6209 persons thus added to the population in one month. These 
arrivals, deducting* departures, appear severally as follows:— 
From Britain, 556; New South Wales, besides overland parties, 
870; Vm£> tetoan’s Land, 2187; South Australia, besides over¬ 
laid parties, 264ft: Arrivals from other parts of the colony are 
not counted. 

These particulars, extr^ctqd from the Customs’ Records, 
probably mucV below the^tualfruth, the vessels being usually 

overcrowded witty 
agents, ^rom 

aerigers, and the returns given short by the 
tension of interference on the part of the an- 

APPENDIX.—THE GOLDEN HARVEST* 

1S7 

thorities. As this and farther anticipated immigration will pro¬ 
bably consist, for the most part, of male population, the Local 
Government We already represented to the Home Authorities 
the necessity of promoting more particularly the emigration from 
Britain of the female sex. 

The scale of commercial operations has been commensurate 
with the rapid increase of the colony in wealth and population. 
There is an immenoe and increasing business in the articles flour, 
tea, coffee, sugar, tobacco, spirits, wines, beer, every kind of 
ready made clothing, canvas, tarpaulings, &o., all of which have' 
flowed in from every quarter, and found a ready and remunerating 
market. The amount of duties received at the Cu?tpm#, Mel¬ 
bourne, for the last quarter, has exceeded that for thesan^e quarter ; 
of 1850 in the proportion of £26,681 to £16,205. . ? ~ 

The Customs’ Duties are:—Bum the produce of sugar, lfiskUy 
the produce of malt, of or from any place whatsoever, pay duty ;»to 
the rate of 3s. 6d. per proof gallon; brandy, gin, and other spirits i 
6s. per proof gallon; foreign cordials and sweetened spirits 6s j per 
gallon. Tobacco, manufactured, pays 2s. per pound; unmanu¬ 
factured, Is. 6d. per pound. Tea, sugar, rice, flour, fatal grain 
pay five per cent, ad valorem; Wines fifteen per cent*; mU other 
imported goods, except the produce of the United Kingdom, ten > 
percent. v -"’rj 

The Nxw Legtslaxurii of Victoria has recently passed an Act- i 
reducing the rates of pilotage for this Tort, and altering the mode 
of levying from draft of water to register tonnage. The rate is 
now 3d.per ton, which averages about one half of previous rates, 
and the new system appears to deal more equally than its prCfle- ) 
cessor with all classes and dimensions of shipping. Coasters And ° 
vessels under fifty tons, have the option of dispensing with a pilot, ” 
and thus avoiding all charge; but availing themselves of bis ser¬ 
vices, they pay the fall rate. Vessels outfitting or refitting, * 
vessels in ballast, or vessels not breaking bulk, may also decline 
pilots, but on taking them they pay half rate: and vessels' pro * • 
ceeding from Hobson’s Bay to Geelong, with similar option, pay ' 
one third. 

The harvest has now been nearly all secured. The reaping 
has been generally taken at 25s. per acre, or upwards jof twice ' 
the ordinary rate. Incessant , importations of flour and other 
provision stuffe have retained forming produce at moderateprices, ‘ 

188 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

notwithstanding at present and prospectively the great increase 
of demand. 

Some apprehension appears to have been entertained in Britain, 
that in consequence of the attractions of the gold fields, the ship * 
ments of wool from these colonies would prove seriously deficient; 
and some advance in price had in consequence taken place. This 
has not proved the case, at least to any material extent. The 
sheep shearing has, however, in many instances, stood over too 
long, and the fleece has thus been exposed to admixture with 
burrs and grass seeds, and in other respects, the wool has been 
washed and got up with less than the usual care. 

At the Gold Fields the want of water continues to he in¬ 
creasingly felt, and is a serious hindrance to the diggers: many 
continue digging on the chance of finding fragments visible to 
the eye in the dry earth: large pieces, or “ Nuggets,” of this 
sort are frequently discovered, and a few days ago a solid mass, 
apparently of pure gold, weighing 27 lbs. 802 s., was brought 
into town, where it was afterwards sold for £4 an ounce, and ex¬ 
hibited at a public house. This specimen must be regarded as 
the best of the kind hitherto discovered in Australia. The in¬ 
creasing numbers at the Mines keep up the supply of gold, but 
the average results must for the present be falling off. Sickness 
to some extent was prevailing, arising from the use of impure 
drinking water, and the laborious and exposed mode of life. 
Scenes of disorder were on the increase, and the Local Govern¬ 
ment had experienced difficulty in engaging men to act as police. 

The Escort Returns for the month of January appear as 

follows:— 

7th January. 

. 10,998 

ounces 

14th „ . 

. 14,398 

n 

21 st ,, ... 

. 12,038 

28th „ . 

.116,996 

n 

Previously arrived. 

»» 

Total . 

ounces 

The Export Returns for the same month give 160,472 ounces 
from the different Ports of the Colony, namely, from Melbourne 
135,817: from Geelong 24,266: and from Portland 389 ounces. 
The total quantity of gold exported from Victoria, from the first 
discovery until 31st January, according to the Customs Records, 
is 305,607 ounces, which, arfrthe moderate rate of £8 per ounce, 
gives the sum of £916,821. It may be observed that this enoc- 

APPENDIX.—THE GOLDEN HARVEST. 

189 

moos export has appeared almost entirely within the last two 
months, and that this produce continues at the same, if not at 
an increasing rate. 

The following table exhibits a variety of particulars, connected 
with this export:— 

Monthly amount of 
Export 

Port of Shipment. 

Place to which 
Shipped. 

August 18 oz. 

September Nil 
October 1,548 

November 8,441 
Decern. 140,128 
January 160,472 

Melbourne 246,260 oz. 
Geelong ... 58,958 
Portland... 389 

London... 238,018 oz. 
Hamburg 3,411 
Sydney... 62,695 
Hobart.*. 1,483 

Total ... 305,607 oz. 

Total... 305,607oz. 

Total... 305,607 oz. 

The following is an extract from a letter received from 
Mr. Westgarth, on the 28th February :— 

“ Gold arrivals per Escort since January returns— 
February 4th 11,8524 ounces. 

„ 11th 11,115 „ 

„ 18th 11,199£ „ 

34,174 ounces. 

Almost all from the Mount Alexander locality. The 
Escort is supposed to bring one-third, or say one-half of 
the whole.” 

So that here is 68,348 ounces, which at £3 per ounce 
is of the value of Two Hundred and Five Thousand and 
Forty-four Pounds Sterling,—the Golden Harvest of 
Victoria in eighteen days ! 

Reader, I closed that portion of this Appendix called 
“ The Contrast,” by saying 

44 The land has peace, freedom, liberty of conscience; 

And what would ye more ?” 

If the answer was “Gold/-— here you see.she now has 

190 

LIFE OY BUCKLEY. 

it in great abundance. Let us hope that such an addi¬ 
tion to her other resources may not damage her peace, 
her freedom, or her liberty of conscience. That unlike 
the Californians, her people will remember generously 
the country from 'whence they sprung, and the unculti¬ 
vated, uncivilized children of the forest, and appropriate 
to them lands they may yet call theirs. —It would be 
unjust toward the Victorians, in a work of this kind, did 
• I not acknowledge that they have already done so, and 
that excepting in solitary instances, the settlers have 
treated the Aborigines with every consideration and 
kindness. 

It would also be despicable cowardice, and a great 
sacrifice of everything politically and morally honest, 
did I not take this opportunity bf contrasting their con¬ 
duct with that pursued by the fi^st gold finders of the 
present age in the Pacific—the Californians. The latter 
boast of their Constitution. Whilst upon this subject, 
I feel commanded by that love of liberty which all of 
British descent should cherish, to say a few words:—in¬ 
deed I know not how better to close my labours than by 
an effort in favour of universal rational liberty,—to the 
black as well as to the white man,—of every creed, 
class, and colour. 

The reader is perhapB aware, that the Californian 
people have given themselves a Constitution, which 
Constitution and Declaration of Bights, begins after the 
French fashion, by saying that all men are by nature 
bom equal; and then it goes on to state, that therefore 
all men who have resided in that particular land of 

APPENDIX.—CALIFORNIAN SLAVERY. 

1B1 

golden blqpsedness six months, mayenjoy the rights of 
citizenship, with the exception of Africans^ Indians, and 
their descendants ,—so that you see, Africans, Indians, 
end their descendants , although compelled to obey all 
the laws, and to contribute in every way to the support 
and exigencies of the Government are treated as slaves, 
simply because they are men of colour. This is fair 
play amongst a people boasting of their superior freedom, 
and of their pure and perfect liberty, until the name of 
liberty becomes nauseous. This is the practical humanity 
as respects mankind in California and in the Southern 
Slave States,^-where a human being, merely because he 
has black blood in his veins, is trodden in the dust, or 
hunted to destruction like a wild beast. It is true the 
CaHfeniiaaa do not deal in human flesh and blood, and 
this, I suppose, they consider to be making it a Free 
State. 

At the first sight of this precious Constitution, which 
is so little known as deserving the execration of the 
world,—and which ought to have been execrated by its 
Press,-—I resolved on remonstrating against its slave 
clause; not supposing for one moment that a protest 
from so humble anindividiial as myself would have any 
direct effect, but because I thought it possible that some¬ 
thing of the kind might draw th&attention of others to 
the subject, in the same wayasvlnaw insert these obser¬ 
vations inthisSyolnme, hoping hcl^frommore influential 
sources. At any rate, H was carrying outpifaetically the 
principles ladvoeate* and therefore J bddres&ed the fol¬ 
lowing letter, to the Governor of California 

192 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

Hobabt Tows, Van Diemen’s Land, 
March 20, 1850. 

►Sir,— 

I do myself the honor to forward two numbers of the 
Hobart Town “ Britannia” newspaper, begging you at the same 
time not to consider it an improper intrusion if I offer a few re¬ 
marks on one of the clauses in the Constitution your State has 
recently adopted. I assure you, Sir, they are not occasioned by 
any feelings but those of respect for the high position you hold, 
and of deep sorrow, (as a free white man,) at the adoption of the 
first principle of slavery, by a community speaking the English 
language, the descendants of a nation to which I am proud to 
belong, and under whose government I have had the honor to 
hold military and civil service, many years. 

By journals recently received in this Colony it appears, that 
although the Californian Constitution is mainly founded on prin - 
ciples of civil and religious liberty, a distinction has been made 
between the white and coloured races. In one of these journals 
it is said, that “ as all hen are bt nature equal,” those who 
have resided a certain period in the State, shall, if they think 
proper, receive all the rights of Citizenship, “ with the exception 
of A fricans and their descendants —in another it is, “ with the 
exception of Indians , Mexicans , and their descendants Which 
of the two is correct I know not, neither does it matter, it being 
evident that a distinct line has been drawn between the black 
and the white man. 

In the course of my life, Sir, I have seen much of what I con¬ 
sider the debasing influences of slavery, and I have observed 
(several hundred miles inland) the grievous wrongs heaped upon 
the Indian tribes of the vast American Continent; I am, there¬ 
fore, excited with the indignation aU free men should feel at ob¬ 
serving the first principles of slavery renewed, and about to be 
acted upon, <*i the shores of the Pacific, and in the nineteenth 
century, by those who, I did hope, would have risen above the 
prejudices of the past in their full understanding of the rights of 
all men. I venture to ask, Sir, was such a sacrifice necessary? 

APPENDIX,—CALIFORNIAN SLAVERY, 

193 

and beg to assure you, if there are any causes for it, which are 
founded upon justice, I shall be most happy to make them known 
through the Press of these Colonies, in order to remove, so for 
us it may be in my power, the deep reproach which appears now 
to attach to your State and Government 1 may add, that I did 
think of visiting California, but that the impression now upon 
my mind renders it impossible. I could not willingly be a resi¬ 
dent in a country where such a principle is acknowledged, as 
that the people of any class, creed, or colour, whilst they are 
made to contribute to the exigencies of a government in peace 
and war, shall be deprived of their natural rights as xxk, and be 
stamped with an indignity, which should attach to the human 
race only as one of the consequences of crime. This now ap¬ 
pears to be the prevalent and increasing opinion of the civilised 
nations of the world; and from the generous efforts making in 
the Northern States of your own Union, I did hope, although 
now more than fifty years of age, to have lived to see the day 
when these just and merciful sentiments would have effected the 
emancipation of a people persecuted only on account of their 
colour;—a circumstance, as we all know, they could have had 
no more to do with, than I could in the passing of a clause 
which appears to me to be disgraceful to humanity. 

. Although not an American Citizen, but a stranger, and not 
even a temporary resident within the precincts of your govern¬ 
ment, yet, as a Member of the Press, and of the great human 
famity, 1 fed it my duty, most respectfully, to protest against an 
act which tends to perpetuate so great a public crime. I could 
not rest in life, or die in peace, humble an individual as I am, 
unless I did so; and consequently claim your indulgence for 
laying this protest before Your Excellency, on behalf of the 
coloured race. 

I have only to add, Sir, my request, that you will receive this 
letter in the spirit with which it is written, viz—of respectful, 
earnest enquiry, and of hope that I may be enabled to show the 
-clause to which I refer, as being an unavoidable wrong or error 

o 

194 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

that will be immediately remedied,—knowing as we all must, 
that there is nothing in this world's affairs which in the first in¬ 
stance can approach to anything like perfection. 

I have the honor to be 

Your Excellency's obedient servant 

JOHN MORGAN, 

To His Excellency 

The Governor of California. 

There is every reason to believe this letter did not 
reach its destination, as the ship by which it was trans¬ 
mitted was wrecked on its passage to California; but 
that the newspapers did, in which it was inserted, there 
can be no doubt, because in several of the San Francisco 
journals published at the time, I was honored with storms 
of that impotent abuse which slave men call up in place 
of justice and argument. 

Remember, reader, I had a peculiar right to address 
such a letter in behalf of my coloured brethren,—being 
an Indian by adoption of the Hurons, one of the Six 
Nations, and having gone through all the forms of that 
adoption.—I have shared the wigwam of the American 
Indian during peace and war; and when, after hunting 
excursions in the wilds of that magnificent Continent, 
I have seen him steal from under its cover, when the 
bright fall moon has risen from ova* a mountain, or from 
out a mighty lake, he has thrown himself prostrate in 
the act of adoration to the Great Spirit, the u Machi 
Maneetoo,” as he calls it, and I have 'respected him for 
his devotion. When he rose, I have risen too, and, after 
the fashion of bushmen, we have smoked our pipes of 

APPEND IX c-*-CALIFORNIAN SLAVERY. 

195 

peace and friendship, trusted and trusting mutually eaeb 
other. 

These scenes of early days in the far west, are more 
especially called to my remembrance by the daily inte- 
ligence from California, detailing particulars of cold¬ 
blooded murders, and of the countless injuries merciless¬ 
ly inflicted^ by the white savages of that land of Devil’s 
dust, upon the poor Mexicans and Indians, whom, by 
their heartless cruelties, they have driven to despera¬ 
tion ; forcing them by their brutalities to acts of aggres¬ 
sion and revenge. 

Well do I remember the prophetic observations of the 
immortal Jefferson, in the American Congress, when 
discussing the Slave question; and after the heartless 
white savages by whom he was opposed, had talked of 
their right by law to deal in human flesh and blood. 
They taunted the veteran Patriot with being mock- 
sentimental in the cause of puerile humanity, as they 
described the cause of the coloured races. Bursting 
with indignation, Jefferson exclaimed :— u I tremble 
for my country when I reflect that God is just, and that 
His vengeance will not sleep for ever.” 

Feeling that the Californian people had committed a 
great offence against the universal liberty of the human 
race, by thus continuing the distinction between the 
white and coloured man, and believing as I do that in 
accordance with God’s immutable justice, no man, or 
community of men, can perpetrate great wrongs and 
escape ultimate punishment, I wrote and dedicated, 
without permission , the following address to those who 

o 2 

196 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

had voted for the infamous Slave Clause,—with which 
appeal in behalf of the oppressed I close this volume. 

Californians,—See that Spirit rise 
From out the raging flame, 

It comes to mark your destinies 
With everlasting shame. 

For you have robb’d the coloured man, 

Your Brother, of his right; 

And God’s dark, deepest, curse and ban, 

Will haunt ye day and night. 

Is this a time with tyrant hand 
To strike a prostrate race ? 

To again renew the bondman’s brand, 

Which free men should efface? 

For shame. Talk not to me of Liberty! 

You do not know its worth. 

It could not live with Slaves like thee; 

You’ve killed it in its birth. 

Half-mast those colours,—lower away; 

Hoist high the black-and-red, 

The emblem of despotic sway, 

Where Liberty is dead. 

Almighty God!—God of the right! 

Stretch forth thine arm, and save 
From Despot power, from lawless might, 

The poor man and the Slave. 

JOHN MORGAN. 

197 

ADDENDA* 

THE JOURNAL OF THE REV. ROBERT KNOPWOOD. 
1803-4. 

At the eleventh hour, and when the preceding pages 
were about to be handed to the bookbinders, we were 
by the kindness of a friend permitted the perusal of the 
private journal kept by the late Reverend Robert 
Knopwood, so well known and respected by the early 
Settlers of Van Diemen's Land. The Reverend Gen¬ 
tleman was the first Chaplain of the Colony, and from 
his daily narrative we take (by permission) the following 
extracts, remarking upon them occasionally in passing, 
as may be necessary:— 

His Majesty's Ship Calcutta, Spithead. 

April 24,1803. —At 9 a.m., unmoored ship, and sent a boat 
on shore at Portsmouth for LieutenantrColonel Collins. At 12 
the boat returned with the lueutenanlrGovemor* Twenty mi- 

198 

XIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

nutes past one, weighed anchor, and stood for St. Helens. FreSh 
breeze and squally. Half-past two, anchored at St. Helens, in 
company with the Ocean transport, Captain Matthew. 

April 25. —At 9 a.m., Lieutenant Houston and myself went 
on shore at St. Helens, Isle of White. 11 a.m., Calcutta fired a 
gun for our return. Half-past eleven, weighed and made all 
sail; Ocean in company. Fresh breezes, but hazy. 

April 26.—At 10 a.m. fresh breezes and clear. Ocean in com¬ 
pany. Several strange sail in sight. 3 p.m. off the Isle of White. 
At 4, strong breezes, with dark threatening weather; Needles 
Point N.N.E. 7 or 8 miles. Bore up for the Needles, and at five 
crossed the bridge. At six, Calcutta and Ocean anchored in 
Yarmouth Roads. 

April 27.—Fresh breezes and dear. Weighed, and made all 
sail; Ocean in company. 

April 28.—At 9 a.m. spoke aFrench fishing boat and got some 
mackerel. At 10 hove-too; sent a boat on board the ship Bowen, 
from Biddeford bound to London. Noon, the Lizard Light-house 
N. three leagues. 7 p.m. fresh breezes and dear; took our de¬ 
parture from England. 

The Calcutta and Ocean anchored in Teneriffe Hoads 
May 16, 1803. Here met a Spanish Ship-of-War, and 
exchanged public and private civilities. The authorities 
and the inhabitants treated the voyagers with great hos¬ 
pitality. The ships left Santa Cruz on the 20th of the 
same month, and made Rio de Janeiro on the 20th June. 
Here they remained until the 17th of July, when they 
again got under weigh for Simon’s Bay, Cape of Good 
Hope, where the Calcutta anchored August 12. My 
good, most hospitable old Mend, thus notes their de¬ 
parture 

August 25. —Made all sail. On our departure from the Cape 
.it is natural to indulge the reflections which obtrude themselves 

ADDENDA.—REV. B. KNOFWOOD , S JOURNAL. 199 

upon those who are to be the first Settlers at Port Phillip. The 
land behind us, is the abode of a civilized people; that before us, 
the residence of Savages. When (if ever) we shall again enjoy 
an intercourse with the world, is doubtful and uncertain. The 
refreshments and pleasure we had partaken at the Cape, are to 
be exchanged for coarse fare and hard labour. We may truly 
say all our communications with our families and friends, are 
now cut off. We are leaving the eivilized world behind us to 
enter upon a career unknown. 

October 8.—At 1 a.m. double-reefed the topsails. At 8 fresh 
breezes. At 10 made the land of New South Wales. 3 p.m, 
hard squalls; a very heavy W. swell, the sea going over the poop. 
At 7 sounded; found no ground at 45 fathoms. 10 p.m. sounded 
37 fathoms; brown sand. At 11 blowing very hard and ship 
labouring much. 12 strong gales and a heavy sea. 

October 9. —Strong gales and squally, Sounded in 43 fathoms. 
Carried away the larboard tiller rope. At 5 a.m. saw the land 
about Port Phillip. The land near the entrance of the Harbour 
appeared low, and from a distance, very beautiful. Seal Island, 
and Whale Point, (so named by Captain WoodrifF, the head being 
very like one) lies on the larboard side, as you enter. At 15 m. 
past 10 we anchored with the best bower in 6 fathoms. Found 
laying there, the Ocean transport, which had arrived on Friday, 
the 7th of October. Moored Ship. Captain Woodriff and Colonel 
Collins went on shore on the Island; returned at 6 p.m.; could 
not find fresh water. They reported the soil to be very bad, and 
the trees small, and unfit for the use of H.M.Navy. The Bay is 
very large, more so than any I have seen, but the entrance does 
not exceed a mile and a half, though from the camp S.W. to the 
N.E. of the Bay, it appears to be not less than sixty miles across. 
At 10 it blew a heavy gale of wind, so that it was fortunate we 
had arrived at our destination in the morning. 

October 10.—At 10 a.m. Lieutenant Petershall, Mr. White* 
and myself, went on shore on the opposite side, but could not find 
Any water which was not brackish. The land a bad light soil* 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

A great many trees blown up by the roots. Did not see any 
natives, but many of their huts, in which were numbers of cockle 
and muscle shells. A few birds, such as parrots and quails, but' 
no quadrupeds or fish along the shore. Returned on board by no 
means satisfied with the country. The Captain and the Govern 
nor went on shore also, but they found only a very small stream 
of good water. 

[Near what is now called Arthur’s Seat, to the east¬ 
ward of the bar.] 

October 11.—The same party and myself went to the Island 
in the middle of the Bay, where we saw a great number of black 
swans. Three were killed, and many caught alive, and also 
pellieans, and some sea birds. Captain Woodriff and the Gover¬ 
nor, with Mr. Tuckey, went on the west side of the Bay, in 
search of water, but could not find any. Three of the natives 
came to us, and were very friendly. They gave Mr. Tuckey a 
spear. The information the Governor, &c., gave us, was by no 
means favorable, .there being a great want of good water, soil, 
and trees. 

October 12. —Sent a party on shore cutting grass, and another 
watering. At 7 a.m. the Governor, Captain Woodriff, and lieu¬ 
tenant Tuckey, went in search of water, and to see the same 
three natives. The Colonial Surgeon reports the water found by 
sinking wells, to he good and fit for use. The Captain gave one of 
the natives a blanket. Sent the carpenter on shore to look for 
wood fit for his purposes. 

October 13.—The carpenter returned, not having found tim¬ 
ber fit for securing the head and knees of the ship. Sent the 
small launch watering, and a party of officers went in her sur¬ 
veying on the S. E, part of the Bay. 

October 14.—Sent the Master up the Bay to sound for a con¬ 
venient place to take the ship to, for removing the colonial stores. 
At,30 m. past 9 a.m. he returned, and reported good anchorage 
three or four miles further to the eastward. At 10 cleared hawse. 
Sent on shore a parly of the Colonial Marines, also some convicts, 

ADDENDA*—REV. R. KNOFWOOD’s JOURNAL. 201 

with Lieutenant Johnson, to pitch tents. They took with them 
the equipage, and live stock. 

[Ships get under-way and anchor again.] 

October 15.—Ocean at anchor, one mile distance. Employed 
unloading stores. Where we are, we can see the Camp, distance 
from us four and a half miles. Launch fitting for surveying the 
harbour. 

October 16.—Sent the launch and cutter away with the First 
lieutenant, Mr. Tuckey, attended by two Civil Officers, Messrs. 
Harris and Collins, and Mr. Gammon, in a six-oar cutter vic¬ 
tualled for six days, to survey the Bay, from the Camp to the 
Northward, to find if possible a more eligible situation for form¬ 
ing a settlement. Employed landing baggage, and convicts. 
[The intervening days, landing stores.] 

October 21.—Launch and cutter returned from having sur¬ 
veyed the harbour. At the N.W. point of the Bay, they dis¬ 
covered a straight passage apparently to the sea, which Lieut. 
Tuckey intended to have explored, but was driven by a strong 
current to the Southward during the night, and at daylight 
finding himself near the ship he came On board. He reported 
having landed at several places, and found the soil bad, the trees 
very small, and but lkde water. 

October 22.—lieutenant Tuckey, Mr. Gammon, Mr. Collins, 
and Mr. Harris, found a fresh water river near the N.E. point 
of the Bay, where they pitched their tent for the night. 
[Messrs. Tuckey and Harris thus report—] 

At 8 a.h., October 23rd, observed three natives, who ap¬ 
proached them. Mr. Tuckey gave them fish, bread, and many 
presents, they being much pleased and very friendly. At tea 
Mr. Collins and Lieutenant Tuckey went across the Bay, about 
five or six miles, with a boat’s crew, leaving Mr. Harris and Mr. 
Gammon, with two men, in charge of the tent, provisions, &©. 
and to make observations on shore. The three natives seeing 
Mr. Tuckey go away, went away also. Early in the afternoon 
they returned, and a great many other natives with them. At 

202 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY, 

2 p.m. those in the boat coming back observed seventy in one 
party. Mr. Tuckey called to them, and they pointed to the spot 
where the tent was, On the boat coming up, Mr. Tuckey found 
Mr. Gammon surrounded by the blacks, the chief having seized 
the latter, Mr. Harris being also surrounded at the tent, of which 
they had taken possession and were pillaging. Mr. Gammon 
called out to Mr. Tuckey to fire. He fired over them, and they 
ran away to a small distance; but immediately returned with 
their Chief, who wore a sort of turban crown. Whenever he 
ordered them to halt or advance, they did so immediately. Mr. 
Tuckey fired over them a second time, at which they again re¬ 
tired a short distance. They were in great numbers, and all 
armed. Finding that none of their party were wounded by the 
firing, they again advanced; but when one of them was about 
to throw his spear at Mr. Tuckey, he gave orders to shoot him 
as an example. Our people fired, and Innis killed him, and 
another was wounded; on which they all fled. When this oc¬ 
curred, the number of the savages had encreased to 150. Had 
not Lieutenant Tuckey fortunately come up with his boat, there 
is no doubt but they would have killed Mr. Gammon and Mr. 
Harris, and their two men, and perhaps have eaten them, for 
there is great reason to believe they are cannibals. 

October 23.—At 11 a.m. the Camp assembled, the Governor 
at the head of the Royal Marines, to hear Divine Service per¬ 
formed in the barrack-square, before all hands. 

October 24.—Convicts mustered, and put into different gangs 
for work. 

October 25.—At 8 a.m. the British Flag hoisted at the Camp 
for the first time, it being the anniversary of His Majesty’s ac¬ 
cession to the throne. At 12 the Royal Marines fired three 
vollies in honor of the day. At 1 p.m. H. M. S. Calcutta fired 
twenty-one guns on the same occasion. The day excessively 
hot; thermometer at noon 92. The sudden changes from heat 
to cold are very great; much more so than in England. 

[The Reverend Gentleman was seized with illness 

ADDENDA.—REV. B. XNOFWOOD’s JOURNAL. 203 

this day, and was an invalid until the end of the week; 
during which time he acknowledges haying received 
great attention from the Governor, and from the estab¬ 
lishment generally.] 

October 31.—Rain, and much lightning. At H) came on a 
dreadful tempest, the lightning being very severe. 

November 1.— Continual rains, with heavy thunder; thermo¬ 
meter 90 at noon; went down to 50 in the evening. 

[The following is the first notice we find of Buckley—] 

November 2.—Rain at intervals. Being much better was 
able to go to the Camp. Waited on the Governor. Complaint 
brought before me as a Magistrate, that one Robert Cannady, a 
servant of Mr. Humphrey, had promised Buckley, the Gover¬ 
nor’s servant, a waistcoat, in return for a pair of shoes which 
Cannady had taken and worn. Cannady would not give the 
waistcoat, although he had his shoes. After hearing both sides, 
I ordered the waistcoat to be given to Buckley according to 
promise. 

November 6.—Mr. Collins, with six men in a large boat, sailed 
with despatches from the Calcutta and the Camp, to Governor 
King, at Port Jackson. 

November 9.—Three more convicts missing. The men em¬ 
ployed making a battery, and mounting guns. 

November 10.—Mr. Collins got out of harbour this morning. 

November 12.—An armed party left in search of runaway 
convicts. Eight in all absent. 

November 13.—All the Officers, Military and Civil, with the 
convicts, attended at Divine Service. The Sermon preached was 
to induce feelings of thankfulness to Almighty God for our safe 
arrival. 

November 14.—Lieutenant PetershaU killed the first Kanga¬ 
roo. It weighed, when dressed, more than 08 lbs. Colour dark 
sandy browrn 

November 15.—The barge’s crew of the Calcutta killed a sea 
elephant, weighing more than 110 lbs. The bead like a bulldog’s. 

204 

LITE OP BUCKET. 

November 16.—The Ocean transport dropped down near the 
harbour’s mouth. Five of the escaped convicts brought back to 
Camp. Burned on shore the first dead body: the oook of the 
Calcutta. 

November 17.—At half-past 10 Captain Woodriff arrived at 
the Camp, with as many of his officers as could be spared. At 
11 the Garrison was under arms; at half-past, all the convicts 
were clean dressed and assembled on the left side the parade. 
The Lieutenant-Governor’s Commission was read by me as the 
Chaplain of the Colony. When that was done, the Military fired 
three vollies, and all gave three cheers for His Honor. The day 
would have passed off with the greatest joy, hut that His Honor 
was obliged to puniflh the five deserters who had been brought 
back, in order to deter others from deserting. Captain Matthew, 
with his ship, the Ocean, got out of the Bay. 

November 18 and 19.—Calcutta shifted her berth. Received 
a letter from her stating that the natives had obliged the wood¬ 
ing party to return on board. The blacks were nearly 400 in 
number. Three of the deserters returned to Camp. Placed an 
outpost near the Governor’s garden, to give notice should the 
blacks approach the Camp. Heavy rains, with dreadful thunder 
and lightning. 

November 20.—Calcutta under way, standing for a fresh 
water river. All assembled at Divine Service. 

[The next few days immaterial. The weather un¬ 
settled, with thunder and lightning very frequent.] 

November 25.—Sergeant Thomas’s wife delivered of a boy, 
the first child bom of European parents at Pert Phillip. 

December 5.—Calcutta having completed her water, took np 
her old station off One Tree Point 

December 9.—Lieutenant Tuckey, Lieutenant M'Cufiock, Mr. 
White, Lieutenant Johnson, Mr. Bowden, Mr. Harris, with their 
servants, and three Marines, (all armed,) left the Camp for 
Western Port. 

December 10.—Mr. Sladden and myself occupied a long time 

ADDENDA,—REV. R. KNOPWOOd’s JOURNAL. 205 

enquiring into a charge brought against a man for coining.— 
Found it be a false and malicious information. 

December 12.—At 10 a.m. a signal made from the station at 
the S.W. side of the Island, that a ship was in sight. Commu¬ 
nicated immediately with the Calcutta. Ship proved to be the 
Ocean transport, Captain Matthew. She had been taken into the 
Colonial Government Service for four months. She brought back 
Mr. Collins and his boat’s crew who went with him to Port Jack- 
son with dispatches from Governor Collins. By her we learnt 
that there had been a Settlement formed in Van Diemen’s Land, 
by a party of Convicts, male and female, under the command 
of Lieutenant Bowen, R.N., and that the Ocean and Lady Nelson 
which had sailed on the 28th November were to remove us there, 
or to any other place Governor Collins might think proper.— 
Early this morning, Lee and another convict, went to the Gover¬ 
nor’s garden and procured a gun and ammunition from the gar¬ 
dener, saying he came from the Governor, and had orders to 
receive it. 

[This man Lee was one of Buckley's party of ab¬ 
sconders, and the gun here mentioned was probably the 
one referred to in his Narrative.] 

December 14.—At noon, signal made for a strange sail in 
sight. At 3 p.m. she came to an anchor, and proved to be the 
Francis schooner, from Port Jackson, sent round by Governor 
King to assist in removing the Settlement to Van Diemen’s 
Land. Party under Lieutenant Tuckey returned from Western 
Port. 

December 17.—Calcutta moved to near the harbour’s mouth, 
preparatory to her sailing for Port Jackson. 

December 18.—Calcutta sailed, and I took leave of Captain 
Woodriff and all those I knew on hoard. 

December 25.—Christmas Day. The Governor, the Civil and 
Military Officers, convicts, &c., attended Divine Service. Pub¬ 
licly baptized Sergeant Thomas’s child, the first horn at the 
Settlement. The Governor named him Hobart. Last night a 

LIFE OF BUCKLET5T. 

m 

daring robbery was committed at the Commissary's marquee* 
whilst he was in bed. They stole a gun which was hanging up 
near the side of the bed, and took a pair of boots from his bed 
side. The hospital tent was also robbed. 

December 27.—At 9 p.m. six convicts endeavoured to make 
their escape. They were beset by a look-out party, and one man 
shot,—very badly wounded. 

[This was Buckley’s party.] 

December 28.—Corporal Sutton reported that the man shot 
was Charles Shaw. A cart, and Assistant-Surgeon Bowden, sent 
to bring him into Camp. 

December 29.—People employed loading the Ocean. The 
Governor communicated his wish that the Civil Establishment' 
should form a patrol at night, in case of an insurrection. 

December 30.—People employed in getting the guns from off 
the wharf, and on board the Ocean. Great fires seen at a dis¬ 
tance, supposed to be made by runaways. At 10, a great fire 
across the Bay. 

[The names of Buckley’s party are here given, but 
the journal states that one man was taken besides Shaw, 
who was shot, which circumstance it is probable Buck-- 
ley had forgotten when he related to me the history of 
his life.] 

January 2,1804.—Civil Officers met to consult upon the plan 
of the association, and at 9 p.m. Mr. Anson and myself took the 
first night watch. 

January 6.—At 5 a.m. Mr. W. Stocker, two men, and myself; 
all armed, went to the harbour's mouth, but did not find any 
trace of the runaway convicts. At 3 p.m. Tetumed'. 

January 7.—At half-past 2 a.m. drums beat to arms. The 
Military, and all the Officers of the Association, with their sub¬ 
ordinates, attended. Each received a brace of pistols, and four 
rounds of ball cartridge, 1 lb. beef, 1 lb. bread, and half a pint of 
spirits. At half-past 3, nine Marines, armed and with the same 
supply of ammunition, joined us, together with Sergeant-Major 

ADDENDA.—BET. B. KNOFWOOD r S JOURNAL. 207 

M A Cauley: in all we mustered Military 11, Association 18. We 
went in search of the men who had escaped from the Camp, but 
discovered only traces where they had been, although we tra¬ 
velled a distance computed at fifty miles. 

January 12.—Observed a schooner coming into the Bay. She 
proved to be the Edwin from Port Jackson. Anchored near the 
Ocean. 

January 15.—The Ocean lost three men drowned by the up¬ 
setting of a boat coming from an island in the Bay. At 2 p.m. 
there came on a very severe tempest. 

[The repeated storms of rain, with thunder and very 
vivid lightning, are noted in the journal as being of very 
frequent occurrence.] 

January 16.—MAllender went to the Governor’s garden and 
surrendered himself, with a gun which was the Commissary’s 
(Mr. Fosbrook’s) property. At 2 he was brought into Camp.. 

[This man was also one of Buckley’s party.] 

January 17.—Engaged all the morning in taking the* depose 
tion of Daniel M‘Allender, the prisoner who escaped with 
Pritchard and the party when Shaw was shot. Sailed for King’s 
Island, the Edwin. 

January 18.—The day very fine. At 11, thermometer stood 
at 82; and at 1 p.m. 92 in the shade, 110 in the sun. At 1 the 
Military, in their new clothing, paraded, and fired three voHies. 
At half-past 3, the hut of Lieutenant Johnson, B.M., and another 
of Lieutenant Lord’s, R.M., caught fire, and were burnt, vefy 
nearly setting the whole of the marquees on fire. 

January 20.—At 2 p.m., the Ann, from Port Jackson, with 
despatches from Governor King to Governor Collins, came to an 
anchor in the Bay. 

January 21. — Engaged all the morning taking the deposition 
of Charles Shaw (the wounded man). At 1 p.m. information was 
given that two vessels were in sight from the flag staff, standing 
toward the harbour. Proved to be the Lady Nelson from Port 
Jackson, and the Edwin from King’s Island. 

208 

LIFE OF BUCKLEY. 

January 22.—Lady Nelson and Edwin anchored off the Jetty. 
Performed Divine Service, all persons off military duty attending. 

January 24.—120 Convicts sent on board the Ocean, with the 
guard. One of the prisoners who had been a long time in the 
bush, returned to Camp in a very weakly state. 

January 25.—At 10 a.m. all the Settlers who were to embark 
on board the Lady Nelson, (Mr. Simons, Commander,) embarked 
with their baggage. The remainder of the convicts went on 
board the Ocean. 

January 26.—At 10 a.m. struck my marquee, and sent all my 
baggage on board the Ocean. Got on board myself about six 
p.m., with lieutenant Lord, Mr. Harris, Mr. Bowden, and others. 

January 28.—At 2 a.m. weighed anchor, and ran down to the 
harbour’s mouth. At 3 anchored. All on board. Contrary winds. 
Observed large fires near the Camp. 

January 29.—At 10 a.m. Captain Matthew, Mr Humphrey, 
and myself went on shore for a walk. Returned at 4 p.m. Heard 
.from the Camp that many of the Natives were about the neigh¬ 
bourhood. 

January 30.—At half-past 4 a.m. weighed anchor and made 
all sail out of the harbour of Port Phillip. At 3 p.m. I dined with 
the Governor. 

It is always desirable to leave a friend in a comfortable 
position; and having thus seen the good ship Ocean well 
outside the Heads of Port Phillip, and the worthy, kind- 
hearted Chaplain of the Expedition happily seated at the 
Governor's table, where no better man could fill a place, 
we once more close the Narrative, hoping this unex¬ 
pected addition may not be considered ill-timed or un¬ 
interesting.
